HOTELIMPERIAL WIEN
a aan ;

I believe that this development represents a historical breakthrough

which should. be eagerly seize3 by all interesteg parties to turn the \1
dream for peace into a living realty. Surprisingly enough, the Palestin- ti
I

ian leagership, instead of receiving support for this constructive {1
attitude, was rebuffed by the USA, attacked. by the Israeli leadership
and harrassea by some Arab States. The political shortsightegness man=
ifesteq in these reactions is gangerous in that it can.easily persuage
the Palestiniam leadership of the futility of moderation ana force

them to adopt a hargline position which will certainly precipitate another |
roung of military.confrontation which now—boay can avert. a

, This’ 3 ‘Drecisely why a West Enropean role is urgently nsegeq.
The Palestinian position is still positive ang will remain so for the
next few months.at least. But how long will the Palestinian leadership

retain this constructive attituge
Arab. hostility,is highly unpredic
for very. longs; However, a determi:
‘consolidate Palestinian mogeratio
negative American ang Israeli ang

oe * The question -naturally:arises: How serious is the Palestinians
committment+for; peace. The answer is that it is very serious, provigeg
that there is reciprocity ang a real desire to tackle the problem of
peace and discuss all the issues whose solution is absolutely necessary,
Very briefly, it can be stateg that for the return of the West Bank,

Gaza. Sector, the Himma ang Auja enclaves, a status of non-belligrency
‘can be established between the future sovereign State of Palestine ang the
State. of ,Israel.. But for a full state of Peace td take place, other issues |
Will have .to.be settlea the nost? important of which is the Israeli accep-
tance ang ‘implementation of the right of Palestinian refugees to return
to their original: homes, if. they wisheg to go so or to be compensatea if
they’ freely electeg not to return. :

bas Natarally enough owe have not limitea our peaceful sentiments
to secret and configential talks with World leaders, but have been sending |
out’a number of public signals which are too well known to enumerate,
What is more important, we are planning on passing some very important
resolutions of a very construstive nature during the forthcoming Palest-
inian National Council. All of this should provige convincing ang irrefu-
table proof of the sincerity ang Seriousness of ‘the Palestinian position.

A-1015 WIEN I. KARNTNERRING 16
‘Telegeameracresse:

f impertaibovd wien + Bankverbindmag: Crediranstale-Bankvereia, Wiea 1. Kirenesin t o. chasse

against American, Israeli and some
tible. My guéss is that it.won't be |
neq West European position coulg possibly
n and exert positive pressure on the --
(certain Arab. attituaes. ~ .

Nery sincere],

7

Isam A. Sartawi.

+ TELEPHON 65 17 65 « TELEX.01/2630-
