Annex I

HOTELIMPERIAL WIEN
Vienna, January 27, 1977.

Dear Chancellor Kreisky

Pursuant to our conversation last night, I would like to
submit to Your Excellency a brief review of the current status of
the Middle East crisis as well as a resume of the position of the
PIO on various parameters of the problem.

There is nowadays a unanimous agreement that the Middle East
crisis shoula be brought to a speeay solution. Unfortunately there
has been a great deal of confusion over what constitutes the basic
ingredients of a just and lasting solution. So far two formulas have
been under consideration, the one assumes that the crux of the problem
is a dispute between the confrontation Arab States ang the State of
Israel while the other insists that the essence of the crisis is the
contradictory claims of both Palestinians ang Israelis to the same
country. The first formula assumes that a settlement is possible
between the Arab States ang the State of Israel with the Palestinians
relegated to a vassal status under Jordan, whereas the other insists
that peace can only be achieved when the Palestinians ang Israelis
reconcile their contradictory claims amicably ang satisfactorily
through a mutually accepted formula which grants each side the degree
of self expression which it seeks ang insists upon.

The first formula, which finds favor in some American ana
Israeli official circles cannot bring about peace or even a temporary
state of nonbelligrency. The explosive Palestinian parametr with its
inherent and automatic built in capacity to destabilise the situation
in the Middle East, will unavoiqably trigger another round of military
‘confrontation with untola damage to the protagonists themselves as
well as to World interests at large. Based iipon this premise, it is
clear that the only way to peace and stability in the Miadle East is
through the recognition. and implementation of Palestinian legitimate
national rights.

Within this context, we believe that Western Europe and in
particular the 2nq International can play a constructive role. In fact
we believe that the major victim of another military confrontation
in the Middle East besiges the Arabs and Israelis themselves, would be
the West European countries whose economies anq continueg wellfare are
are crucially dependent upon the continued flow of Miggle Eastern oil,
The 2nd International shoula therefore seek ang insist upon an active
role in the search for peace in the Middle East, not only because of
the moral imperatives involved or because of the committments of the
International to the lofty iaeals of peace, justice ang universal
brotherhood, but also for the urgently pragmatic reasons of West Europ-
ean economic stability ang welfare.

Having asserted that peace is impossible without the Palest-
inians, it is highly reassuring to state that the Palestinians , through
an interesting process of political evolution ang maturity, are prepared
nowadays to contribute to the establishment of Peace in the Miggle East.

A-1015 WIEN I - KARNTNERRING 16 - TELEPHON 65 17 65 - TELEX. 01/2630
‘Telegrammadresse: imperialbotel wien » Bankverbindung: Creditanstalt-Bankverein, Wien 1, Karntnerring 1, Keo. 50-14360

