SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL
88a ST. JOHN’S WOOD HIGH STREET, LONDON NW8 7S)

Phone: 01-586 110! Grams: INTESOCON, LONDON Telex: 261735

1
ras
'

Circular No. B14/77

Cetober 7, 1977

To Bureau members

fii ENGLISH ONLY an

REPORT OF THE SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL
FPACT-FINDING MISSION TO THE MIDDLE EAST

Intreduction by Bruno Kreisky

CONFIDENTIAL

Please find attached the report of the Socialist International
fact-finding mission’ to the Middle East, together with an intro~
duction by Bruno Kreisky, and annexes.

The proposal to establish a Socialist International fact-finding
body was made at the Party Leaders’ Conference held in London on
November 11, 1973, in connection with the discussion on the
Middle East which then took place.

The Bureau of the Socialist International, at its meeting in Londen
on December 9, 1973, established the Socialist International fact=
finging mission to the Middle East.

The mission, which was led by Bruno Kreisky, took place in three
stages. For dates, itinerary and membership, please see overleaf.

Fraternally yours,

ri seo? Ldwtarenn .*
Bernt Carlsson ot
General Secretary.

~2-

SOCIALIST INTERNATIONAL MISSION TO THE MIDDLE EAST

STAGE 1

itinerary :

Participants :

STAGE 2

itinerary :

Participants :

Participants :

March 9-16, 1974

Egypt, Syria and Israel

Bruno Kreisky (Austria), Hans Thalberg (Austria),
Hans-Eberhard Dingels (Federal Germany), Robert
Pontillon (France), Ron Hayward (Great Britain),
Pietro Lezzi (Italy, PSI), Eki Sone (Japan, DSP),
Relus ter Beek (Netherlands, representing the
Benelux countries), Bertil Loefberg (Sweden,
representing the Scandinavian countries), Bernt
Carlsson (Sweden, xvepresenting the Scandinavian
countries), and Hans Janitschek (Socialist
International).

February 9-16, 1975

Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya

Bruno Kreisky, Hans Thalberg, Hans-berhard
Dingels, Michel Thauvin (France), Anne Vondeling
(Netherlands, representing the Benelux countries),
Bertil Zachrisson (Sweden, representing the
Scandinavian countries), Bernt Carlsson and

Hans Janitschek.

March 15-21, 1976

Kuwait, Irag, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and Syria.

Bruno Kreisky, Hans-Eberhard Dingels, Michel
Thauvin, Bernt Carlsson and Hans Janitschek.,

ENGLISH. TRANSLATION

I, INTRODUCTION

BY Bruno KREISKY

I], Report

OF THE FACT-FINDING MISSION OF THE SOCIALIST
INTERNATIONAL

III, ANNexes

INTRODUCTION
by Bruno Kreisky

The proposal to send a fact-finding mission of the
International to the Arab countries had found the
unanimous agreement at the Party Leaders' Conference
held in London on Nov. 11, 1973. Golda Meir, the
representative of the Israeli Labour Party, did not

rais objections.

The explicit purpose of the fact-finding mission was
the attempt to find out to what extent there exist
preconditions for a peaceful solution of the Arab-

Israeli conflict.

From the outset there should be no doubt among the
Arab participants in these talks that the Socialist
International was not only proceeding with the consent
of the Israeli Labour Party but in complete loyalty

to that party. Developments during these four years
were highly unsteady and changing. During the early
stages of this mission, immediately after the October
War, only President Sadat showed a relative willingness
for conciliation, while at the same time being quite

explicit about the fact that the ultimate goal,

Loe

"peace in our times", would be illusory. The maximum
result feasible would be a state of non-belligerency.

Other Arab leaders were more irreconciliable.

During the past four = years, there has been a total
change. Today most Arab governments support a peaceful
solution under certain circumstances. A few;"'like

the governments of Iraq and Libya, still continue

to hold to a negative posture. President Boumedienne's
position, which could almost be called a doctrine,
subscribes to the view that those Arab states which
are not immediate neighbors of Israel should not be
opposed to a solution which is acceptable to the Arab
neighbors of Israel. I may be assumed that this
Boumedienne Doctrine, as we would like to call it,

will eventually be accepted by all Arab states.

The question arising in this context is therefore the
following:

What is. the framework within which a peaceful
solution :~ ~ can be searched for and, eventually,
found? After many long discussions with almost all
leading personalities in the Arab world we have come
to the conclusion that the following points must be

taken into account:

1) Peace, in one form or another - and this .

could also mean some kind of peaceful co-existence -

-/.

Slee et fae

can only be found if Israel is prepared to re-
turn to the border of 1967. This is all the more
important since this demand, according to the
Arab view and to the original partition plan,
implies an essential concession: de facto the

Arab states silently accept the revision of the
wk

partition plan of 1947.

2) In the Arab view, the establishment of
a Palestinian state, in one or another form, is
the obvious precondition for any peaceful solution;
its territory is understood to include the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip. I would like to leave
open, for the time being, the question of the
feasibility of negotiations on territorial con-

cessions or temporary zones of demilitarization.

3) An agreement about the return of the
territories taken from Syria and Egypt, possibly

by means of a relevant calendar of operations.

4) In case that there will be Israeli
settlements in the areas returned the need arises
for an agreement about their status as well as
about the areas of Arab settlements in Israel,
the content of which would probably have to be

more specific then those which were originally de-

veloped in connection with the plan of partition.

5) An agreement about a return of a certain
number of Palestinian refugees. In this context I
have the feeling that the Arab side knows quite
clearly that the number envisaged would:be of a

more symbolic nature. wk

It is not the task of this report to present de-
tailed suggestions for a solution; it is only
possible to indicate a framework and the general
direction where there is the potential for peace~
ful development. The question is too complex and
too much burdened with resentments. It will, there-
fore, require prolonged and tedious negotiations,
beyond the primary framwork indicated, which will
be similarly complicated as the ones about the

Austrian State Treaty.

According to the Arab view, normalization of re-
lations can only be expected after a number of
years. First of all, the peace settlement would
have to prove and strenghten itself and bring
about a gradual change in the state of mind of
both sides. The Israeli side occasionally expresses

the opinion that normalization has to come first

o/s

ore

ore

-5-

and that this could then be the precondition for

a peaceful solution.

Recent history has presented us with concrete examples.
for both alternatives. I believe that, if both states
do exist side by side, the necessity for a ‘process of
normalization with each other will arise very quickly:
the lack of natural resources would force Israel and
an eventual Palestinian state, probably also Jordan,
into it. Given a change of mind, even a very organic
cooperation with regard to economic questions could

develop very rapidly.

Concerning the question of Jerusalem, I would be the
last one who would want to minimize this problem. I am
nevertheless of the opinion that, as soon as a solution

will have been found for the main problem, it will be

possible to find one for Jerusalem too. The case of
Rome, which now is the capital of Italy as well as
the center of the Roman Catholic Church, could serve
as a historic example. In this context, it is worth
noting that, as far as I know, the position of the
King of Jordan as the Protector of the Holy Places
in Jerusalem has been untouched, even by the Rabat

Conference. =

o/s

A question arising in this context is the one
concerning the genuine nature of peaceful inten-
tions on the Arab side. I am quite concious of

the fact that, under the existing conditions of
prevailing distrust, on both sides, any remark to
this point will scarcely meet with approval » On the
basis of detailed and very unemotional talks Ir
have reached the conclusion that the reasons. put
forth by the Arab side to explain their new and
changed attitude are quite plausible. According

to my informations, which might be incomplete,

the. Arab. states along the front with Israel

spend at. least ten billion Dollars for purposes of
armament. This represents a gigantic amount for
relatively small and altogether poor countries
which they are not able to raise by themselves but
which - and this is generally known - must be
financed by the rich Arab states. But these states are
also slowly beginning to feel this burden as
oppressive. All the more so, since these states
themselves need additional funds to finance their

own internal and military projects.

Egypt, as the largest Arab state, is a country
with so many economic and social problems that
their solution can only be approached ina .

o/s

tangible way, immediately recognizable for

large segments of her population, when the re-
sources presently being used for purposes of war
are utilized for the accomplishment:.of' peace="~ :
ful tasks. If this is not the case, Egypt will
become a fountainhead for social unrest and,, as

a consequence, possibly an arena for communist or
crypto-communist movements. This fact may be one

of the reasons why, above all, progressive demo-
cracy-oriented Arab circles, who envision a

solution for the social problems of Egypt through
reforms, have come to the conclusion that peace

is a necessary precondition for such a development.
However, if peace cannot be attained, the escalation
of nationalist emotions combined with an ever-in-
creasing number of war-like confrontations, will

be the unavoidable consequence. War will then become
for Egypt, as during Nasser's time, more than a
means to fight Israel, it becomes a social safety
valve. To brake this vicious circle of poverty,

war and hatred is, according to my view, the
historical endeavour of Sadat. If it.fails, the

consequences will be incalculable.

There is enormous wealth amassed in the Arab states.

It consists of the revenues from their only raw

-/-

|

material, oil. The rich states, therefore,have

a considerable desire for peace and are arriving
more and more at a very realistic assessment of

the dangers actually confronting these states. The
leaders of these countries must therefore logically
come to the conclusion that, if the Israelis and
the Palestinians are able to find a solution which
strongly reduces the risks of war in this region
and possibly could even bring about a vision of
peace, there are more dangerous enemies than Israel.
I therefore do not have any doubt that these countries
will supply large amounts of financial assistance
to a newly created Palestinian state in order to

contribute to its prosperity.

In some instances it was even pointed out to me
that, in the long run, a contribution of Israel
towards the economic and social development of the
region is counted on. To develop this point more
deeply at the present time, when our task above all
is to reduce mutual distrust, would give this report

an aspect of politico-romanticism.

To those who argue that the reasons mentioned by
me are not recognized by the Palestinians and their

leadership and that it is they who primarily count, .*

-/.

he

pg

I would like to quote parts of relevant statements

of Palestinians put at my disposal:

"The explosive Palestinian parameter with its
inherent and automatic built-in capacity to
destabilise the situation in the Middle East,
will unavoidably trigger another round of
military confrontation with untold damage to
the protagonists themselves as well as to
world interests at large. Based upon this
premise, it is clear that the only way to
peace and stability in the Middle East is
through the recognition and implementation
of Palestinian legitimate national rights.
Very briefly, it can be stated that for the
return of the West Bank, Gaza Sector, the
Himma and Auja enclaves, a status of’ non-
belligerency can be established between the
future sovereign State of Palestine and the
State of Israel. But for a full state of peace
to take place, other issues will have to be
settled the most important of which is the
Israeli acceptance and implementation of the
right of Palestinian refugees to return to
their original homes, if they wished to do
so or to be compensated if they freely elected
not to return." (For the full text see annex I).

"The PNC's resolution called for the estab-
lishment of a national Palestinian state and
did not refer to a secular democratic State.
The resolutions spelled out for the first time
what we mean by Palestinian: national rights, a
point of constant criticism by friend and foe
alike, Article 11 delineated them as: the right

-lo-

of return, self-determination and the establish-
ment of a national Palestinian State."

"For those familiar with political forms

of expression the Communiqué expresses a clear
acceptance of a peaceful evolution.

To differentiate the position of its'supporters
it should be said that they are again divided

in two tendencies.

The first tendency is persistently in favour of
the creation of a Palestinian state consisting of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and therewith
considers the conflict as ended. This state shall
be the homeland of the Palestinians; if not all
of them can actually live there, then in a
hypothetical way. What Israel représents for the Jews,
The future of this state is considered bright by
this tendency. Like that of all states in the
region. They see the relations with Israel as an
evolutionary process which can be found in the
course of history. In short, this tendency would
acquiesce in the solution attained and will strive
to further the development of their state within
the framework of the reqional conditions,

The second tendency agrees to the peaceful so-
lution out of realistic political considerations.
For they understood that unger the local and
international conditions prevailing at present

no other solution would be possible. They do not
perceive this step - creation of their state -

at all as a final solution. On the contrary,

they see it as a way to attain a calmer situation
which would open new possibilities for peaceful
confrontation. This tendency watches the evolution

o/s

-118

of Israel and her manyfold social and national
problems. They proceed further in their internal
discussions and analysis and ascertain that with-
out war, the state of Israel will not have a very
long life-span for the following reasons:

1. Definitely established, secure frontiers
will eliminate an important foundation for the
creation of that state: the argument that Israel
can be a home for all Jews. For there ist not enough
space.

2. When the Jews have the possibility to live
in their state - Israel - securely and without
menace, then the motivation for the World-Jewry
to constantly support Israel financially will cease.
That will have the effect that the state of Israel
and her citizens shape their life in a normal way,
like all other states of the region. This means, at
the same time, that the messianic character of that
state ceases,

3, A peace settlement and the cessation of the
messianic character will lead to a resurgénce of the
national and social problems of that state, for
example the discrimination of Oriental Jews in
Israel, This situation will then be used by the Arabs
to persuade the Oriental Jews with generous financial
help to return to their Arab countries of origin. This
possibility is already practised. Through intercession
of the P.L.O. with some Arab countries it was
possible to persuade 500 Israeli families to return
to their Arab homelands with appropriate financial
help for the start.

4, If this process takes places as described,
= so this tendency believes - then the Israelis
finally will live as a strong minority in their
country. It is furthermore counted upon that the
Arab population in Israel will gradually become as
large as the Israeli. . ~
Once this situation is reached Israel will finally
no more be a obstacle to the Arab striving for unity,
neither nationally nor geographically. As stated

-12-

initially, the struggle of the Arabs for independence
and for the creation of a "United Arab State" was
frustrated because of two reasons:

1, the British government did not keep its promises
and agreements;

2. a heterogeneous state - Israel- wascreated which
separates the Arab Orient from Arab North Africa.

These two reasons or obstacles will be surmounted - as
the second tendency analyses ~ by neutralizing the

state of Israel." (Translation from German)
ak

If a Palestinian state in the envisaged area, West Bank and
Gaza Strip, does come into existence, this newly created state
will pose overwhelming problems for its government. Such a
state will be unable to direct its attention towards anything
but internal tasks for a very lang time. Even if this state
could be armed with the aid of others, it will find itself,
in view of the military experience and the military por
tential of Israel and its army, in a hopeless position

and each attempt to look for war-like confrontations with
Israel would necessarily lead to a terrible counter-strike
which in its effect would qo far beyond anything that the
Arab side could oppose to it. At any rate, an organized

state consisting of the regions presently occupied by

Israel would constitute for the whole Arab world a far

more vulnerable area with regard to military retaliation
Measures than is the case with territories occupied by
Israel. If such as Palestinian state is created, one of the
logical consequences would be the successive dissolution

of the refugee camps. They were primarily meant to be

a parastate which would enable the Palestinian leader-

ship to fulfil’ some quasi-qovernmental functions sich

-13-

as education of children in Palestinian schools,
military recruitment for El Fatah, creation of poli-
tical institutions, generation of a spirit of resis-
tance and development of their aggressive tendencies.
These camps constitute an alien element within the
Arab states and, in the case of Lebanon, have proven
themselves to be dangerous liabilities for the host
country. Their dissolution will be supported by the
host countries, in particular, and it is also the

declared intention of the PLO to liquidate these camps.

It would be foolish to deny that there still exist
radical groups which are not satisfied with a solution
along these lines and which would continue their struggle.
But we have been plausibly assured that the great ma-
jority of the Palestinians would eventually accept a
solution found by Arafat and his collaborators, and those
not prepared to accept this solution will suffer the

fate of all extremist groups.

We also should not neglect the argument based on inter-
mational law that Israel's existence derives from a
resolution of the United Nations from 1947 and that at
that time it was the expressed will of the United Nations
to create an Israeli and a Palestinian state.

The UN General Assembly's resolution 181 (II) of

November 29, 1947, read:

-14-

"Independent Arab and Jewish States and the Special
International Regime for the City of Jerusalem, set
forth in part III of this plan, shall come into
existence in Palestine two months after the evacuation
of the armed forces for the mandatory Power has been
completed but in any case not later than 1 Ocotber

1948." (for full text see annex II
ak
It remains the duty of member states of the United Nations

to work for the implementation of this resolution, even

if in a modified form.

From my discussions with leading personalities of the
Soviet-Union I know that they feel themsleves commited to
this resolution, in content as well as in principle.

The representative of the Soviet-Union at the UN at the
time (the present Minister of Foreign Affairs), Mr. Gromyko,
presented the position of his country in the 25th plenary
meeting of the General Assembly on November 26, 1947, as

follows:

"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, as everyone
knows, has had no direct material or other interests
in Palestine; it is interested in the question of
Palestine because it is a Member of the United Nations
and because it is a great Power that bears, just as

do other great Powers, a special responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace. These facts
determine the stand taken by the Government of the

USSR on the question of Palestine.”

oe eee

ols

r15-

"When the question of the future of Palestine was
under discussion at the special session of the Ge-
neral Assembly, the Government of the USSR pointed
to the two most acceptable solutions of this
question. The first was the creation of a single
democratic Arab-Jewish State in which Arabs and

Jews would enjoy equal rights. In case that solution
were to prove unworkable because of Arab and
Jewish insistence that, in view of the deterioration
in Arab-Jewish relations, they would be unable to
live together, the Government of the USSR through
its delegation at the Assembly, pointed to the
second solution, which was to partition Palestine
into two free, independent and democratic States -
an Arab and a Jewish one."

I also gained the impression, that the Soviet government
is prepared to accept modifications of the former UN-Re-
solution if they derive from agreements by the parties con-

cerned, for example through a Geneva Conference,

Finally, I believe that such a solution, which appears
to me to be the only one with a chance of success, can
be secured politically and militarily so that we may reach
a state of affairs which is at least more durable than this

precarious state of tension which exists at present.

If we do not succeed in this venture there will be dramatic

changes in the Arab states. The enormous resources available

to the Arab world will necassarily be used for military

purposes and, in the courseof the next decades, increasingly

better armed armies will threaten Israel. No amount of

-16-

counter-force, even if it is militarily extremly
successful. and devastating,will bring about a de-
finitive change in favour of Israel but will only in-
crease the general danger of war. And the price to

be paid in blood by the Israeli people will rise
constantly. For the very reason that European ,,
Socialists are committed to the state of Israel,

they can only, in my view, support a peaceful solution
reached through a process of negotiations. Even taking
into account the full extent of the feeling of respon-
sibility with regard to Israel, we should not fail

to see that the movement of democratic socialism would
drift into an intolerable situation if the price would
be the antagonizing of the Arab world. It is therefore
the task of the Socialist International to do every-
thing in its power to work for a peaceful solution which
guarantees the acceptance of the right to live for the
Israeli people and the Palestinian people. I am |
deeply convinced that there will be no insurmountable

difficulties that, if Israel, on her part, is prepared |
to recognize the Palestinian people and its right to |
live, the Palestinians will withdraw the declaration
which calls for the destruction of Israel. Nobody wants
to take the first step, but it would not be difficult

to find a technical procedure according to which both 7

parties will have to deposit their intentions in a

-17-

recognizable way with a third party. The latter
assumes to make public these declaration of intent in
case of the peace settlement, in which case the public
confirmation by both parties will naturally have to

be given simitaneously.

In conclusion, with regard to the question whether

a new Palestinian state should be part of a Pale-
stinian-Jordanian confederation or should develop out-
side of it, this appears to be, in our view, not an
unsolvable problem if it is made clear in advance

that this Palestinian state will be created on the
territory of Western Jordan and the Gaza Strip. Under

this premise it is entirely feasible, at least it

appears to me, that there could be a confederation bet-

ween Jordan and Palestine before the signing of a peace
treaty, Today already, it seems to be clear that such

a confederation would be possible after the creation

of the state of Palestine and the signing of a peace
treaty. This question should not pose unsurmountable

difficulties,

I do not deny that I consider the problem of the

Middle East as a crucial question for peace in the

world in this phase of our history and, if we were

-18- °

successful in bringing about a peaceful solution,

_ peace would be a historical accomplishment of such

magnitude which has been denied to humanity for
centuries and I think that, for the first time,

the prospects do exist. If rapprochement were
possible - the idea of peace would have gained a
great, universally visible victory, and the Socialist

International would have contributed its share.

At this very moment it seems to me to be of. utmost
importance that we know our obligation and work in
this spirit. No other political movement in democratic

Europe can do it.

I therefore propose, as a practical step, that the
Socialist International organizes ‘without delay,
éspecially in view of the development in Israel to
the Right, a round-table conference with prominent
representatives of the Israeli labour movement and of
the other member parties. This conference should be
considered as the beginning of a series of meetings
to be planned over a short period. The objection which
will be raised, I can hear it already: such a thing
has to be well prepared. My reply, based on practical
experience of several decades, is simply this: If a
confrontation is prepared at length and takesplace

only then, one does not really need it any more. At

present, however, to meet is more important than

a forseeable result.

-19-

REPORT

The Palestinians

The disputed question which we can not, and da,

not want to, answer in our report is the question

of the number of Palestinians living in the Arab
countries. The Israelis apparently do not focus their
attention on this question and they would like to
restrict themselves numerically to the Palestinians
living in the Israeli sphere of influence. There
exists the widely held view - which is, incidentally,

shared by large parts of the democratic world - that

‘it is the task of the Arab states to take care, through

assim iation, of the Palestinians living outside the
state and sphere of influence of Israel, including

the occupied territories. This appears to be, in our

view, a first serious error of judgment. The fact,

for instance, that an Arab of Palestinian extraction holds
an important job in the oil industry of Saudi Arabia,

or that another one is employd in the Kuwaiti ministry

of planning, should not lead to the conclusion that the

question of their national identity has now been solved

-20-

through assimilation; this to us appears to be an

error which leads to serious consequences. This problem
is even more relevant with regard to the millions of
Palestinian refugees who have found some kind
Loft work. The Palestinians, since they are strangers,
have experienced, as they themselves have pointed out,
a certain animosity in many of their host countries.
The problem is aggravated by the fact that many of

them are highly qualified workers, technicians and
professionals. In some Arab countries they are mostly
working in areaswhich make them members of the upper
classes. In the conservative countries, where they

are most urgently needed as part -of the work force,
_they are often considered to be progressive, anti-

monarchist, even inclined towards communism.

With regard to their republican sentiments, it |
seems that the deep hatred of the Palestinians for |
King Hussein, which derives from the well known events
of the past, plays a certain role and is transfered

to any monarch who closely cooperates with King Hussein.
The position, formerly also often supported by our
Israeli comrades, that there is no Palestinian nation

appears to us, whatever the historical arguments may be,

-21-

to have been superseded by the facts. Recent history
teaches us that a spirit of nationalism, once its
springs into existence, represents a force which in

the long run can not be ignored.

There exists today - and this has been proven by the
elections in the occupied territories - a deep Pale-
stinian nationalism in many parts of the Arab world.
In any event, there have been hundreds of thousands

of Palestinians outside of Israel who years ago have
renounced all common bonds with Jordan. In view of
these developments we think it is therefore wishful
thinking to believe that Jordan and King Hussein can
in any way be of assistance in the resolution of this
‘conflict. Incidentally, King Hussein has specifically
precluded this possibility in his discussions with us.
But it is still feasible that, due to the fact that
such a large part of the population of Jordan consists
of Palestinians, certain solutions could be found, i. e.
the establishment of a confederation between an in-
dependent Palestinian state and Jordan. The establish-
ment of such a confederation is presently envisaged for

the time afterthe creation of a Palestinian state,

In this aspect, the Palestinians have clearly succeeded
in establishing their political and national views in

the entire Pan-Arab world. And it is highly advisable

wT

-22-

not to harbor any illusions with regard to these facts,
These positions have been expressed with equal deter-
mination by the King of Saudi Arabia and the Crown Prince
of Saudi Arabia as well as by the leading personalities
in the conservative gulf states. Similar views have
been expressed by King Hassan in his discussidhs with
us during the month of March, 1975. It may be true that
the unity shown by the Arab world in Rabat was only

on the surface, with regard to one question it ap-
pears to be very real: today the right of the Pale-
stinians to speak for themselves cannot be denied. No
Arab state could speak for them against their will. We
deliberately are very cautious in our formulations
since we do not want to hurt anyone, since we do not
want to deny our respect for the accomplishments which
may be observed in Jordan. It seems therefore all the
more important and necessary to us to point out that
the hope, which is still kept alive in some chancelleries,
a final solution can be found with the help of King
Hussein, is nothing but an illusion. We consider this
observation to be one of the most important results

of our fact-finding mission.

The Influence of the Palestinians

Everywhere where nationalist Arab movements execute

-23-

governmental functions, Palestinians play a very im-
portant role, not only as experts but as politicians
as well. In all meetings which we held in these countries,

there were Palestinians represented in these groups.

In all Arab states, the Palestinians therefore, have at
their disposal influential pressure groups which
should not be underestimated, especially in the Gulf
States. There was a visible expression of relief

when our delegation, during the visit to Kuwait, ex-
pressed its willingness to also meet with representa-
tives of the PLO, Simply our willingness to do so has
lead to a total change of the cool, even hostile cli-
mate which had prevailed up to that moment. During the
ensueing meeting with representative spokesmen of the
Palestinians it was.pointed out to us that they had
built up Kuwait, a position which we thought to

have been a little arrogant.

In many of these states, the Palestinians have their

disposal the only existing organization - usually with
hundreds of thousands of members. This influence of the
Palestinians, on the other hand, is a continous source
of their irritation since they cannot estimate what kind

of reactions could be caused by the fact of their domi-

-24-

nance. A typical example were the events in Jordan and

also the present events in Lebanon.

This is one of the reasons why each Palestinian feels the
need to bear a passport of his homeland. Even if many

of them, above all those who have built up a good career
for themselves, do not intend to immediately réturn to
this yet-to-be-established state, all of them, in the
final analysis, want their own homeland which they want
to create for themselves, This is the explanation why the
demand for the creation of a "Little Palestine” has

found such a positive resonance also with the Palestinians
living outside the areas which are supposed to constitute
the new state. We would not exclude the possibility

that this is also a source of irritation for the Pale-

stinians who are living in these areas,
The PLO

The importance of the PLO as the legitimate representa-
tive of the Palestinians was emphasized in all Arab
states, Maybe it was possible to hear in Syria that
there exist also other Palestinian organizations, and
to be told in Lybia that other Palestinian organizations
will take over from the PLO if the PLO "betrays" the
interest of the Palestinians. Today there are in fact

probably nine Palestinian organizations but there is

ory

meee eESB HE SEE SB SE HSE SESBEA SBA EB a DZ

725-

no doubt that El Fatah, which was founded as a mili-
tary movement in 1962, is the most important one,

The politically most important organization is the

PLO, In the course of a few years it has gained such a
degree of recognition with the Palestinians living out-
side of Israel, a fact which is apparently not known
well enough. No matter how one looks at the rgle of

the organization, it is the PLO which has created a
Palestinian national consciousnees. and it is also

the PLO which presents itself as a structured political
organization with a high degree of internal democracy.
The largest and most influential organization within the
PLO ist El Fatah which is organized along military lines,
El Fatah in turn is led mainly by the Palestinian
intelligentsia which primarily occupies itself with
military tasks, This is a somewhat similar process

like the one that could be observed in Israel, where
people from civilian walks of life temporarily make
themselves available for military duties because of

the pressing national problems. Within the PLO there

is also a financiallv very strong grouv of Palestinians
who have gained their wealth through their work. mainly
in the rich Arab states. This observation appears to

us to be of importance since it enables us to draw
conclusions about the ideological posture of the PLO,

It is not a movement of social revolutionaries, it is *

(726-

to a not inconsiderable extent nationalist-conservative.

We therefore do not agree with the sometimes expressed
apprehension that the PLO is an organization prone to
be influenced by communism. The class forces within
the PLO, by their very nature, are not communist or
anti-economy, although this does not preclude that one
is asking for the support of the Soviet Union in the

pursuit of national aspirations.

We should also not overlook the fact that, for the
last couple of years, El Fatah bears responsibility
for the refugee camps and that this, again and again,
leads to conflicts with the governments in the
countries in which these refugee camps are located,

This was one of the factors which caused El Fatah

‘to take a more realistic position, El Fatah knows

fully well that it bears responsibility for hundreds
of thousands of Palestinians who live in the refugee
camps, but that it was, as of now, not able to produce
one single square foot of Palestinian homeland, This,
on the one side, has forced El Fatah to intensify
again and again its military efforts with the ultimate
goal of creating a well equipped regular army - in-

dependent of the interests of other Arab countries -

nmlee@Se 2 @G BS Sf SS SS SE ft SE ff ff ee ee ss

-27-

but also has, om the other hand, given birth to the
idea to get a territory on which a Palestinian state
may be established. We think that this is one of the
reasons why a policy of moderation has begun to de-
velop.among the influential circles within El Fatah
and that, within the PLO, there are even the beginnings
of the idea that the reality of the state of Israel
will have to be taken into account. While in 1974.
during our talks with Arafat and his colleagues,

the differences were clearly visible, and while they
were at that time not ready to accept a solution
brought about by the creation of a Palestinian state
on the territory of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
except possibly as a short-term settlement, Arafat now
holds the position, as we can see from his address to

the United Nations.

++."Why therefore should I not dream and hope? For is
not revolution the making real of dreams and hopes? So
let us work together that my dreams may be fulfilled,
that I may return with my people out of exile. there

in Palestine to live with this Jewish freedomfighter

and his partners, with this Arab priest and his brothers,
in one democratic State where Christian, Jew and Moslem
live in justice. fraternity and progress."

}
We would also not want to deny ourselves the opportunity *

ey

-28-

to emphasize that other organizations, for example

Es Saika, which is close to the Syrian Baath Party

and therefore to the Syrian government, has some in-
fluence on the formulation of policy within the PLO.
The present crisis in Lebanon points at inner tensions
which it is not our present task to discuss and where
we do not have any relevant concrete facts at our dis-
posal. In this context it should be mentioned though
that one of the organizations, which is considered to
be the most radical one, the organization of Dr. Habbash,
has publicly recognized the Israelis as a people with
its own nationality, which is evident from a document
circulated at the Congress of the Palestinians. This
organization supports the idea of the coexistence bet=
ween Palestinians and Israelis instead of one between
Moslems, Christians and Jews. In any case, we were in-
formed, by persons who are rather close to us politi-
cally, that this organization, because of its "socia-
list program" has no influence within the PLO, but hopes
to gain influence among the Palestinian people. But it
is a fact, without any doubt, that the overwhelming

majority of all Arab governments supports the PLO.

Presently there are 105 nations who recognize the PLO
as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people in one way or another. We may assume that it

is only a question of - very little - time until most

|

-29-

of the industrialized countries will also follow this
tendency. We think that it is quite clear from numerous
discussions that the PLO, due to the worldwide recog-
nition which it has found during the last months has
now irrevocably decided to shed its terrorist image
which it had in many countries in Europe and the world.
In Arab circles, with the exception of Libya and Iraq,
there is recognition of the fact that terrorism has
driven the PLO into some kind of political isolation.
Because of the reasons mentioned above we have come

to the conclusion that a denial of the existence of

the PLO by Socialist parties would not only be in-
effective but would also create feelings of a new
hostility in the Arab world against the social demo-

cratic movement.

We know about the great difficulties of our Israeli
comrades who take the position that under no circum-
stances should there be negotiations with the PLO.

We think it is not our task to give advice to our
Israeli comrades, but we have raised the question
again and again with our Arab contacts and have found,
at least with regard to one question an important
readiness to negotiate. Everywhere where we raised’ this
question, we were told that, for the beginning, the

task of presenting the Palestinians could very well

-30-

be turned over to Arab military institutions. Apparently
it was thought that it might be easier for the Israeli
participants to stick to negotiation models which
already exist. In this context, the second highest,
although fictitious, institution of the Arab world was
specifically mentioned, the United Arab High Command.

We only mention this example - we have never thought of
offering our good services - because it leads us to the con-
clusion that the Arab side would like to find a quick
solution for this question. It is felt that the problem
of Palestine is an extremely heavy burden because, as
long as it exists, it has to be considered to be the
primary problem even though there are quite different

problems arising for many Arab states.

Some Problems of the Arab World

The discrepancy between the unimaginable wealth of the
upper class which controls the oil wells and the great
mass - we specifically do not want to say of their own
people but of all those working in these countries is
striking. These are, in many instances, millions of
foreigners, Arabs as well as non-Arabs, ranging form
Egyptians to Sudanese, from Pakistanis to Kurds,A new
proletariat is growing,and it is an unsolved question how
it can be organized along political and trade union lines,

This problem will present itself with great urgency if and-

hw

=31-

when there will be normal conditions in this region.

The process of industrialization, even accumulation
of capital is running its course in the rich oil
countries without an extreme exploitation of the
working people. On the contrary, the new proletariat
in these countries belongs to a relatively well-off
group of the population. The process of industriali-
zation is mostly conducted by European technicians
and supervisors. But this process has its numerous
limits, and we may assume that the largest part of
the investments generated by the revenues derived
from oil will be transferred to the industrial na-
tions of Europe and North America. It is correct that
there are gigantic amounts of dollars stacked away
in the many funds and banks of the Arab oil countries
with the exception of Iraq and Algeria. But they will
seek their own opportunities for investment, and

even today the recycling of petrodollars does not
pose a serious problem. This in turn will lead to

a commitment of Arab capital interests in Europe
which can be barely envisaged at this time. Con-
sidering the situation of the balances of payments

of most European nations, we will see the development
of a degree of interdependence which would be worthy

of special attention. In any event, this problem

732-

indicates a strong desire for stability in the rich
Arab states and leads to the distinct hope to ter-
minate the state of war with Israel. But naturally
under the condition that a compromise solution between

Israel and the Palestinians can be found.

Another problem which preoccupies the attention of the
rich states is their security. The desire for security
is particularly pronounced in the Gulf States, in Kuwait
and in Saudi Arabia. And it should be noted briefly

that these states definitely do not consider Israel

as the primary threat to their security ~ if Israel
would set the preconditions for the termination of the
state of war by retreating from the territories occupied
in 1967 -, but by other states and developments. We

do not want to be more specific here, which, in view

of the well-known geographic situation, is not necessary,

One problem, which apparently preoccupies the moderate
Arab statesmen to a very high degree, seems to be the
developments in Africa and in this context, above all,
the military intervention of Cuba in Angola. It was
pointed out to us that such influences may already be
observed in South Yemen, All these examples should show

us why there is a readiness in the Arab world to come

to a solution of the problems of the Arab-Israeli conflict,

|

ok

-33-

Our Arab sources in North Africa have told us about |
their original worry, that Israelis and Palestinians
could not live together, was unfounded since it has

been shown again and again that especially Palestinian
and Israeli intellectuals would be very well suited

for just such a development. And finally, our most
openminded Arab sources even expressed the view that

it would be just this very task which should be given
particular attention by the Israelis and Palestinians on
the one hand and Israelis and Arabs in general on the
other. This surely means that Israel will have to be
prepared to relinquish her extremeZionist conceptions

but could, in exchange, add a new and mutually beneficial
chapter to the history of the centuries-old relationship
between Jews and Arabs. In this context there were
strong hints with regard to the high level of Israel's
technological and scientific development. One of the
partners in our discussions, an Arab statesman known

all over the world, expressed his opinion that the prob-
lem of South Africa could only be finally solved if

South Africa will accept the fact that it exists within
an African envirorment and more strongly takes into account
developments in Africa, without having to give up South

Africa's European characteristics. Similar developments were

-34-

predicted for the next decades with regard to Israel -
she would have to accept that Israel was created within
an Arab area and, although keeping all aspects of her
identity, would have to integrate herself into this
area, a process greatly facilitated by the fact that
the Arab states are becoming more and more Eurdpean

themselves.

Israel would be totally unchallenged in her existence,
the sooner she accepts the fact that she has to take
into account developments in the Arab world and if she
adjusts her future political aspirations to this area.
We are fully aware of the fact that, in our report, we
present a particular emphasis with regard to the Arab-
Israeli question but we feel, that, on the basis of our
talks and experiences, we ‘are not only justified in
such a posture but that we have a moral obligation to

do so.

Return of the Occupied Territories

A phenomenon which in our opinion is particularly
worthy of note: In our talks with President Sadat in
1974 he expressed the view that the most which could

be accomplished through long negotiations would be

-35-

the end of belligerency. To make peace, that would be

the task of future generations, This is not the case

any more. Most Arab statesmen believe that presently
Israel - and we only report on their views -_ apparently
has no interest in making peace. They even believe that
the end of belligerency would have come had there been

a stonger institutionalization of the negotiations in
Geneva, since it is the mandate of the Geneva negotiations
to create peace. This changed posture appears to us to be
of some consequence, just like the demand for a return

to the borders of 1967, which already implies a recog-
nition of the existence of the state of Israel within
those borders. But there can be no doubt that no Arab
state, even the states not directly involved, can
withdraw the demand that all’ the land conquered in the
war of 1967 will have to be returned. In our discussions,
there have been no indications whatsoever that there
exists a readiness to talk about revisions with regard

to territory - although minor ones need not necessarily

be totally precluded.

Every Arab statesman will support the position of Pre-
sident Sadat who said, during a press conference in
Vienna, that he could not relinquish one inch of soil.
But what we feel is feasible would be negotiations

about the time-table of such a return of territory

hae

-36-

and of the confidence-building measures which would

have to be an itegral part. We are not enough versed

in these questions in order to make concrete proposals
but already the agreements which have been signed

during the last two years have shown us that several
possibilities exist. We have not gained the impression
that the Geneva Conference - if it were possible to
proceed along these lines - represents the only way

for a solution but we believe that, at present, there

can not be any other practical peace-supporting measures
than a resumption of the Geneva Conference, its insti-
tutionalization over a longer period of time, in order

to make it possible to return to the conference table
again and again, ‘also situations of crisis. . There
are examples in recent history that permanent conferences
of this kind have had no positive effect, but there are
also examples which prove that conferences of long duration
can bring about results, i.e. the negotiations about the
Austrian State Treaty. In all probability, there will be a
long series of detailed negotiations preceeding any peace-

ful solution,

Whatever our experiences with negotiations May have been,
democratic socialists simply can not depriv themselves

of the basic trust in negotiations between states.

°=37-

We think that especially at the present time, most of
Arab statesmen to whom we have talked are our partners
in discussion in the truest sense of the word. At any
rate, we have not been able to find that absolute,
final and even natural deadly enmity between Arabs

and Israelis.

oe
In this context it would be tempting to go intoan ana-
lysis of the question how many "hereditary enmities”
there existed between European nations in our older

and more recent history.

We feel obliged to point out in our report that Arab
self-confidence is not only based on the millions of
dollars which derive from oil, as is widely assumed in
Europe and America. In fact, there have been the genuine
beginnings of a national awakening, which dates back

a long time, and which, among other things, has had

as its consequence that the oil companies have been

taken away from the multinational corporations.

In the Arab world, the national revolution has be-
gun long before the oil crisis. It may be that the con-
trol over this gigantic wealth has accelerated this
process. The Arabs were, before they were condemned

to a state of ahistorical life for many centuries -

-38-

centuries of rule by the Turks, a few decades of
European colonial rule have brought about this
ahistorical state - the generators of a tremendous
culture and civilization, and it should be noted
that, in particular, members of the Jewish: faith,
fully allowed to develop their potential, have."'
greatly contributed to this culture. But it is
completely natural that the rise of Arab natio-
nalism orients itself to a high degree towards a
glorious cultural past. The impressive accomplish-
ments which may be observed in Israel find their
counterpart in a newly arising creativity which
has been submerged for centuries. This fact, we
believe,should make the Arab world a natural”.
partner for cooperation with Europe, and we have
left no doubt in our discussions that the estab-
lishment of peace in this region and a new re-
lationship between Arabs and Israelis would

-be- a-substantial precondition for such a
development. Certainly, material incentives will
have more effect in this instance - the urgent ne-
cessity for a supply of oil and similar developments.
In addition, we would like to point out in this con-
text the fact of the strong inclinations of the Arab

world toward Black Africa. There is no question that

on

-39-

the great efforts in the field of development assis-
tance do play a quite considerable role. The figures give

us a very clear picture.
National Geographic has reported in October 1975;

"Last year, following Kuwait's lead, OPEC nations
pledged 17 billion (dollar) to developing countries

(the industrial nations committed 11,3 billion) ,."

We were given another assignment as well: We were
asked to look into the question to ‘hat extent the
Arab states show a desire to cooperate with democra-
tic Europe. On the basis of the discussions which we

have held we finally came to the conclusion that the

. nations of Eastern Europe, inspite of everything, have

found a strong foothold in the Arab world. And that,

for example, the Soviet Union acts on a perfectly
“ideology-free" basis. As an example we would point to

the fact that the Soviet Union is one of the largest

trade partners of the Moroccan monarchy. On the basis

of our discussions we have come to the conclusion that

the Arab states will not follow the example of Egypt

with regard to relationships with the Soviet Union. In

the meantime, even Egypt is trying to work out a modus
vivendi with the Soviet Union. Only one thing is certain, |

that the Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries

—

40 -

do not enjoy a dominating i:deological influence in the
Arab world, at least as long as there is no new war.
Only such a war would immediately increase the willing-

ness to visibly intensify military cooperation. In our

opinionit is very well feasible that Syria, which presently

maintains close political, financial and economic ties
with Saudi Arabia and Jordan, will simultaneously main-
tain a close and intimate relationship with the Soviet
Union. With regard to economic cooperation with demo-
cratic Europe, we would like to note that it would have
to be primarily based on a more enlightened policy by
the European Economic Community. In addition, we should
work for constructive contacts between the International
Energy Agency within OECD on the one hand and OPEC on
the other. In this case, economic talks between OECD
and Arab organizations along similar lines would be use-
ful. There is certainly the necessary readiness for such

contacts on the Arab side.

Chances for cooperation between the Socialist Inter-

national and the associated varties and political forces

in_the Arab states

The changed statutes of the Socialist International

now permit a much more enlightened posture vis-a-vis

De ce eee ee

-41-

nationalist Arab parties. But we think it would be an
even more practical and useful development if we

could convince ourselves that social-democratic parties,
if and when they establish contacts with other political
forces on other continents, need not simultaneously

enter into full - fledged fraternity - which, incidentally,
has not been demanded by our partners. We think there

is also need for a less emotional posture within the
Socialist International. What these forces want, and

we have seen this quite clearly, is to be liberated

from the apparently inescapable alternative of having

to make a choice either for “capitalist America" or

for "communist Russia". Social Democracy and demo-

cratic Socialism really present themselves here as a third
force. During the last year, it was not the least due

to the fact-finding mission of the Socialist International
that leading politicians of the Arab countries have shown
a basic change in their attitude toward us. We think that
the established procedure of bilateral contacts of the
member parties of the Socialist International are useful,
but we should not overlook the fact that a rapprochement
between Arab parties and the Socialist International

could represent a ~ substantial precondition

for a new situation of dialogue between the Arab par-

ties and the Israeli Labour Party.

In this context we should not overlook a vital fact:

The strong affinity which Arab politicians who have

lived and studied in Europe feel towards the workers'
movement in Europe. We are here faced with a moral as-
pect which we on our side have not given sufficient atten-

tion.

Final Remarks

We do not want to overestimate the importance of the
work of this fact-finding mission of the Socialist
International. But the fact that it was considered
necessary to accord the delegation a large degree

of attention with regard to politics, journalism and
protocol is proof that its importance was considered
to be quite great, That it was possible, in each and
everyone of the countries visited, to hold dis-
cussions which lasted on the average from 4 to 7 hours,
proves the thoroughness with which we dealt with the
pressing problems, That we were treated not only wit:
exceptional politeness but with great friendliness -
we are even tempted to say, genuine warm friendliness -
shows. how useful the mission has been, and that,
finally, there was acceptance of the fact that the So-
cialist International and the Socialist parties are

determined to give unswerving loyalty to the workers’

743-

movement of Israel but nevertheless want to be informed
about developments in the Arab world, which not only

gives proof to the realistic perspective of the influential

statesmen of the Arab world but also of their desire
to establish contacts with us. We therefore believe
that the efforts to reach a peaceful solution of the
bloody confrontation would today be more sensibité than
during any other time in the history of this conflict,
would have more chances of success-than at any time
during the proceeding thirty years, but there is need
for a considerable measure of courage to support such a

rogram vis-d-vis one's own people.
Pp

We reached the conclusion that economic cooperation

between Europe and the Arab world, in the interest

of both parties concerned, should not only be developed

along the traditional forms of commercial relation-

ships but that there is need for a far more systematic

attitude of partnership. And we finally are of the

opinion that, as volatile the political conditions i |
in this part of the world may be, it is worthwhile
to establish contacts with suitable partners because
in this way social-democratic, that is to say demo-
cratic socialist thought, could find a wider field

of application.

-44-

All this must justify the interest of the Socialist
International in an opening towards the Arab world ;
this was, after all, the starting point in the decision

of London and the mandate for the delegation.

Annex I

HOTELIMPERIAL WIEN
Vienna, January 27, 1977.

Dear Chancellor Kreisky

Pursuant to our conversation last night, I would like to
submit to Your Excellency a brief review of the current status of
the Middle East crisis as well as a resume of the position of the
PIO on various parameters of the problem.

There is nowadays a unanimous agreement that the Middle East
crisis shoula be brought to a speeay solution. Unfortunately there
has been a great deal of confusion over what constitutes the basic
ingredients of a just and lasting solution. So far two formulas have
been under consideration, the one assumes that the crux of the problem
is a dispute between the confrontation Arab States ang the State of
Israel while the other insists that the essence of the crisis is the
contradictory claims of both Palestinians ang Israelis to the same
country. The first formula assumes that a settlement is possible
between the Arab States ang the State of Israel with the Palestinians
relegated to a vassal status under Jordan, whereas the other insists
that peace can only be achieved when the Palestinians ang Israelis
reconcile their contradictory claims amicably ang satisfactorily
through a mutually accepted formula which grants each side the degree
of self expression which it seeks ang insists upon.

The first formula, which finds favor in some American ana
Israeli official circles cannot bring about peace or even a temporary
state of nonbelligrency. The explosive Palestinian parametr with its
inherent and automatic built in capacity to destabilise the situation
in the Middle East, will unavoiqably trigger another round of military
‘confrontation with untola damage to the protagonists themselves as
well as to World interests at large. Based iipon this premise, it is
clear that the only way to peace and stability in the Miadle East is
through the recognition. and implementation of Palestinian legitimate
national rights.

Within this context, we believe that Western Europe and in
particular the 2nq International can play a constructive role. In fact
we believe that the major victim of another military confrontation
in the Middle East besiges the Arabs and Israelis themselves, would be
the West European countries whose economies anq continueg wellfare are
are crucially dependent upon the continued flow of Miggle Eastern oil,
The 2nd International shoula therefore seek ang insist upon an active
role in the search for peace in the Middle East, not only because of
the moral imperatives involved or because of the committments of the
International to the lofty iaeals of peace, justice ang universal
brotherhood, but also for the urgently pragmatic reasons of West Europ-
ean economic stability ang welfare.

Having asserted that peace is impossible without the Palest-
inians, it is highly reassuring to state that the Palestinians , through
an interesting process of political evolution ang maturity, are prepared
nowadays to contribute to the establishment of Peace in the Miggle East.

A-1015 WIEN I - KARNTNERRING 16 - TELEPHON 65 17 65 - TELEX. 01/2630
‘Telegrammadresse: imperialbotel wien » Bankverbindung: Creditanstalt-Bankverein, Wien 1, Karntnerring 1, Keo. 50-14360

HOTELIMPERIAL WIEN
a aan ;

I believe that this development represents a historical breakthrough

which should. be eagerly seize3 by all interesteg parties to turn the \1
dream for peace into a living realty. Surprisingly enough, the Palestin- ti
I

ian leagership, instead of receiving support for this constructive {1
attitude, was rebuffed by the USA, attacked. by the Israeli leadership
and harrassea by some Arab States. The political shortsightegness man=
ifesteq in these reactions is gangerous in that it can.easily persuage
the Palestiniam leadership of the futility of moderation ana force

them to adopt a hargline position which will certainly precipitate another |
roung of military.confrontation which now—boay can avert. a

, This’ 3 ‘Drecisely why a West Enropean role is urgently nsegeq.
The Palestinian position is still positive ang will remain so for the
next few months.at least. But how long will the Palestinian leadership

retain this constructive attituge
Arab. hostility,is highly unpredic
for very. longs; However, a determi:
‘consolidate Palestinian mogeratio
negative American ang Israeli ang

oe * The question -naturally:arises: How serious is the Palestinians
committment+for; peace. The answer is that it is very serious, provigeg
that there is reciprocity ang a real desire to tackle the problem of
peace and discuss all the issues whose solution is absolutely necessary,
Very briefly, it can be stateg that for the return of the West Bank,

Gaza. Sector, the Himma ang Auja enclaves, a status of non-belligrency
‘can be established between the future sovereign State of Palestine ang the
State. of ,Israel.. But for a full state of Peace td take place, other issues |
Will have .to.be settlea the nost? important of which is the Israeli accep-
tance ang ‘implementation of the right of Palestinian refugees to return
to their original: homes, if. they wisheg to go so or to be compensatea if
they’ freely electeg not to return. :

bas Natarally enough owe have not limitea our peaceful sentiments
to secret and configential talks with World leaders, but have been sending |
out’a number of public signals which are too well known to enumerate,
What is more important, we are planning on passing some very important
resolutions of a very construstive nature during the forthcoming Palest-
inian National Council. All of this should provige convincing ang irrefu-
table proof of the sincerity ang Seriousness of ‘the Palestinian position.

A-1015 WIEN I. KARNTNERRING 16
‘Telegeameracresse:

f impertaibovd wien + Bankverbindmag: Crediranstale-Bankvereia, Wiea 1. Kirenesin t o. chasse

against American, Israeli and some
tible. My guéss is that it.won't be |
neq West European position coulg possibly
n and exert positive pressure on the --
(certain Arab. attituaes. ~ .

Nery sincere],

7

Isam A. Sartawi.

+ TELEPHON 65 17 65 « TELEX.01/2630-
