"I '-
, (
;;:.• ~
':~=t
-!.'~
{'f'
-, .,
r)·
::).
..
-J<.-;J.
;;0
.:. '
/-\
-<, (
"
~;
'r
()•
:).
" .
.
~i(
~~ '
..
\/
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
VOULIAGMENI
CONFERENCE
22-25 April 1993
NOT FOR QUOTATION
INTRODUCfiON
The forty-first BilderbergMeeting was held at the Nafsika Astir
Palace Hotel in Vouliagmeni, Greece, on April22-25, 1993. There were
114 participants from 18 European countries, the United Sates and
Canada. They represented government, diplomacy, politics, business,
law, labor, education,journalism, the military, and institutes specializing
in national and international studies. All participants spoke in a
personal capacity, not as representatives of their national governments
or their organizations. As is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to
permit frank and open discussion, no public reporting of the conference
proceedings took place.
This booklet is an account of the 1993 Bilderberg Meeting and
is distributed only to participants of this and past conferences and to
prospective participantsof future conferences. It represents a summary
of the panelists' opening remarks for each session, and of the comments
and interventions made in the subsequent discussions.
1
,_,
'0
'
" '
'..,:":::
p
~~. ...
_\_,
~;~
......_.~
- '
..J
..).,
" ..
'; ;'0;
............;
:":.J.
.";,_~
"
r(
' '
... .
"'
'1
.).
~ ~
,:):
-~~
PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN
PETER CARRINGTON
Chairmanof the Board, Christie'sInternationalpic; Former
Secretary General, NATO
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND
CANADA
VICfOR HALBERSTADT
Professor of Public Economics, Leiden University,
Netherlands
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR U.S.A.
I
USA
GB
USA
GR
USA
p
s
1REODORE L. ELIOT, JR.
Dean Emeritus, The Fletcher School of Law & Diplomacy;
Former U.S. Ambassador
GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
Chairman, Fiat S.p.A.
PAUL A ALLAIRE
Chairman, Xerox Corporation
BARBARA AMIEL
Columnist, Sunday Times
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
Chairman, Archer-Daniels-Midland Company, Inc.
SlELIOS ARGYROS
Chairman, Federation of Greek Industries
GEORGE W. BALL**
Former Under-Secretary of State
FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMA.O*
Chairman, Sojornal sari; Former Prime Minister
PERCY BARNEVIK*
President and C.E.O., ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd.
2
D
NL
TR
s
ICE
CDN
GB
N
IRL
GB
p
NL
GR
D
E
E
TR
CHRISTOPH BERTRAM*
Diplomatic Correspondent, "Die Zeit"; Former Director
International Institute for Strategic Studies
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL**
Emeritus Professor of International Relations, Leiden
University; Former Honorary Secretary General of
Bilderberg Meetings for Europe and Canada
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
Director of Companies
CARL BILDT
Prime Minister
BJORN BJARNASON
Member of Parliament
CONRAD M. BLACK*
Chairman, The Telegraph plc
TONY BLAIR
Member of Parliament (Shadow Home Secretary,
Labour)
ERIK G. BRAATI-IEN
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer,
Braathens SAFE
CONORBRADY
Editor, The Irish Times
RODRIC BRAITHWAITE
Foreign Policy Adviser to the Prime Minister
NUNO BREDERODE SANTOS
Member of the Socialist Party; Columnist; Expresso
ELCO BRINKMAN
Parliamentary Leader of CDA (Christian Democrats)
COSTA CARRAS*
Director of Companies
ULRICH CARTELLIERI
Member of the Board of Managing Directors, Deutsche
Bank A.G.
JAIME CARYAJAL URQUIJO*
Chairman and General Manager, lberfomento
JUAN LUIS CEBRIAN
Chief Executive Officer, PRISA (El Pais)
HUSEYIN E. (ELEM
Ambassador to Greece
3
GB
GR
KENNETII CLARKE
Home Secretary
CDN
YANNIS S. COSTOPOULOS
Chairman, Credit Bank
KENNETII S. COURTIS
USA
E
F
CDN
INT
DK
E
USA
USA
CDN
GR
TR
First Vice President, Deutsche Bank Capital Markets
Asia Ltd., Tokyo
KENNETH W. DAM*
Max Pam Professor of American and Foreign Law,
University of Chicago Law School; Former Deputy
Secretary of State
GUILLERMO DE LA DEHESA
Chief Executive, Banco Pastor
PATRICK DEVEDJIAN
Member of Parliament (UDF, Hauts de Seine)
MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN*
Executive Director, Hudson Institute of Canada
ARTHUR DUNKEL
Director General, General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade
UFFE ELLEMANN-JENSEN
Member of Parliament
CARLOSFERRERSALAT
Chairman, UNICE (The European Employers
Federation)
STEPHEN FRIEDMAN
Senior Partner and Chairman, Goldman Sachs & Co.
JOHN R. GALVIN
John M. Olin Distinguished Professor of National
Security Studies, U.S. Military Academy West Point;
Former Supreme Allied Commander Europe, SHAPE
ANTIIONY G.S. GRIFFIN**
Director of Companies
GREGORY HADJIELEFTIIERIADIS
Vice-President, Eletson Corporation
TALAT S. HALMAN
Professor of Near Eastern Languages and Literatures,
New York University
4
USA
N
B
SF
A
CH
D
USA
CH
USA
GB
SF
NL
SF
NL
USA
JAMES HOAGLAND
Associate Editor/Senior Foreign Correspondent, The
Washington Post
WESTYE H0EGH*
Chairman of the Board, Leif H0egh & Co. AS
JAN HUYGHEBAERT
Chairman, Almanij-Kredietbank Group
JAAKKO ILONIEMI*
Managing Director, Centre for Finnish Business and
Policy Studies; Former Ambassador to the United States
of America
PETER JANKOWITSCH*
Chairman Joint Parliamentary Committee Austria-EC;
Former Foreign Minister
ROBERT A JEKER
Managing Director of the Stephan Schmidheiny Holdings
JOSEF JOFFE
Foreign Editor, Siiddeutsche Zeitung
VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.*
Senior Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld,
LLP (Attorneys-at-Law)
JAKOB KELLENBERGER
State Secretary for Foreign Affairs
LANE KIRKLAND
President, AFL-CIO
ANDREW KNIGHT*
Executive Chairman, News International Pic
JARL KOHLER
President, Finnish Forest Industries Federation
WIM KOK
Minister of Finance; Deputy Prime Minister
JOHANNES KOROMA
Director General, Confederation of Finnish Industry and
Employers
PIETER KORTEWEG*
President and C.E.O. of the Robeco Group; Honorary
Treasurer of Bilderberg Meetings
HENRY R. ¥.RAVIS
Founding Partner, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.
5
·:r ,...llt
'
....
-G
0
"'
!I~~
,-
-....>
••
".
o·
:).
."
. f
'"''·)
.....
"1
.;,_(.
I
..
!·'
..... c
....
(~
·:r·
I
-1.~
"
o·
••
-~i\:
•;\!.
0 '
A
USA
GR
GR
PAUL LENDVAI
Director, Austrian International Radio
SAMUEL W. LEWIS
Director, Policy Planning Staff, Department of State
GEORGE P. LIVANOS
Shipowner
JOHN C. LYRAS
Vice Chairman, Union of Greek Shipowners
CDN DONALD S. MACDONALD
Senior Partner, McCarthy Tetrault; Former Minister of
Finance
NL FLORIS A. MALJERS
Chairman of the Board, Unilever N.V.
GR STEFANOS MANOS
Minister of National Economy
B WILFRIED MARTENS
Minister of State; Former Prime Minister
USA CHARLES MCC. MATHIAS*
Partner, Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue; Former U.S.
Senator (Republican, Maryland)
CDN BARBARA MCDOUGALL
Secretary of State for External Affairs
INT KAREL VAN MIERT
E.C. Commissioner
GR CONSTANTINE MITSOTAKIS
Prime Minister
F THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL*
Director, French Institute of International Relations;
Professor of Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
I MARIO MONTI"'
Rector and Professor of Economics, Bocconi University,
Milan
USA WILLIAM E. ODOM
Director of National Security Studies, The Hudson
Institute; Former Director National Security Agency
P FERNANDO FARIA DE OLIVEIRA
Minister of Trade and Tourism
F FRANCOIS D'ORCIVAL
Editor, Valeurs Actuelles
6
GB
NL
GR
GR
DAVID OWEN
E.C. Mediator, International Conference on Former
Yugoslavia
H.M. THE QUEEN OF THE NETHERLANDS
THEODOROSPANGALOS
Spokesman for Foreign Affairs, Socialist Party
MICHALIS G. PAPACONSTANTINOU
Minister for Foreign Affairs
GR THEODORE PAPALEXOPOULOS
Deputy Chairman, Titan Cement Company S.A.
GR MICHAEL C. PERATICOS
Chairman, Pegasus Ocean Services
USA LARRY PRESSLER
Senator (Republican, South Dakota)
CH DAVID DE PURY*
Chairman of the Board of BBC Brown Boveri Ltd. and
Co-Chairman of ABB Asea Brown Boveri Group
GB WILLIAM REES-MOGG
Chairman, Broadcasting Standards Council; Chairman,
The American Trading Company Ltd.; Former Editor,
The Times
D WOLFGANG REITZLE
Member of the Board, BMW AG
DK CHRESTEN W. REVES
President and C.E.O., Berlingske Tidende
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER**
Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank International
Advisory Committee
USA SHARON PERCY ROCKEFELLER
President and C.E.O., WETA TV & FM
GB ERIC ROLL OF IPSDEN**
President, S.G. Warburg Group plc
I RENATO RUGGIERO*
Member of the Board, Fiat S.p.A.; Former Minister of
Trade
D VOLKER RUHE
Minister of Defence
TR RUSDU SARACOGLU
Governor, Central Bank of Turkey
7
B
F
GB
ICE
D
D
I
PHILIPPE DE SCHOUTHEETE DE TERVARENT
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the European
Communities
LOUIS SCH"NEITZER
Chairman and C.E.O., Renault S.A.
PATRICK SHEEHY
Chairman, B.A.T. Industries
J6N SIGURDSSON
Minister of Trade and Industry
THEO SOMMER
Editor-in-Chief, "Die Zeit"
LOTHAR SPATH
Chief Executive Officer, Jenoptik; Former Prime
Minister of Baden-Wiirtemberg
BARBARA SPINELLI
Editorialist and European Correspondent, La Stampa,
Paris
INT HELGA STEEG
Executive Director, International Energy Agency
IRL PETER D. SUTHERLAND*
Chairman, Allied Irish Banks plc; Former Member,
Commission of the European Communities
GB J. MARTIN TAYLOR
Chief Executive, Courtaulds Textiles Pic
I MARCO TRONCHETTI PROVERA
GR
GR
A
Executive Vice President and C.E.O., Pirelli SpA
THANOS M. VEREMIS
Professor of Political History, University of Athens;
Director, Hellenic Foundation for Defence and Foreign
Policy
THEMISTOCLES VOKOS
Chairman, The Seatrade Organisation
FRANZ VRANITZKY
Federal Chancellor
N NIELS WERRING, JR.
Director, Wilh. Wilhelmsen Limited NS
USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD*
Chairman, AEA Investors, Inc.; Former Deputy
Secretary of State
8
USA LYNN R. WILLIAMS*
International President, United Steelworkers of America
USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN*
President, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.
D OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN* *
Chairman and C.E.O. of Otto Wolff Industrieberatung
und Beteiligungen GmbH
INT MANFRED WORNER
Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organisation
USA CASIMIR A YOST*
Executive Director, The Asia Foundation's Center for
Asian Pacific Affairs
*Member of the Steering Committee
**Member of the Advisory Group
OBSERVER
B H.R.H. Prince Philippe
RAPPORTEUR
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
Partner, Milbank Winthrop & Co.
USA ALICE VICTOR
Executive Assistant to David Rockefeller, Rockefeller
Financial Services, Inc.
9
J
'
'c.
~
.
.,.
""{_1;.1
~ '
·J"·
'
_,
r'
.,.,.,._.
()
.) .
.'
\:.1
.......,,I
.j~
''
..
f- ;
""!
"'
'%]
')
" '
{
-··
'
-~
l ,
IN ATfENDANCE
NL
GR
SF
USA
MAJABANCK
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
STEPHEN FARRANT
Managing Director, Newsfront Naftiliaki; Local
Organizer 1993
MIRJA LEHTINEN
Local Organizer 1994
CHARLES MULLER
President, Murden and Company; Adviser, American
Friends of Bilderberg, Inc.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A Austria ICE Iceland
B Belgium INT International
CDN Canada IRL Ireland
CH Switzerland N Norway
D Germany NL Netherlands
DK Denmark p Portugal
E Spain s Sweden
F France SF Finland
GB Great Britain TR Turkey
GR Greece USA United States of America
I Italy
10
I.
II.
m.
IV.
v.
VI.
AGENDA
WHAT KIND OF EUROPE WILL THE U.S. HAVE TO DEAL
WITH?
Moderator: Christoph Bertram
Panelists: Volker Riihe
Lord Owen
CURRENT EVENTS: FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Moderator: Lord Carrington
Panelist: Lord Owen
RESTORING CONFIDENCE IN LEADERSHIP AND
INSTITUTIONS
Moderator: Vernon Jordan
Panelists: James Hoagland
William Rees-Mogg
PROSPECTS FOR GLOBAL TRADE
Moderator: Peter Sutherland
Panelists: Arthur Dunkel
Lane Kirkland
U.S. DOMESTIC POLICY CONCERNS
Moderator: Renata Ruggiero
Panelist: Vernon Jordan
THE OUTLOOK FOR JAPAN'S ECONOMY
Moderator: James Wolfensohn
Panelist: Kenneth Courtis
11
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
COST OF INDIFFERENCE TOWARD THE FORMER
SOVIET UNION
Moderator: John Whitehead
Panelists: Rodric Braithwaite
William Odom
CURRENT EVENTS: ITALY
Moderator: Lord Roll
Panelist: Renato Ruggiero
FOREIGN POLICY CONCERNS OF THE CLINTON
ADMINISTRATION
Moderator: Thierry de Montbrial
Panelist: Samuel Lewis
CRISIS MANAGEMENT
Moderator: Lord Carrington
Panelist: Manfred Worner
12
I. WHAT KIND OF EUROPE WILL THE U.S. HAVE TO DEAL WITH?
The moderator ofthis session observed that it was time~v to grapple
with a number ofquestions that were being asked, especial~v in the United
States, about the new Europe. What is the new Europe? Where is it
going? What will happen with Maastricht? Is Europe the Community, or
is it more than that? And how should this Europe relate to the United
States?
The session was led by two panelists, a German and a Briton.
The German, who spokefirst, focused his remarks upon the challenges that
lie ahead in the European integration process and the future role that
Europe mustplay in the world. The British panelist addressed his remarks
to the lessons that Europe should learn from the problems in the
Maastricht process, which have altered the planned course of European
integration in ways that are generally positive.
The discussion dwelt extensively upon the Maastricht process, what
went wrong the first time and what are the prospects for the Danish
referendum in a few weeks' time. Speakers gave their views on current
problems and challenges confronting Europe and their prescriptions for
what course Europe should follow in the future. There were a few Euro-
skeptics among the participants, but the view of the majority was that
Europe had weathered some important challenges and was making real
progress. Americans were largely silent in the discussion, a reflection,
suggested one who did speak, of the current preoccupation with the
domestic agenda in the United States.
Panelist's Remarks, /.
Much is going on in Europe at the present time. In the West,
the process is one of integration, with the formation of larger units.
Meanwhile, in southeastern Europe, you have disintegration, with
division into smaller units.
The task for Europe is to broaden, deepen (by approving the
Maastricht Treaty) and open up (by extending membership to more
countries), while maintaining the link to the United States.
Europe must work out a defense identity which is consistent
with the desire of the U.S. to pull back. The opportunity for
membership in NATO must be offered to Eastern European nations.
For this to work, there must be a partnership between NATO and
Russia.
In the aJ!'ea of widening, we need to look at the conflict
13
'
'""(
---~
.:;~
~ ·
:..·
" <
~
J-· ~
r
:).
:~
~;~
,
,
; .. ,
4_ ,
l •
1:1
I.
""'
..
t")
J
j'
between widening and deepening. The gaps in prosperity between the
nations of Western Europe and those in Eastern Europe must be
narrowed. This cannot be Germany's responsibility alone. The club of
twelve cannot be perfected as long as this gap exists. From the security
standpoint as well, the West must work to stabilize the fledgling
democracies of the East.
In the process of shaping the future of Europe, the U.S. must
be an important, active player. European identity always includes the
vital transatlantic dimension. In the future, there will be new jobs for
NATO to take on. The most unlikely future conflict is an attack on
Western Europe. NATO only makes sense if it addresses the most
future tasks: peacemaking and peacekeeping.
The United States will have to deal with a Europe which
continues the integration process, which develops into a more capable,
self-confident, equal partner, which gives priority to economic and
social elements of security, and which restructures its military forces to
better meet crisis management needs in a collective manner.
Panelist's Remarks, II.
The Europe with which the U.S. will have to deal is today a
chastened, better Europe. The Europe of illusions is gone. Europe
today is more realistic and will be a better partner. It is on an
unstoppable course, and no country that wants to play a future role can
opt out. But the illusion that Europe is going to be modeled on the
United States is over.
This was the message of the Danish referendum on the
Maastricht Treaty, and, more important, the French referendum, which
very nearly lost, in spite of the fact that the government and its major
opponents were united in support.
The construction of Europe must go forward, but recognizing
certain limits. There will be certain areas of policy that are going to
remain primarily governmental: foreign policy, defense, and
immigration and related iswes. These are matters of too great concern
to the publics for governments to let go of and pass to a supra-
governmental body. There will be collective decision making, but final
authority will be reserved for the governments.
While there is a will to have a common foreign policy,
Yugoslavia showed the futility of trying to have a common foreign
policy based on a vote. You cannot conduct foreign policy or defense
14
policy on the basis of majority voting. NATO has been the best
defensive alliance in history, and it has never operated this way.
The Atlantic partnership must and will continue to be very
important. It will change, with the dominance of the United States
giving way to a more equal bilateral relationship. But there are issues
in Europe from which the interests of the United States cannot be
separated.
Discussion
The next big test of the process of European unification and
integration is the second Danish referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.
Most observers expect a "yes" outcome, although a negative vote is still
a possibility. Should that happen, the question is whether the process
should go on without the Danes, or pause for an indefinite period of
time. There is a chance that, if the Danes do reject Maastricht again,
the United Kingdom will follow suit. In this event, there will almost
certainly have to be a pause in the process, if not an entirely different
approach.
What went wrong with the Maastricht process the first time?
Why did the Danes vote "no" and the French barely vote "yes"? One
view is that the electorate increasingly felt that the European
Community was developing in the direction of bureaucracy and
centralization and away from accountability. This suggests that national
leaders must take care not to lose touch with public opinion. European
integration has to be a political process in which governments have the
time to bring along their peoples. They must more clearly define the
goals and objectives of integration.
Some national political leaders have failed to try to expiain to
their people how the community works. Many of them have blamed
the European Commission for everything that goes wrong, while taking
credit for what goes right. There is a need for a more open, sensible
process. Future revisions of Maastricht will have to be done openly
and well in advance and then subjected to debate. In retrospect, the
first Maastricht effort resulted in a poor treaty, cobbled together in
haste. Its weakness was that it was intergovernmental; it was not
negotiated in a constitutional way.
If accountability is one of the big issues, then the answer is to
have a completely democratic structure in the Community, in which the
European Commission is accountable to the European Parliament. In
15
that case, we must have acceptance of a real European Parliament.
There are certain responsibilities and functions that will have to be
done at the Community level that call for more, rather than less,
community.
1992 was a year of negativism in Europe because Europe did
not deliver what the politicians had promised it would. In the Europe
of 1992, there was supposed to be peace, prosperity, and high
employment. What people saw and experienced was the opposite:
recession, unemployment, war in Yugoslavia, and endless bickering
among governments over obscure issues. Europe finds itself in its
current crisis because of a number of factors, including the
consequences of the end of the cold war, world recession, the stringent
requirements of monetary union, and the need to adapt to open
markets.
But the aims of Maastricht remain valid: the need for a
common foreign and defense policy, and some sort of economic and
monetary union. In some respects, the process of European
integration is more sound today than it was a year ago. Progress has
been made in the integration of markets, and, in spite of the currency
crisis, there was no reintroduction of controls on international capital
movements. The major tests the Community has recently faced--
German reunification, currency crisis, and recession--have not caused
disintegration. Indeed, the past twelve months have proven the logical
framework of Maastricht.
In summary, in spite of recent difficulties, Europe has made
great strides by sticking together. This is, tberefore, no time for a new
round of European introspection. The process of integration was never
intended to result in a "United States of Europe." But it has resulted
in a unique pole of stability, the only one on the whole Euro-Asian
continent. The process of integration must certainly go forward, but in
a more measured, gradual, open manner, stressing accountability.
16
ll. CURRENT EVENTS: FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
For the third year in a row, Yugoslavia - now known as the former
Yugoslavia - was selected as a topic for the sessions on Current Events.
That, alone, underscores the continuing significance which the world
attributes to this Balkan tragedy. Without reviewing the events which have
led to the current Yugoslavian conflict, the panelist outlined the current
situation, the rationale behind the Vance-Owen plan, and his analysis of
the various alternative solutions which have been and continue to be
considered.
Panelist's Remarks
The present situation in Yugoslavia is a tragic example of how
important it is to remember the history of a country as we try to
confront an almost unsolvable situation in the Balkan area, one which
could be repeated at any time around the world. It is graver than
anyone, even the media, could possibly portray and there is a real
potential for war, not just within its boundaries but spreading
throughout the Balkan region and even beyond. Therefore it is
imperative that pressure be maintained on those who are resisting all
attempts at peace. This applies most particularly to the Bosnian Serbs,
who feel that, through continuing fighting and "ethnic cleansing", they
can create a greater Serbia, contiguous with the original Serbia from
where the impetus for these aggressions has come.
At the same time, one must not forget the other tensions
around the country. The Croatians are fighting the Muslims,
sometimes committing the same atrocities as the Bosnian Serbs, though
not to the same horrific extent. One must be aware that there is a
great deal of dry tinder around Bosnia, which could break into an
inferno at any moment.
The recent decision by the United Nations to increase sanctions
against the region is both welcome and about six to eight weeks late,
during which time the world has had to witness the continuing
abominations. The delay was understandable, given the referendum in
Russia, which President Yeltsin bas called in search of a vote of
confidence in his leadership. If Yeltsin were to lose out to the hard-
line military and politicians, Serbia might well have an ally to support
its efforts, both militarily and with supplies of food and other goods.
At the same time, the delay has been put to tragic use by the Serbians
17
'
"(
,..:-
·•.
1_) .
.).
.·
;.~
,,
,.
~
(../
\
~
~ ...,
~
"
.,
··.
· if(~_
"
::)
.)
:),
and has heightened the determination, both in Europe and the United
States, to find some workable solution.
This merely underscores the importance that the new sanctions
are enforced by all countries. To date that has not been the case and
scattered "cheating" on sanctions has severely diluted their success and
leaves open the possibility of more controversial solutions, including
military intervention. The Vance-Owen Peace Plan, which calls for
dividing Bosnia and Herzegovinainto ten largely autonomous provinces,
has been thus far signed by two of the three factions. This has been
possible because the Muslims in Bosnia have finally come to accept that
a Muslim-dominated territory is not feasible, and that a partitioned
Bosnia would not survive. It remains for the Bosnian Serbs to accept
a parallel limitation - that a good portion of the land they have
conquered to date not only may not be used to create a "greater Serbia"
contiguous to the present one, but must be returned to its original
owners.
Discussion
The discussion began with an American, speaking on the
military possibilities available for consideration, and the relative merits
of each level of intervention. His words reflec:ted the opinions of many
participants, both European and American, who strongly supported a
continuation and increase of economic sanctions, while at the same
time recognizing that some form of military intervention might
ultimately be necessary. While the West continues to employ political,
moral, economic and military coercion, there is an urgent need to
develop a consensus among the European Community and the United
Stales on the next direction to take.
Although lifting the arms embargo on the Muslims would be
limited to supplying small arms to Croatians and Muslims in Bosnia-
Herzegovina, at the same time it would send a confrontational signal
to the Bosnian Serbs. Any more significant arms, such as artillery,
would require training in the use of such weapons, and would signifY
an acceptance that the fighting, and concurrent atrocities, would
continue.
In an air strike, the targets would be almost impossible to
pinpoint, as was the case in the recent war in Iraq, thus falling far short
of the hoped for effect. The risk of killing innocent people would be
18
high and would surely lead to a retaliation by the Serbs, including
possible air strikes on European countries outside the Balkan area.
What about a ground war? Putting in ground troops would
require removing the peacekeeping teams now in place which are
providing humanitarian support, and effectively bringing that support
to a halt. Moreover it would give the signal that the United States and
Europe are not above the fray, but ready to be a part of it, undoubtedly
leading to an escalation on the part of the Serbs. And one must ask
which troops would be used if a ground war were begun. It would be
nearly impossible to get a consensus around Europe and in the United
States as to which troops to send and how many. If any troops are
needed, they should be NATO troops, with the capacity to facilitate a
consensus among the politicians from the supporting countries.
By process of elimination, therefore, it would seem that the
political pressure and sanctions must continue, but at a more intense
level.
The remainder of the discussion reflected a strong sense of
frustration over the opportunities missed during the earlier phases of
this conflict, as well as the drawbacks of each of the alternatives that
have been considered. Although several countries, including Canada,
had urged intervention at an earlier stage, it was conceded that both
Americans and Europeans had been preoccupied with time-consuming
events in their respective countries, such as the Maastricht Treaty in
Europe, and the Presidential election in the United States. On the
whole, it was felt that military intervention should only be used to
contain whatever peacekeeping agreement could be achieved.
The arguments both for and against lifting the arms embargo
were strongly articulated. Those who supported such a move felt that
the more palliative methods have been given long enough to take
effect, and at this point to deny the Muslims the arms with which to
defend themselves seemed almost inhuman. Others felt that lifting the
embargo would be a signal for everyone to take up arms, not only the
Muslims in Bosnia and the surrounding countries, but the Europeans
and Americans as well. One participant suggested that the situation
would be quite different if the Muslims were the aggressors rather than
the victims; that the Western countries would have moved in with
military force against them at a much earlier point. Suggesting that a
continuation of the present approach would neither solve the problem
or create a permanent solution, he proposed that a Muslim force, made
up of the greater Muslim community and augmented by other troops
19
J
on a voluntary basis, be formed and armed in order to give them the
means to confront the Bosnian Serbs on a more equal basis. Ethnic
cleansing is not really ethnic at all, he noted, but religious, and perhaps
an equal balance of power between the factions would persuade all of
them to bring an end to the unconscionable bloodshed taking place.
The panelist confirmed, in response to several participants'
doubts about the validity of signatures on any agreement that might be
reached, that such signatures would, indeed, mean very little.
Therefore, it was not realistic for the Americans to condition any
potential commitment of peacekeepingtroops upon the assurance of an
agreement based upon honesty and good faith. The Serbian military
are dishonest, untrustworthy, and without scruples, he noted, which
underscores the need for a large and strong peacekeeping force to
uphold any agreement which might be reached. At the same time,
however, thousands of decent Serbs, as well as Croats and Muslims,
who are not in the military, not only want peace but are already
demonstrating a capacity to get along. There is a large amount of cross
cultural living and marriage among the three factions and it is not
unreasonable to hope that simple human nature, once the military
forces are quieted, might combine with the peacekeeping efforts to
assure a more stable environment. Therefore, one has to count on a
degree of trust that these elements will help to hold an agreement
together.
To lift the arms embargo, the panelist reiterated, would be just
about the worst decision one could make. First of all, in spite of their
best intentions, the Russians would find it difficult to refrain from
supplying arms and other necessities to the Serbs. The Russians have
a great deal of modern equipment and the Serbs have the money with
which to pay for it. Second, such action would be a flat-out concession
to a larger, fiercer, and longer war which, as said before, would have
all the potential of spreading farther afield. Thirdly, by lifting the arms
embargo, the West would have to withdraw all of its humanitarian aid
now in place and would be sending a signal, essentially, that they are
no longer able or willing to work towards a settlement through peaceful
means.
Ultimately, although the Vance-Owen plan is by no means
ideal, it is the only viable method at this time. And it does have a
chance of succeeding if only the sanctions were not being violated. The
sanctions must be strictly and uniformly enforced; and then one can
only hope that reason will prevail.
20
ill. RESTORING CONFIDENCE IN LEADERSHIP
AND INSTITUTIONS
Two panelists, an American and a Briton, introduced this topic.
1he American stated that a loss of confidence in leaders and institutions
in his country led to the election of President Clinton, and perhaps the
President's foremost challenge is to restore that confidence. This explains
the priority given to domestic affairs by the new administration, but, at the
same time, President Clinton is well aware that America must stay deeply
involved in the world.
The British panelist argued that the main causes of the weakness
that has developed in Western leaders and institutions in recent years have
been economic: a world depression brought on by debt accumulation,
which now must be liquidated in an environment where the traditional
economic supremacy of the U.S./Europe axis has been overtaken by the
powerful Japanese economy and rapid~v developing Chinese economy.
The discussion expanded upon the causes of the weakness of
leaders and institutions, and what should be done to restore confulence.
The economy was seen as the primary source ofour difficulties, but other
factors, such as the funcfioning ofpolitical parties and the influence ofthe
media, were identified a.'i playing an important role.
Panelist's Remarks,/.
The topic is particularly timely because of recent events: the re-
emergence of governmental gridlock in the U.S., the fall of the Italian
government, the return of divided government in France, the economic
problems plaguing the leaders of Germany and the United Kingdom,
and the paralysis about what to do in Bosnia. Restoring confidence is
therefore a very important task facing leaders.
This is particularly true from the American perspective.
President Clinton was elected because of a crisis of spirit and
confidence. Opinion surveys and polls have shown that the recession
has taken a toll on the national psyche. Americans have lowered their
expectations; they sec a future of higher costs and lower living
standards. A powerful anti-status quo sentiment was built up in 1992,
with a majority of people feeling that government could change things
for the better, but was not; rather it was merely conducting business as
usual.
21
I
'>(
.,
'·
4
r)
:)
•
""
..
0
;)
\I
\.;
}~:
;
;
.....
·'
.J.
..
J
~
~
~;
0
This sentiment in the U.S. affects the way Americans look at
other countries, especially their traditional trading partners, and most
especially Japan. President Clinton's actions with respect to other
countries are influenced by this sentiment. This does not mean he will
be constantly looking over his shoulder at opinion polls, but he does
feel his task is to build a new consensus as the basis of restoring
confidence in leaders and institutions.
President Clinton does not intend to preside over a turning
away from the world. He is very much aware that America is an
important part of the world. His actions in the early months of his
administration with respect to Russia, the Middle East, Somalia, and
Haiti illustrate this.
Panelist's Remarks, II.
The main underlying cause of the weakness of leaders and
institutions in recent years is the world recession that has impacted
almost all economies. This recession resulted from the long period of
debt accumulation since the Second World War and the process of
liquidating it that began in 1987. Simultaneously, world economic
power has shifted from Europe and the United States to the Pacific
region, particularly the powerful economy of Japan and the rapidly
growing economy of China.
Economic factors have had a considerableimpact upon political
structures. Institutions seem to have become less effective and leaders
less re~;pected. This has led to changes in regimes., which fortunately
have been largely confined to the Communist world, where
dictatorships have been destroyed.
The challenge facing Europe in this environment is great. The
continuation of free trade is vital, but difficult at a time when economic
difficulties are giving rise to protectionist sentiments. The European
Community is weaker than it was, especially economically. It is unlikely
the 11 countries that have not met the convergence requirements set by
Maastricht will do so any time soon. The convergence seems to be in
high deficits and high unemployment. European governments are
weak, and will not find it easy to resist the forces of protectionism or
to take the right steps to restabilize their economies.
The unsung hero of this period is Alan Greenspan, who bas
kept interest rates down in the United States. Fortunately, the
Bundesbank has recently caught on. Low interest rates are essential for
22
orderly debt reduction. Avoidance of protectionism is the other key
ingredient, if we are to avoid a repetition of the mistakes made at the
time of the 1930s Depression.
The effect of world recession is to disintegrate political
authority, as happened in the communist world. These same dangers
must not be neglected in the democratic world.
Discussion
A number of factors have contributed to the erosion in popular
confidence in leaders and institutions in the United States and Europe.
One of these has been a fundamental change in the nature of
democracy which can be described as the development of mass
democracy. This involves an electorate which is less deferential to its
leaders, less fixed in its loyalties, more informed, more critical, and
tending to identify itself with special interest groups. In this
environment, the political debate has become more volatile, and
authority has been diluted.
In some respects, politicians have brought this state of affairs
upon themselves. Lacking a clear political philosophy and a sense of
direction, they have not delivered what George Bush called "the vision
thing." Pandering too much to nationalisms and regionalisms, they have
failed to provide the kind of collective leadership these difficult times
require. Perhaps one reason for the loss of confidence in leaders is
that not enough of the "best and the brightest" are in positions of
leadership. Somehow, politics and government service must be made
more attractive to the top quality people.
There are problems with our institutions as well as our leaders.
Many of our most basic, venerable institutions don't seem to be
working as well as they used to, whether they be political parties, labor
unions, the media, big corporations, and even the collective institutions,
such as NATO, that have served so well in the past. As for the new
institutions of the European Community, there is a lack of popular
participation in them, a sense of remoteness from the people about
them. Perhaps there is a need for new institutions and structures.
Certainly there is the need for institutions to change.
Economic issues lie at the heart of the probkm of loss of
confidence in leaders and institutions. In Europe, there has been a
fundamental change in national economies since the fall of the Iron
Curtain. The response to this change has been incremental, not
23
fundamental, applying old rules and solutions to new problems.
Indeed, a political paralysis has seemingly gripped Europe when it
comes to addressing even the most basic economic problems.
The serious unemployment facing most Western economies is
an especially difficult challenge, existing as it does at a time when the
West aspires to bring up to its standard of living the peoples of
neighboring regions, such as Eastern Europe and Mexico.
The fast pace of technological change is another factor having
very significant economic effects. Coupled with the wide disparity
around the world of the cost of high quality labor, it has led to very fast
shifts in the economy.
The media is another, major factor affecting leadership and
institutions. The enormous emphasis on the immediacy of news in both
print and electronic journalism may be depriving both governments and
educated people of the necessary thoughtful reflection on the issues and
events of the day. People tend to make judgements based upon what
they see on TV, which greatly oversimplifies complex issues.
Governments are in danger of losing control unless they can become
more adept at dealing with the emotions produced by instantaneous
televised images of such things as the carnage in Bosnia.
On the other hand, the media have produced an electorate
which is more widely and better informed on issues. The positive
impact of television on the course of world events can be seen in the
influence of live broadcasts of the actions of anti-Communist activists
in Eastern Europe and in Tienanmen Square.
Leaders and governments can restore confidence by
demonstrating a sense of purpose. They must define the major
challenges facing the nations of the West: how to compete against the
growing economic power of the Far East, and how to construct new
principles of international cooptration. Governments must be
predictable, consistent, and credible. Their rules of operating must be
understandable to their publics, who must be kept well informed.
Looking at immediate, concrete goals, confidence would be boosted if
we could complete the Uruguay Roand, accomplish through our aid a
significant improvement of the economic and political situation in
Russia, and make some progress, through international cooperation, in
the Balkans.
24
IV. PROSPECTS FOR GLOBAL TRADE
Negotiations on GAIT (Genera/Agreement on Tariffs and Trcule)
as well as NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement), are matters
of major concern to Europeans and Americans. These agreements will
have an impact on both sides ofthe Atlantic Ocean and ultimately around
the world. The first panelist addressed the status of the GAIT
negotiations. The second panelist, an opponent of NAFTA, proposed an
alternative treaty, a North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement. Except for this
panelist, support for GAIT and for NAFTA, among participants in the
discussion, was almost universal. Most ofthe speakers were European and
expressed their thoughts on not only GATT but on how NAFTA would
effect European trade.
Panelist's Remarks, I.
There have been strong indications that world trade, which
improved last year by 4-%, has been the impetus behind world economic
growth in the last few years. Although the subject at hand focuses on
trade within and between the countries of Europe and the United
States, some countrie5'. not in the OECD provide an important source
of strength in world trade, including Asia, Latin America, the Middle
East and, to some extent, Eastern and Central Europe. The
turnaround for some of these countries, which were in debt only a few
years ago, is quite remarkable. But there is a risk of losing this forward
momentum because investors are hesitant over trade with Third World
countries. This makes a successful conclusion of the GATT
negotiations vital to reenergizing the world economy.
Most of 1.992 was lost in terms of making any progress as a
result of regional concerns of Europe and America. On the European
side, politicians have been focussing on Maastricht. In the United
States, the attention has been on NAFfA, as well as a drawn out
presidential election. Beyond these distractions, there have been
stumbling blocks in the Uruguay Round which are hampering the
progress. Several European negotiators have been questioning the
validity of the BJ.air House agreement and the United States, having
originally indicated support, has pulled back as well. This happens, in
part, because there is an enormous information gap about GATI'
between the trade negotiators and the legislators which must be
addressed. Ultimately, some form of GA'IT will emerge; the economic
25
"'
.,
-...j
~
'-'
1
!.),
"'
·,~
'""'
c
,)
·~
.~j
j;,)
f•
....
<:
\
"
.,)
,,
,_
"'
"
;c'<~
progress we have seen in the less developed countries shows us how
crucial such a universal trade agreement is.
Panelist's Remarks, II.
From the perspective of a leader of one of the world's largest
trade unions, the years devoted to GATT have been fruitless.
Furthermore, such an agreement would be viewed as a major setback
for American workers, who feel their rights and safeguards have not
been addressed, specifically through the lack of a social clause in the
GATT treaty.
A large portion of the labor population in the United States has
similar concerns about NAFfA which, in their opinion, would have a
depressing effect on United States jobs and markets, with the American
industries seeking out the lower wages in Mexico. For American
workers, this would result in lower wages at home, inferior working
conditions, decreased living standards and, for many, loss of
employment.
There is a credible alternative to NAl<1'A. which would have
the same acronym but rather than being a treaty between the United
States and Mexico, would connect the US and Europe and be called
the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement. In contrast to the currently
proposed NAFfA. which would result in a unilateral posturing on
trade, a new Atlantic NAFfA would anchor the United States in
Europe, thus reenforcing the common democraticvalues that are at the
root of the NATO political-military alliance. This new NAFfA.
negotiated with the twelve nations of the $6 trillion European
Economic Community, would link the U.S. and Canada to a trading
block accounting for $13 trillion in gross domestic product and would
create a single market of more than 600 million consumers. America
would be tied to countries with high wages, strong consumer purchasing
power and high standards of living. A North Atlantic Free Trade bloc
would have the clout with which to negotiate balanced trade with Japan
and China, and as long as the social charter continues to be part of the
agreement, it would have the support of workers on both sides of the
Atlantic.
26
Discussion
The proposal for the North Atlantic Free Trade Agreement
elicited strong reactions, primarily negative, from almost every speaker
present. Several felt that a U.S./European NAFfA would create a
trading bloc uniformly rich in resources and even less accessible to the
neighboring, less developed countries than at present, including Mexico
and the countries of Eastern Europe. In response to the panelist's
suggestion that the larger bloc would have the clout to negotiate
balanced trade with Japan and China, a speaker argued that the reverse
would most likely happen because the economic growth is and will be
in Asia, greatly strengthening the position of Japan and China. Such
an outcome could cause the European bloc to turn inward, thus
cultivating the very protectionism it wants to avoid. A participant
argued that a new NAI7fA would be redundant next to GATT and any
time spent on creating such a NAJ:!A would be much better spent on
concluding the GATT treaty.
The original NAFfA. however, received strong support from
many speakers. A Canadian observed that Canadianworkers supported
the treaty, in spite of the lower wage base in Mexico. He went on to
say, and this was a theme represented several times, that by helping the
Mexican economy through NAfTA. the United States would be
endorsing President Salinas's leadership in strengthening the Mexican
economy, which is being watched and followed throughout the
countries of Latin and South America. Indeed, a speaker surmised that
within a short period of time, Chile and even Argentina will be invited
to join NAFfA. This is extraordinary progress from the dictatorship
and poverty once prevalent in many of the Latin American countries
and it would be in the interest of the American and European
Community to support such developments.
There were several comments on GATT which reflected similar
advantages or problems as can be found with NAITA. If GATT were
to fail, the members of the European Community would be inclined to
draw back into their ori!,>inal boundaries, both economically and
politically, creating a wider gap between Western and Eastern Europe,
and reversing the present direction of growth in those newly democratic
countries. The same would apply with NAFfA. If it were to fail,
Mexico would lose all economic and political achievements which have
been gained over the last few years and the backward trend would
27
ricochet all through Latin America where other governments have been
struggling to become strong, independent entities.
Several suggestions were made to remove the obstacles to a
successful conclusion of the GATT negotiations. One was replacing the
current negotiators with strong leaders, statesmen who would be
prepared to strive for the end rather than getting tangled up in the
means. A few speakers suggested creating a settlement out of those
areas of the proposed treaty which have already been agreed, and
leaving the remaining items for a ninth Uruguay Round. One such
item was the question of the environment and to what extent
environmental concerns should be addressed through the GATT
agreement. In the meantime, :J.s one participant said, it would seem
important to be ambitious, but not perfectionists; to put forth a good
agreement now, rather than striving for an optimum agreement later -
one which might never be achieved. A successful completion of this
Uruguay Round, as well as NAFfA, would result in positive effects
across the board. The borders between Western and Eastern Europe,
between Mexico and the United States, between the rich and the poor,
would be opened, all of this leading, ultimately to free trade and
economic growth around the world.
Responding to points raised in the discussion, the first panelist
made several observations. First, GATT was never intended to
promote trade for trade's sake; rather to create jobs and accelerate
economic growth around the world. The agenda for GATT does not
include environmental issues or labor rights because those issues are
best left to the organizations created to deal with them; The Rio
Committee on the environment and the International Labor
Organization on labor rights. The Uruguay Round has already had a
positive effect on world trade. New groupings are being formed and
new open trade policies adoptt>d, all in the anticipation of an
agreement. Unfortunately, however, the present negotiators do not
have the necessary sense of urgency, and until the leadership makes
GATT the first priority, it will not be concluded. This makes the
NAFTA agreement all the more important; with NAFTA out of the
way, the Americans will be able to turn their full attention to GATT.
On the other hand, if NAFTA were to fail, it is unlikely that the
United States would continue discussions with the European GATT
members. Without GATT, economic reform would not take place, and
without a strong economy, the politicalsystems around the world would
suffer lasting adverse consequences.
28
V. U.S. DOMESTIC POLICY CONCERNS
The moderator, a European, opened the session with the
observation that America's concerns are Europe's concerns. Europeans,
as they face the need to restructure and revitalize their own economies,
cannot question why strengthening the economy is a major domestic
concern in the United States. Indeed, it would be desirable for economic
revitalization initiatives in Europe to be coordinated with those in the U.S.
The panelist, an American, concentrated his remarks on the forces
which led to the election ofPresident Clinton, the nature ofhis leadership,
the priorities ofhis administration, its achievements in its first 100 days in
office, and where ir goes from here.
Participants in the discussion offered evaluations of the Clinton
Administration'sperformance so far, both from the positive and negative
perspectives. Europeans refrained from criticism for the most part, but
voicedparticular concern about U.S.foreign policy under the newpresident.
Panelist's Remarks
President Clinton was elected because a majority of Americans
want change and an end to governmental gridlock. In his first 100
days, the President has shown himself to be untiring and ebullient, a
believer in government as an instrument of reform. His election has
stimulated a new interest in government service, and the important role
of his wife in the administration has enhanced the status of American
women. The President has forged a close partnership with his Vice
President, AI Gore, with whom he shares a common ideology and
similar backgrounds, in terms of age, origin, religion, education, and
ambition.
President Clinton has taken quick action in several areas. He
began, after his election, by appointing a cabinet, whose diversity in
terms of gender, ethnicity, and geography, make it "look like America."
He reversed certain executive orders of his predecessors, most notably
ones restricting abortion. And he addressed the issue of gays in the
military.
He also proposed an economic growth plan intended to deal all
at once with a range of problems, particularly deficit reduction and long
term growth. After early successes in the House of Representatives,
the plan encountered a serious setback when the fiscal stimulus portion
of it did not survive a Republican-led filibuster.
29
' "'.ill
(
..,
\"';
"
',
>
"
'.;;
~
'""
:)
f
4,
'2
, '
"
,
~
(
.-
..
.l
This reversal has been viewed by some as a disaster for
. President Clinton. But this is too strong a characterization. It is a
setback, from which he can learn, and, unlike an electoral defeat, he
has a chance to regroup and come back, with improved legislation and
a more effective political plan for its passage. This he must do, by
sharpening his message, taking it to the people who elected him, and
negotiating with moderate Republicans.
The President may be trying to accomplish too much too soon.
He is driving himself and his administration too hard. But he is young,
vigorous, intelligent, and learns from his mistakes. He has been down
before in his career, and has shown that he can get up and fight on.
Discussion
The first speaker, representing the Republican point of view,
argued that the Clinton economic plan relies too heavily on tax
increases and not enough on spending cuts, and is therefore out of step
with popular sentiment against tax increases and new spending. The
impact of the tax increase will be particularly harmful to small
businesses, which have been the engine of job creation in the U.S.
Support for the President's economic plan is weak even within his own
party, which was unable to break the filibuster.
Among other negatives perceived by some in the new
administration are an inexperienced, ineffective Congressional relations
staff, weak appointments in some cabinet departments, and waffling on
free trade. A Canadian speaker was particularly dismissive, stating that
Clinton's victory owed less to his own qualities than it did to the
lackluster record and incompetent campaign of George Bush, the lack
of other strong Democratic candidates, and the presence in the race of
Ross Perot.
Rising in defense of the President, an American speaker
rejected the notion of political paralysis, and said that the new
government is united under a President who has a strong vision for the
future. From a business point of view, Clinton understands the need
for U.S. companies to be competitive in world markets, and he is
committed to helping government, business, and labor work together to
achieve this goal. In this regard, he is fully supportive of the North
American Free Trade Agreement.
While support for NAFTA is not a positive in the view of the
American labor movement, its leaders are enthusiastic about President
30
Clinton and his Secretary of Labor, Robert Reich, who has undertaken
several initiatives, such as a comprehensive review of labor legislation,
favored by workers.
European participants in the discussion did not join in the
debate about Clinton's performance to date, but they did express
concerns about the direction of his presidency. One wondered if, given
the ideological diversity of the President's top advisors (from Bentsen
to Shalala) and his propensity to please everyone, a clear coherent
policy is possible. The sad condition of U.S.-European relations that
emerged early in the Carter Presidency was recalled by several
speakers, who expressed the hope and expectation that this would not
happen again under Clinton. The strongest criticism of the President
offered by a European was that he had not shown any real leadership,
especially in the cause of free trade, where he seemed to be "waffling
and wobbling."
The panelist observed that a certain amount of "wafiling and
wobbling" and "zigging and zagging" will be the norm in the Clinton
Administration. For a metamorphosis has occurred in American
politics, which Clinton clearly understands. It is that government in the
future cannot come from either the left or the right. Clinton will make
an effort to steer a middle course.
As another American pointed out, it is early to accept clear
prognostications about the Clinton Administration. It is new, young,
not yet settled in, and not adept at using the power that it has been
given. But there are some very good people in it, and some very good
ideas are being discussed and debated.
31
VI. THE OUTLOOK FOR JAPAN'S ECONOMY
As Japan continues to grow as a majorpower, its role in the world
economy and international trade becomes increasingly important,
particularly as the whole issue of worUL trade becomes an integral part of
international relations. The panelist, a German who is based in Tokyo,
expressed optimism that the economic and political turmoil in Japan will
soon be resolved and Japan could be moving into one of its greatest
economic periods. Although acknowledgingJapan's present strength, most
speakers were less optimistic about the future, both in terms of Japan's
economic stability and its willingness to be a more active player in world
trade.
Panelist's Remarks
The developments in Japan over recent years have led to an
economy which today presents extraordinary contradictions. On the
one hand it has faced, during this period, its greatest difficulty since the
oil shock of the 1970s. The financial system has been taken into
unfamiliar zones of risk in terms of new investments, the corporate
sector finds itself with too much capital stock and an over-capacity
which will take a while to work off, and in the face of recessions in
Europe and North America, Japanese companies are bleeding abroad.
Concurrent with these developments, social, demographic changes in
Japan have led to new political pressures which, in turn, have coincided
with an international political system going through monumental
change.
'Therefore, despite a period of essentially full employment, an
economy which is running substantial budgetary surpluses, an increasing
share in the global market, a rise in household income and after tax
corporate cash flows which are running at record levels, the press and
the outside world see Japan as having run out of steam, never again to
return to its recent heights.
'Ibis pessimistic evaluation does not take into account a unique
political-economic management system which has a proven ability to
pull together the major groups of society which, collectively, are able
to focus on key strategic issues in times of crisis. This was most
dramatically demonstrated by Japan's response to the Plaza Accord
which, in 1985, decreed that Japan had to reduce production costs of its
goods by 50% and the production timetable from, for example, twenty
32
years to four or five. This was accomplished and, 'in everyone's
opinion, avoided the potentialof double-digit unemployment in the late
1980s.
This ability to confront potential economic difficulties was
accompanied, in the mid-1980s, by a collapse in the price of oil, a
commodity which has historically commanded 84% of Japan's import
dollars. With such a windfall of "free money" coinciding with a period
when the economy grew at the rate of 5.3% and wages only rose by
4.7%, Japan entered the most powerful investment cycle any modern
economy has ever seen. From 1986-1991 the larger Japanese companies
invested $3.1 trillion into the domestic economy, $500 billion into
civilian non-military research and development, and another $600
billion abroad. This combined $4.2 trillion investment, compared to a
total economy of $2.4 trillion at the time of Plaza Accord, represented
a remarkable growth in a relatively short period of time.
Unfortunately, the sudden surplus of funds led to an overly
ambitious, and sometimes inappropriately creative, period of
investment, leading to side effects which, if left unabated, would have
destroyed much of what had been gained in the post-Plaza Accord ··
period. Therefore, in the summer of 1989, a process of purge was
undertaken, eradicating the excesses in both the equity market, which
seems to have bottomed out and begun its return, and the real estate
market, which will take longer before it has leveled off and can begin
a new period of recovery. Furthermore, this over-expansion led to an
accumulation of bad debts which, fortunately, the Japanese are
addressing vigorously.
One of the key reasons for Japan's economic stability over the
last forty years has been the loyal support of the Liberal Democratic
Party (LDP) by the three main groups in the population: the farm~rs,
the shopkeepers, and the doctors. However, these people are growing
older and are not being replaced in their vocations by the younger
generations. Instead, the party leaders must contend with the emerging
educated middle class, an inevitability that is causing severe conflicts
among the older and younger members of the LDP and is shifting the
power base to the urban areas. The employee base of Japan's great
multinational companies is also demanding a change in the party
platforms - a change which acknowledges the importance of trade with
Europe, East Asia, and America.
If the LDP is able to resolve these differences, as is probable,
the outlook for a strong economy is very encouraging, beginning with
33
I::"'
J
\..
,·,
'
'~
~
.\
~
!
4
(
"
~
"'
~
~.
l
major investments in East Asia. With America investing less today in
that region than it did in 1945 and Europe losing its market share by
investing at a slower rate than the opportunities available, Japan will
be using its edge to gain control of whatever investments seem
worthwhile. A look at the inequitiesof the automobile industry among
America, Europe and Japan further underscores Japan's success in
penetrating foreign markets.
This success story will not continue, however, if Japan doesn't
accept that it must work harder to become a world player. The price
of land in Japan must go down so that foreign companies can purchase
land and build factories. The heavy surplus income from Japan's
exports must be recycled back into the world economy, primarily
through free trade. Finally, Japan must face not only the political
turmoil within the country but its position in East Asia. If these issues
are addressed squarely, the potential for Japan's economy is boundless.
Discussion
lbe discussion centered on Japan's role in the world economy
and the participants' views on the direction it seems to be taking. One
factor of Japan's success is the homogeneous nature of Japanese
people, who appreciate the importance of sound investments, a firm
infrastructure, and a solid education. Other factors which are
successful now, but could break down in the long term, are a protected
home market, the low cost of capital, and a history of non-participation
in military activity around the world. Several participants addressed
these points, underscoring the importance of opening the Japanese
market. The trade surplus which presently exists in Japan is a major
destabilizing factor in the world economy and must be reduced
drastically. The recycling of Japanese capital must be worldwide,
including Third World countries, rather than merely within the region
of Japan. And finally, political reform in Japan is vital. One
participant compared Japan's political difficulties to those of Italy, and
complimented Japan's determination to move away from the present
electoral system to one more closely resembling those of Britain or
Germany.
Several participants spoke on how the United States and
Europe compare unfavorably to Japan in several kt:y areas. The
educational ~ystem in Japan is known for its strengths, and several
statistics stand out: the statutory number of school days a year is 240
34
in Japan, 230 in Europe, and 180 in the United States. Even more
striking is the percentage of high school graduates; 71% in America,
91% in Germany and 94% in Japan. Another difference is the
priorities of Japan's corporate institutions. In America the first priority
is the shareholder, followed by the customer and finally the employee.
In Japan the first is the employee, then the customer, and lastly the
shareholder.
The general consensus of the discussion, among the participants
and the panelist, was that Japan holds a very strong position in the
world economy and the West would do well by learning from its
systems of strength. At the same time Japan has a responsibility as a
world player to improve its trade policies and solve its political
problems, and one can only hope that negotiations on both fronts will
be vigorously pursued.
35
Vll. COST OF INDIFFERENCE TOWARD THE
FORMER SOVIET UNION
The moderator opened this session with the observation that the
sense ofrelief which greeted the collapse ofthe Soviet Union and the end
of the Cold War was short lived. Instead of worrying about Russian
strength, the West now has to worry about Russian weakness. The
centralized control of the Soviet Union has given way to political and
economic chaos. What should the West do? What can the West do?
Will anything do any good?
An American and a British panelist addressed these questions.
Both said that change in the former Soviet Union will take several
generations, and that the West has not yet formulated a coherent policy to
meet this great challenge. Both panelists also agreed that Russian military
power will not disappear, but will be a force to be reckoned with in the
future. The British panelist stressed the need for ties and contacts between
the West and all levels of Russian society as the best way to keep Russia
open. The American panelist argued that the scope for economic policy
is limited, and that there has to be a security dimension to Western policy
to cope with the very real possibility of Russian adventurism in the other
republics, to which the West must also pay attention.
Evident in the discussion was a sense of uncertainty about how
much the West could do, and where the focus of its assi.<;tance should be.
Those who argued for principally economic aid differed on whether or not
it should be conditional on certain internal reforms. A number ofspeakers
thought that economic aid was secondary to broad contacts and exchanges
of knowledge between the West and the former Soviet republics at many
leveL<>.
Panelist's Remarks, l
In considering the topic at hand, it is important to realize that
it was military power that upheld Russian statehood and created the
Russian Empire.
The Soviet Union was another name for the Russian Empire.
It was a military giant, but an economic and political pygmy. By the
late 1970s it was unable to sustain strategic competition with the United
States, and the reforms that were instituted wound up destroying the
Communist system and the empire.
36
Today, Russia is a European country and culture untouched by
the legal traditions of Rome and the liberal values of the Renaissance.
It is hardly sensible to expect it to suddenly become a prosperous
liberal democra<.-)'.
Looking into the future, Russia will not disintegrate, but will
remain a great and unified country. But it bas already changed in a
very fundamental way: its people are urbanized, educated, and informed
about their own country and the outside world. Totalitarian
communism wiU not be restored in Russia, but an authoritarian regime
might be.
Post-imperial Russia is not likely to ever again pose a global
military and ideological threat. But it will be a great power, if not a
super power. So the West will again face a revived and powerful
Russia on Europe's eastern flank and Japan's western flank.
An authoritarian, illiberal, militarily powerful Russia would
have ample opportunity to cause trouble around the world, particularly
in the Balkans and in regions where Russians live. So the West has an
obvious interest in a liberal, democratic, prosperous, status quo Russia,
not to mention a strong economic interest in its unexploited natural
riches.
Russia today has un unprecedented opportunity to create a
modern, civil society. The problems are obvious: no culture of private
enterpriseor ownership, inadequateadministration,entrencbed interests
opposed to change, and the need to do something with the enormous
defense industry. But there is a new openness and a large number of
educated, competent people, many of them already making their own
way forward. There is no alternative to reform if Russia wants to
compete.
The task is nothing less than to change a whole culture, and it
may take three generations. In considering what to do, the West must
recognize that change cannot be driven from the outside; it must be
willed by the people. The right answers, when they are discovered, will
be hard to apply, but the right questions have not even been asked yet.
It is wrong to say the West has acted too slowly and done too little.
Starting with the political relationship in the late 1980s was the right
strategy. The serious economic reforms only began in 1990, and the
difficulties have become more evident since then.
If the fundamental change is the opening of Russian society,
then one of the most important things the West can do is to keep it
37
;. lt.";i,
J
(
-~
..
open. This involves contacts and exchanges at all levels, not just
between businessmen, but between ordinary people.
Panelist's Remarks, II.
That indifference toward the former Soviet Union is a sensible
policy option is no longer argued. The issues today are where do we
get the capital for economic assistance, and will it make any difference.
We have to do something, but we must avoid doing things that
make conditions worse. Direct aid can have the effect of shoring up
the very institutions that ought to dissolve. The only kind of direct aid
to governments that avoids this is provision of hard currency to back
local currencies, and then only if the printing presses are stopped,
removed from political control, and put under independent currency
boards.
The second type of aid the West should give is direct ties
between Western businesses and local firms in the former Soviet Union.
Results will be slow, but this should not deter us. We should also give
technical assistance, particularly political advice.
But these kinds of aid are unlikely to induce democracy in the
former Soviet states. Some of them will inevitably revert to
dictatorship, which would not be so bad, as long as they were dedicated
to privatization, free markets, and legal reform.
The West views the challenge of assisting change in the former
Soviet Union too narrowly, with a time horizon that i~ too short and a
policy scope that is too limited. Russia will require one or two
generations to make the kind of transition both we and the Russians
would like to see. It is a challenge that will be with us for a long time.
We need to expand our policy scope to include more than
economic assistance. We should take a deeper look at the dynamics at
work in the former Soviet Union, anticipating critical junctures and
seeking occasional points of leverage that we might exploit for positive
outcomes.
Russia, unlike other European empires, did not pass through
a decolonization phase in the early and middle part of this century.
Empires that evolved along liberal lines, like the British Empire, did
not remain empires. Other post-imperial states went through periods
of intense nationalism and sometimes authoritarianismbefore emerging
on a liberal economic path, and later a liberal political path. In this
sense, if democracy fails to develop in Russia, Ukraine, or the Baltic
38
republics, it is not necessarily tragic, depending on the kind of
authoritarian rule that occurs.
But it would be tragic if the old Russian imperial impulse
successfully reasserts itself. It would not quickly create a new military
threat to the West, but it would ensure that a new authoritarianism
would not evolve on liberal lines. This implies that we need a political
and security component to our strategy to parallel economic and
technical assistance. We must think about what we can do to prevent
the restoration of the empire.
It is Yeltsin, not Gorbachev, who broke up the Soviet empire.
Whether he is a democrat or not is trivial. He is an anti-imperialist.
His management of relations with the other republics has been
remarkable. But his capacity to follow this course is falling into doubt
as his political strength declines. Thus we cannot continue to bet on
Yeltsin alone.
The West should pay much greater attention to the initiatives
of the leaders of the other republics to unite against Russian
interference. The emerging strategy ..pf the Russian military,
encouraged by certain reactionary politicians and groups, is to
destabilize, divide, and conquer. In addition, the Central Asian
republics, ruled by former communists, have essentially turned over
their security to Russia, reinforcing ties with the military, the Ministry
of Interior, and the KGB. Even Armenia is now a proponent of much
of the new Russian military doctrine.
The cost of indifference to these developments will be much
higher than indifference to economic realities. But building a Western
consensus to do something about them might make support for
economic assistance look easy. And some will argue that Russian
hegemony in Central Asia and the Caucasus is preferable to civil wars
there. But this condemns Russia once again to the imperial
predicament, ruling out all chance of a liberal development in the
former Soviet Union.
There are several things the West can do to build a security
component into its strategy:
(1) Admit Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary to full
NATO membership now.
(2) Stop pressing Ukraine so hard on removing Russian nuclear
weapons, which may contribute to preventing Russian
adventurism.
39
(3) Develop ties with Georgia that signal support for
Shevardnadze and Georgian independence.
(4) Work with Turkey on its strategy for Azerbaijan and
Central Asia.
(5) Take Russia permanently into the G-7, and use that group
to address the big issues of Yugoslavia, the Middle East,
and the defense of the independence of the former Soviet
republics. The G-7 plus Russia could become the
international forum for designing a new world order.
So far, all that bas been proposed in the West is paying off the
right-wing Russians to make them behave and lecturing the center and
left on democracy. Meanwhile, most of the other republics have been
largely ignored. We have not yet begun to think through an effective
strategy for avoiding the high cost of indifference to the former Soviet
Union.
Discussion
The situation in Russia and the other former Soviet republics
is bad and rapidly getting worse, in the view of most participants in the
discussion. Gas and oil income is declining, debt is high, inflation is
rampant, capital is flowing out, and there is a wave of crime and
corruption. It is a picture of general disintegration and turmoil. The
cost of Western indifference to this sorry state of affairs will be
increased threats to world peace and stability, environmental
degradation, and pressure from immigration, among other problems.
One school of thought favors Western investment on a massive
scale in order to stop the downward spiral. Western governments
should provide credits, loans, aid, guarantees, etc. The magnitude of
such aid should be on the same scale as the Marshall Plan. The short-
term challenge of such an effort will be great, but the long-term
benefits of opening these economies will be huge.
Some speakers advocated economic aid conditioned on reform,
particularly in the areas of pricing and privatization. The West cannot
help a Russia (or other republics) that will not help itself. 11te
governments must take steps to rein in hyperinflation by empowering
the central banks, to develop the private sector, to improve public
administration, to build infrastructure, and to do the other things
necessary to create the conditions for a market economy.
40
Others argued that there is a danger in insisting too much on
conditions that may be unrealistic for a society that has no experience
of democracy or fr~e markets. The West cannot expect the former
Soviet republics to build up free markets and democracy by themselves.
Assistance is a question of more than loans and guarantees. It must
encompass, through exchanges at all levels, the transfer of knowledge
in business, public administration, security policy, nuclear safety, energy,
and many other areas. The ability of Western countries to help in
these areas is great.
The need for contacts and exchanges is particularly important
in containing the ambitions of the Russian military establishment,which
is now in a state of confusion, lacking confidence, uncertain about what
it wants but certain about what it does not want. It must be a high
priority to couple the Russian military with the West, through some
sort of collective action, focused on NATO and the North Atlantic
Cooperation Council.
With respect to Russia, the West may be focusing too much
upon Yeltsin, whose position has grown steadilyweaker. We should be
prepared for a change in leadership and be just as ready to work with
someone else, rather than put all our hopes in the person of Yeltsin.
Similarly, we should avoid being seen to be preoccupied with
Russia at the exclusion of the other former Soviet republics and the
countries of the former East Bloc. The latter in particular are
increasingly looking West and do not wish to be seen as being in a
group with the former Soviet republics.
Finally, the debate about what to do is perhaps based on too
gloomy an outlook. Much bas already been accomplished in the former
Soviet republ\cs in recent years, with less turmoil and violence than
might have been expected. Change will take generations, but the
generational change is already underway, with those under 40 now
adjusted to the new way of thinking in Russia and the other republics.
And there are unmistakable signs of capitalism to be seen in many
parts of the form~r Soviet Union.
41
-~-
:,1
i··-·
Vlll. CURRENT EVENTS: ITALY
The moderator, in introducingthe topic, underlined its significance
by reminding the participants that Italy remains one ofthe principal roots
ofour civilization and ofgreat economic importance, to say nothing ofits
early role in the European unification movement which began in the late
1980s. At the same time, one cannot ignore the flaws in Italian politics
which have been apparent for many years but which have been
dramatically exposed over the last few weeks, leading to a major call for
change in the referendum ofApril 18.
The panelist, an Italian who has played a major role in both the
public andprivate sectors ofItaly, outlined the political climateprior to the
referendum, the measures being taken to eliminate the conditions which
caused the abuse ofpolitical power, and his view ofthe direction in which
Italy is most likely to go.
Panelist's Remarks
For the last forty years, Italy has stood at the frontier between
East and West, between communism and democracy. The Communist
Party has not been able to cross this frontier in Italian politics at the
national level, which has resulted in no change of leadership between
the government and the opposition throughout the cold war. However
at the regional and administrative level, beginning in the 1970s, there
has been a gradual but continuous involvement of the communist party,
the main political opposition, thus creating two contradictory elements
in Italian politics.
With no opposition at the national level, the government has
assumed a growing sense of impunity which has led, in turn, to
widespread illegal funding. Although illegal funding can be found in
almost any democracy, it reached extensive proportions in Italy and
opened the way to important electoral influence by the Mafia.
Ever since the recent collapse of Soviet Communism, there has
been an increasing belief in Italy that crucial changes in the political
system might finally be possible. New political forces, in particular the
Northern League, have entered the arena, seeking a change from a
unitary state into a federation. The judicial inquiries into the political
corruption in Milan, known as "Clean Hands" has., through its process,
swept aside almost all of the political leaders, in turn affecting the main
political parties because all of them, including the former Communist
42
Party, were involved. Everyone, to one degree or another, has
participated in illegal funding. Even when the sums involved were
minor, as was the case with some corporations and individuals, they
were still considered corrupt if they had not been declared to the
Parliament.
Although some have called these events, and the call for
change, a form of revolution, the actual process has had four elements
which are not characteristics of revolutions as we know them. In this
situation the protagonists are the judges and the voters, there is no
undisputed leader, there were no preconceived plans, and the process
has been non-violent.
So where does Italy go now? What is certain is that the
political system which has been in place since the war is on the way out
and another is being created. Although many questions remain to be
answered, an overwhelming majority of the electorate made its opinions
quite clear, in the referendum on April 18, on some of these matters;
the State's role in the economy must be reduced and the public
financing of political campaigns must be limited only to electoral
campaigns. Of particular importance is the fact that 82% of the
electorate voted in favor of a new, "first past the post" electoral !.)'Stem
for 75% of the Senate, the other 25% to be elected by the proportional
system in order to save the existence of small political parties. This will
undoubtedly lead to a new electoral system in the House, based on the
English or French model, and many members of the House may see
their political future threatened by this change.
Another important vote in the referendum was to abolish the
Ministries of Agriculture and Tourism, placing the responsibility for
these two important economic segments in the hands of the separate
regions around the country. The growing regional power in Italy will
be a significant force in the years ahead.
The next important steps in this process will be the
appointment of a new Prime Minister, and the local elections on June
6. These elections, involving 12 million voters will, for the first time,
use a majority system very close to the French one. They will signal
the changes in the political spectrum. Will the Christian Democrats
remain in first place or will that pass to the Democratic left? How big
is the real power of the Northern League? And what are the chances
of Mario Segni, a strong candidate for Prime Minister, creating his own
electoral power?
43
In spite of this major upheaval in Italian politics, one must not
forget that Italy's rate of growth over the last 50 years has been second
only to that of Germany in Western Europe, making it one of the most
highly industrialized countries in the world. It has always chosen
democracy over communism and it was an early supporter of the
European Monetary System. One can be assured that Italy will
conquer political corruption and organized crime, and remain a vital
part of the European scene.
Discussion
Several speakers expressed surprise that the panelist exhibited
optimism while at the same time putting forth questions which were
also on the minds of the participants. Will the politicians who are
being removed be replaced by subordinates who don't have the same
experience and might well have the same bent for corruption? Will the
regions, in a country which is more asymmetrical than most, work for
Italy as a whole - and as a member of the European Community - or
for the interests of the particular region? What will be the political
coloration of the new forces that might arise; what will be the new
ideological content? Will the ethnic groups which to date have been
accommodated by the ruling party maintain their status in the next
"second Italian Republic"? With the internal solidarity of Italy giving
way to regional supremacy, what will happen to Italy's role in Europe
as a whole? Will the external cohesion with the other European
countries be damaged by the diminishing internal cohesion? And is not
the judicial ~-ystem gaining too much power, at the expense of the
people and any politicians who have not participated in the corruption?
One participant, also an Italian, sought to balance the political
corruption with the positive economic changes in Italy which bode well
for the country's financial stability. Until recently Italians were
required not only to keep their funds within Italy rather than placing
investments abroad, but were further limited to investing their money
in government securities, giving the government easy access to funds
which led to the inevitable government debt. All that is over now, as
a result of the introduction of the European Community single market.
The political class bas bad to withdraw from its financial monopoly,
serious efforts to reduce the deficit have been initiated, and
privatization efforts have begun. The deep change in Italy's political
and civilian life is not only a result of the fall of communism but the
44
arrival of European integration; not only the fall of the Berlin Wall, but
also the creation of a single market.
Responding to a number of questions that bad been posed, the
panelist stated that one should not be worried about who will succeed
the politicians who have been removed from office but bow to make
political life attractive to the younger generation. The system needs to
be changed so that public service will again become of importance to
those future leaders. On regional independence as opposed to Italian
unity when dealing outside Italy, it is true that there is a contradiction
here but there is no reason it will not continue to be managed as
successfully has it has to date. The economic integration of Italy into
the European system will not only decrease the possibility of political
corruption but enhance the standard of living within Italy and
contribute importantly to Italy's role in the European Community.
45
~;.vt~
.
~
. ~~
I
IX. FOREIGN POLICY CONCERNS OF THE
CLINTON ADMINISTRA110N
The European moderator observed that, as in domestic matters,
the concerns of the United States are the concerns of Europe, and
Europeans are wondering what the Clinton Administration '~foreign policy
will be, especially with respect to such matters of European concern as
trade, NATO, and Yugoslavia.
In his remarks, the panelist, an American, sought to clarify the
foreign policy objectives of the Clinton Administration by describing its
three underlyingconcepts:restoringAmerica'seconomic strength,redefining
the role of the U.S. in the world, and supporting democracy and human
rights.
The discussion focused principally on the uncertainty, especially in
Europe, about Clinton's foreign policy objectives, and what changes there
may be in the U.S.-European partnership.
Panelist's Remarks
Clinton's 100-day report card in foreign policy is quite good,
considering he inherited an international agenda filled with ticking time
bombs, ranging from Russia in disarray to the probings of an
unrepentant Saddam Hussein to the failure of peacekeeping in Bosnia
to the continuing humanitarian effort in Somalia, and on. He has been
faced not by one big challenge like the Cold War, but with a thicket of
problems in a disordered new world, and he bas not made a single
foreign policy blunder.
Clinton foreign policy may be thought of as having three pillars.
The first is the revival of U.S. economic strength. In the post-Cold
War world, economic strength will be as important as military strength.
Clinton is not an isolationist, and has no inclination to withdraw from
the world. But he aims to get the American house in order and to
enhance its ability to compete in the world economy.
When the Soviet threat overshadowed everything else, the U.S.,
as leader of the Western alliance, was willing to carry a
disproportionate burden in order to maintain an open international
economic system. With that threat gone, the allies of the U.S. are its
major economic competitors, and Americans are no longer willing to
turn the other cheek to unfair barriers or competition. The time has
come to negotiate a new partnership with Europe and Japan that more
46
equitably divides the burdens and responsibilities of maintaining an
open world economy.
Success in the GATf talks is crucial to that objective, and it
tops the list of the U.S.'s international economic concerns. A close
second is a reduction in the structural trade deficit with Japan, and
completion of the North American Free Trade Agreement is the third
priority.
The Clinton administration is fully committed to maintaining
the U.S. commitment to NATO, but it feels the Western allies must
get their economic relationships right, and be guided by the watchwords
of reciprocity and responsibility.
Clinton's second foreign policy pillar calls for updating
American forces and security arrangements to meet new kinds of
threats. The Soviet threat is gone, but there are plenty of dangers to
U.S. interests and to international peace in this new era. Two
particular challenges are the disintegration of the post-World War Two
system of states into religious and ethnic conflicts, and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, especially into the hands of anti-
Western dictators.
The Clinton Administration seeks to meet these new challenges
with preventive diplomacy, enhanced peace keeping and peace making,
and multilateralism. There must be more aggressive American
diplomacy to address potential conflicts and dangers before they
explode and endanger Western interests. This can be employed in the
Balkans now, and it is the basis of the U.S. renewed involvement in the
area of Arab-Israeli relations.
Preventive diplomacy is closely linked to the need for enhanced
peace keeping and peace making capabilities. The proliferation of
intra-state conflicts requires a more robust and timely international
response. No single nation has the direct vital interest, the resources,
or the authority to deal with most of the conflicts that are likely to
explode in this decade. But the United Nations and the other
multilateral organizations don't have the capability either.
Clinton wants to enhance those multilateral organizations,
particularly the U.N., which will have to develop the capability to
respond to conflicts quickly, with a sufficiently large and strong force
which will have to be involved in enforcement as well as peace keeping.
NATO also plays an important role in the Clinton
Administration's thinking. Its core function of providing collective
defense for its members in a still uncertain strategic environment
47
remains vital. But NATO must also help address security threats
Europe is more likely to face--not a large scale land war, but more
Yugoslavias.
The third pillar of Clinton's foreign policy is promoting
democracy, human rights, and free markets. This is the core of his
foreign policy philosophy. He believes that a central lesson of the 20th
century is that democracies do not make war on other democracies.
But he knows he cannot seek to impose democracy in places where the
results can only produce violent instability or where the necessary social
and economic conditions are non-existent. He will seek to make
progress where it is possible.
A democratic Russia would be the grand prize, and Clinton will
continue to commit resources to Russia's revival. If Russia can be
integrated into the democratic community, it will make the other
threats more manageable. Clinton knows how tough it will be to
reform Russia, and he believes Western joint effort will be necessary.
Clinton's foreign policy is centrist, in the mainstream of
American internationalism, and adapted to the challenges of an
uncertain new age.
Discussion
A common theme in the discussion was concern that the
Clinton Administration has not yet really defined its foreign polit.y
What is the strategic design, the grand strategy? So far, it seems that
foreign polit.-y is being shaped by events, rather than the other way
around.
A series of observations about Clinton's foreign policy were
made by American speakers. The Clinton Administration no longer has
the luxury of blaming its foreign policy problems on the unfinished
business of the Bush Administration; the problems are Clinton's now.
And while the President will have bipartisan support for his foreign
policy, he is likely to have more difficulty with legislators in his own
party on such issues as trade, Most-Favored-Nation status for China,
and burden sharing.
Two particular failings are hindering the development of
Clinton's administration. One is that fact that, while the foreign policy
teams at the State and Defense departments and the National Security
Council are first rate, their effectiveness is hindered by the failure to
complete lower level staffing. The other is that Clinton has not yet
48
carried his vision to the American people about the future role of the
U.N. and new kinds of collective security arrangements.
Europeans expressed particularconcern about the mixed signals
coming out of Washington. There was a sense of relief that, in his first
100 days, Clinton has avoided the kind of conflicts with Europe that
marred the same period of the Carter presidency. But there hasn't
been much leadership, either, at a time when, in a German's view, U.S.
leadership is more important than ever.
But, said an American, U.S. leadership has entered a new era,
one in which it can no longer set the policy and bring Europe along,
sometimes by dividing Europe. The transatlantic relationship must now
have a European partner that is truly united, and capable of saying
"yes." Europeans heard this as a call to get on with European
integration, a process that U.S. foreign policy should make it a priority
to support.
In this new era, the U.S. was seen by some speakers as having
to adapt to a role it is not accustomed to: peace keeping, peace making,
and, in some <:ases, non-intervention. Rather than becoming involved
in intractable problems like Bosnia, said a Briton, U.S. foreign policy
should concern itself with Russia, the Middle East, and trade. Add to
this, suggested an American, a new focus on Asia.
The American panelist concluded with the observation that the
Clinton Administration faces a disorderly world, in which it is harder
to have a strategic vision than when the world was strictly bipolar.
49
i: ....~
;;
~
~...,
:"'< ..-;
~'
..,,
',
<
I
,..,,,
~~
~~!~
(
~~
X. CRISIS MANAGEIVIENT
The moderator introduced this session by noting that although the
last 45 years, known as the cold war period, were disagreeable, expensive,
and sometimes dangerous, they were also predictable. On the whole, there
was a continuous grand strategy between tht! two super powers which
prevented the sort ofcrises which have arisen in the last few years. In fact,
if the two super powers still existed, it is doubtful that the invasion of
Kuwait would have happened, nor the problems in Yugoslavia. Instead,
after the initial euphoria over the break-up of the Soviet Union, the world
is confronted with new and very difficult problems which must not only be
addressed individually but which call for a new international strategy to
control.
Panelist's Remarks
The end of the Cold War has not brought with it the beginning
of a new world order, which had been the expectation around the
world. On the contrary, a whole new set of crises has emerged which
may well have been held in abeyance with the fear of intervention by
one of the two world powers. Now we are faced with the problem of
how to confront these conflicts, which c:annot be allowed to escalate.
If we fail to respond, we would be condoning aggression as the means
of negotiations; our peacekeeping entities such as NATO and the UN
would appear to be useless; and conflicts such as the one in the former
Yugoslavia would not bum themselves out but escalate into wider and
deeper confrontations, with disastrous outcomes. Thus, we are faced
with the responsibility of crisis management, an approach which could
be said to have four criteria: legitimacy, the appropriate institutions,
political will, and public support.
First, there is the question of legitimacy. Although we are far
from clearly defining international law, we cannot remain passive if: a
state is attacked by a powerful neighbor; a national government
collapses leaving wide~;pread violence; governments or groups commit
human rights violations on a genocidal scale; a government sponsors
terrorism; or if an entity develops weapons with the potential for
massive destruction. All such situations no~ only permit but require
intervention by whatever peacekeeping method is called for.
Second, the institutions in place -- the UN, the CSCE, the
European Community, WEU, and NATO -- play an essential role in
50
building support within the international community for a certain
course of action. It is important that they work together, and interact
efficiently, on whatever measures are needed: sanctions, peacekeeping
forces, or negotiations. The scale of the United Nations' peacekeeping
operations has quintupled in the past two years, generating many
unanswered questions. The line between peacekeeping and
peacemaking has become very gray and needs to be better defined for
each situation. The United Nations' experience in the former
Yugoslavia reminds us that diplomacy or economic sanctions alone
cannot always stop a determined dictatorship. We have learned,
perhaps a little late in the case of Bosnia, that the avoidance of a
limited use of military means at an early stage results in a far greater
military involvement in far less favorable conditions later on. The
earlier one is prepared to stand up to a bully, the less force it takes.
Therefore, more emphasis must be placed on conflict prevention
through anticipation and quick responses, such as has been seen with
the preventive deployment in Macedonia. All threats, military or
otherwise, must be backed up by credible actions and, we must be
flexible enough to adapt, if need be, to a form of action which can fall
anywhere between total abstention in a problem area and total
involvement. A weapons embargo for the victim is not an equitable
approach to a solution.
Above all, it is vital that we remain realistic. Even a vastly
strengthened UN cannot do everything. It is overburdened,
underfinanced, and not able to cope with complicated military tactics.
It is sobering that Europe has been unable to handle the Yugoslav
conflict effectively, demonstrating a lack of military strength, political
will, and determination. The members of the European Community
seem to have been paralyzed into inaction by an inability to arrive at
a consensus on the appropriate response to the situation in Bosnia.
This leaves the United States or NATO to assume a lead role
in managing crises in the future. The US cannot be expected, nor
would it be able, to deal with every crisis that comes along, which is
why NATO should be recognized as the most logical military support
system. Over the last few years, with the end of the Cold War, NATO
has embarked on a major transformation to meet the future needs of
its member countries. Therefore, if one accepts that the strength can
be placed in NATO, what is still lacking? Strong political leaders or,
put another way, political will - the third of the four criteria outlined
earlier. Without political will, one cannot arrive at a consensus;
51
without a consensus - as demonstrated in Europe last year on the
Yugoslav question - one simply cannot he effective. NATO alone
cannot operate without the unified support of its member countries,
both militarily and on whatever missions are undertaken.
Finally, any political, military, or economic action by a country
must have public support. It is the responsibility of our leaders to
outline, clearly and understandably, the changed environment we face
today and the need to bring our respective security systems into current
readiness.
Discussion
All of the participants reaffirmed the important role NATO will
continue to play, and the need to support it. In that context, the range
of questions and statements was wide and direct. To start, a European
asked, 'Who or what is NATO? Not Germany, which prefers proactive
forays as opposed to defense; probably not France, which cannot decide
whether it is in or out; probably not Greece or Turkey, who guard their
.. troops for their more immediate area. Does that leave the United
States to shoulder the responsibilities?'
Another speaker underlined the importance not only of a
collective military instrument, but strong political guidance. If NATO
were to build military structures in other places around the world, those
on-site institutions would have a better understanding of a problem,
and would be better prepared to carry out the solution, whatever that
might be. Several participants supported such a proposal but felt it was
unrealistic. One person used the current example of a peace-keeping
force in Liberia which has been unable to prevent a slaughter.
Several participants acknowledged that a major reason NATO
seems to have lost its backbone is that member countries lack political
will and a consensus to achieve common goals. As with the difficulties
in the GATT negotiations, Europe seems unable to present a common
foreign policy and this, in turn, impedes unified support of any NATO
undertaking. Finally, a participant asked the panelist to address the
specific focus NATO will take in this changed world. How far afield
does it plan to go? Would it be accurate to describe the change as
moving from an organization for collective self defense, to a collective
world policeman? Will the NATO treaty have to be changed to
accommodate this new direction and how will decisions be made on
when and where to move into any world crisis?
52
'Ibe panelist responded to the first question; what is NATO?
It is a commurity of nations which has developed a partnership over
time. During the Cold War there was a clear leader, the United States.
Although the United States continues to exert leadership, the
Americans are the first to recognize the imbalance between the United
Sta!es and Europe within NATO and they have reduced the American
troop strength and recognized the growing European influence.. It will
be years before an equitable balance is reached, and during that
transition some degree of American leadership is essential. In the
meantime, the Europeans have the opportunity to develop a real
foreign securit<j poljcy which can be used as the guidelines for NATO.
Responding to one speaker's suggestion of building military
structures around the world which could oversee local crises as needed,
the panelist agreed with the thought and disagreed with the possibility.
NATO must limit itself to focussing on neighboring countries, not only
to avoid the impression of being a world policeman but to preclude the
risk of stretching beyond its means. Mr. Nazarbayev, the highly ·
impressive President of Kazakhstan, has tried to promote his ideas of
building a regional security structure similar to NATO, confirming that
this subject is of great concern around the world. An example of the
importance of NATO has been the recent crisis in Yugoslavia, where
if the Europeans h.ad spent less time on rhetoric and more on deed, the
present situation might be considerably improved. The inability to
enforce the sanctions has been a striking example of the lack of unity
among the countries over policy towards Yugoslavia.
In order for NATO to continue to be effective in its new role,
it needs a firm mandate from its membership to provide legitimacy to
its activities. This would enhance public support and strengthen its
credibility. It is not in competition with the CSCE, which is a useful
forum for preventive diplomacy. But the CSCE does not have a
security council and one can envision the impossibility of getting a
consensus of 53 nations without a security council, especiallywhen one
or two of those nations might be part of the problem! NATO will
continue to concentrate on those fields of expertise not found in the
CSCE: helping the Eastern and Central European nations integrate
their military into demographic structures, helping them to develop a
new strategy, and helping them to develop defense budgets. The two
new tasks of NATO, in short, are to project stability to the East, and
to handle crisis management. The primary task, as has been for 44
years, is to provide security for its member nations.
53
I!
~t
..
~
~
<
~
§:
?-
')
~
1,
9
(
~
"
~
~t
11?
i~
'....
>
"
~'
~
