.. -i'ill
,,
.,
,,
l!
t.:
fi
11
lj
l
I
~
'i
¥.;i
' ~
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBLICAnON
EITHER IN WHOLE OR JN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
KNOKKE
CONFERENCE
2M!3 April r972
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
KNOKKE
CONFERENCE
21-23 April 1972
CONTENTS
1. LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
2. INTRODUCTION . .
3. WORKING PAPERS:
A. "Economic Issues Between Industrialized Countries for the
Seventies" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B. "Western Europe and America in the Seventies" . . .
C. "Power Relationships in the Far East: a European View"
D. "The Changing Configuration of Power in Asia"
4. DISCUSSION:
I. Economic Considerations
The Crumbling Community of Purpose
The Claims of Domestic Priorities
Trade Relations . . .
The Case ofJapan . . . . . .
European Perspectives
Relations with the Third World
Economic Dealings with Communist Countries
Transnational Investment Issues . . . . . .
International Monetary Reform . . . . . .
Working Together: Institutions and Attitudes
Summing Up . . . . . . . . . . .
II. Securiry Considerations
The New Geometry of Asian Relations
Ingredients of the Japanese Situation .
Fundamentals of the East-West Relationship
The Evolution of \Vestern Public Opinion
Implications for European Security . . .
- The American Commitment . . . . .
- Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions
5
9
IO
20
34
42
54
57
59
6r
66
69
72
73
75
79
Sr
84
89
93
roo
ro6
ro6
!IO
- Conference on Security and Cooperation
- The Ostpolitik . . . . . . . . . . . .
- The European Contribution
Summing Up ..
5. CLOSING REMARKS
Il2
II6
II7
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
C. FRITS KARSTEN
AGNELLI, GrovANNI ITALY
ARNOLD, HANS GERMANY
BALL, GEORGE w. UNITED STATES
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S. FRANCE
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC UNITED KINGDOM
BERGSTEN, C. FRED UNITED STATES
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN TURKEY
BIRGI, M. NuRI TURKEY
BIRRENBACH, KuRT GERMANY
BLUMENTHAL, W. MICHAEL UNITED STATES
BRIMMER, ANDREW UNITED STATES
BROWN, NEIL A. AUSTRALIA
BROWNE, H. JOHN C. UNITED KINGDOM
BRZEZINSKI, ZBIGNIEW UNITED STATES
BucHAN, THE HoN. ALASTAIR UNITED KINGDOM
CAMPS, MIRIAM UNITED STATES
CAMU, LOUIS BELGIUM
CITTADINI CEsI, IL MARCHESE ITALY
COLLADO, EMILIO G. UNITED STATES
5
COLOMBO, UMBERTO ITALY MURPHY, ROBERT D. UNITED STATES
COLONNA DI pALIANO, PRINCE Gurno ITALY ,'i NETHERLANDS, H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX OF THE NETHERLANDS
CoRTERIER, PETER GERMANY NETHERLANDS, H.R.H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
CULVER, jOHN S. UNITED STATES NOGUEIRA, ALBERTO FRANCO PORTUGAL
DAHRENDORF, RALF INTERNATIONAL NORA, SIMON FRANCE
DAVID-WEILL, MICHEL FRANCE N0RLUND, NIELS DENMARK
DAVIGNON, VICOMTE BELGIUM NYKOPP, ]OHAN A. FINLAND
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES PATIJN, ScHELTO NETHERLANDS
DEN!AU, jEAN-FRAN<;OIS INTERNATIONAL PAYTON, BENJAMIN UNITED STATES
DiiNHOFF, MARION GRAFIN GERMANY PERKINS, ]AMES A. UNITED STATES
Ducci, ROBERTO ITALY RAYNAULD, ANDRE CANADA
DIJKGRAAF, ANTON F. J. NETHERLANDS REES-MOGG, WILLIAM UNITED KINGDOM
ESPIRITO SANTO SILv A, MANUEL R. PORTUGAL REVERDIN, OLIVIER SWITZERLAND
FLEINER, THOMAS SWITZERLAND RrnouD, JEAN FRANCE
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s. CANADA ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
G!ROUD, FRAN<;OISE FRANCE ROLL, SIR ERIC UNITED KINGDOM
HALLGRIMSSON, GEIR lcELAND ROTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE FRANCE
HAUGE, GABRIEL UNITED STATES SABOURET, YVES FRANCE
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES ScALAPINO, RoBERT UNITED STATES
H0EGH, LEIF NORWAY ScHAETZEL, RoBERT UNITED STATES
HooFT, MARIA J. 'T NETHERLANDS SCHRODER, GERHARD GERMANY
HOUGHTON, AMORY jR. UNITED STATES SEIP, HELGE NORWAY
Humrns, THOMAS L. UNITED STATES SNoY ET D'OPPUERs, BARON BELGIUM
JANSSEN, DANIEL BELGIUM SOLVAY, JACQUES BELGIUM
JANSSEN, PAUL E. BELGIUM S0RENSEN, SVEND 0. DENMARK
joLLEs, PAUL SWITZERLAND STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
KEARTON, THE LORD UNITED KINGDOM SuMMERSKILL, SHIRLEY UNITED KINGDOM
KoHNSTAMM, MAx INTERNATIONAL TATU, MICHEL FRANCE
KOSTER, HENRI J. DE NETHERLANDS TAYLOR, ARTHUR R. UNITED STATES
LAMBERT, BARON BELGIUM TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
LENNEP, JoNKHEER EMILE VAN INTERNATIONAL TJDEMAND, OTTO G. NORWAY
LEVER, HAROLD UNITED KINGDOM UMBRIGHT, VICTOR H. SWITZERLAND
LEVI, ARRIGO ITALY VANDEPUTTE, ROBERT BELGIUM
LOUDON, j ONKHEER JOHN H. INTERNATIONAL WAGNER, GERRIT A. NETHERLANDS
LuNs, JosEPH M.A. H. INTERNATIONAL WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
MACLAREN, Roy CANADA WARREN, JACK H. CANADA
MANNING, BAYLESS UNITED STATES WESTERMAN, SIR ALAN AUSTRALIA
MATHIAs, CHARLEs Mee. JR. UNITED STATES WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, Orro GERMANY
McLEAN, WILLIAM F. CANADA ZIJLSTRA, JELLE NETHERLANDS
MEYNEN, JOHANNES NETHERLANDS ZUMWALT, ELMO JR. UNITED STATES
6 7
8
IN ATTENDANCE:
HULHOVEN, L.
VERNEDE, E.
WARMENHOVEN, J, T.
GETCHELL, CH. W. JR.
BEUGEL, TH-M, VAN DER
BELGIUM
NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-first Bilderberg Meeting was held at the hotel "La Reserve",
Knokke, Belgium, on 21, 22 and 23 April 1972 under the Chairmanship of
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 103 participants from the United States, Canada, Australia and
14 Western European countries, as well as from various international organi-
zations. They consisted of members of governments, politicians, prominent in-
dustrialists and bankers, lawyers, journalists, national and international civil
servants and outstanding representatives of the academic world and other
groups.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke
in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever govern-
ment or organization to which they might belong. In order to enable partici-
pants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were con-
fidential, with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
The state of the Western community in the light of changing relationships
among the non-Communist industrialized countries, and the impact of
changing power relationships in the Far East on Western security.
The Meeting was opened by H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands, who
extended a special welcome to the ladies present, this being the first occasion
on which women had participated in the Bilderberg Meetings. His Royal
Highness conveyed the gratitude of all the participants to their Belgian and
Dutch hosts, and read telegrams which he proposed sending to H.M. The King
ofthe Belgians and H.M. The Queen of the Netherlands.
The Prince expressed regret at the absence of Professor John Pesmazoglu,
whose request for a passport to attend the Conference had been denied by the
Greek authorities.
After recalling the rules of procedure, His Royal Highness turned to .the
subject of the Agenda.
9
...
WORKING PAPERS
The groundwork for discussion at the Conference consisted of four working
papers distributed in advance to all the participants. Two were prepared by
American participants, one by a British participant, and one jointly by a
Netherlands and an International participant.
Following are summaries of these working pape1's, and of the comments of
their authors in introducing them to the meeting:
A. "ECONOMIC ISSUES BETWEEN INDUSTRIALIZED
COUNTRIES FOR THE SEVENTIES"
I. Background
The American author of this paper began by saying that the industrialized
countries of the non-Communist world could take considerable satisfaction
from their record of dealing constructively with major economic issues during
the postwar period. The result had been unprecedented growth and prosperity
for all.
The reconstruction of Western Europe and Japan, and reconversion from
war to peace in the US and elsewhere, had been achieved more quickly and
effectively than anyone had dared hope in 1945. The individual tasks of each
country had been facilitated by enlightened international cooperation -
through the Marshall Plan, other ad hoc reconstruction organs, and in a whole
host ofnew institutions for economic collaboration. For the first time in modern
history, nations had started working multilaterally to solve common problems.
From the mid-fifties through the latter sixties, this habit of working together
had become more deeply ingrained and everyone had benefited accordingly.
Europe had embarked on a historic path of economic integration, with the
encouragement and help of the US. The wider institutional framework for
economic collaboration - IMF, IBRD, GATT, OEEC and its successor, OECD
- had functioned well and was adequately suited to the task.
The Bretton Woods system, with a convertible dollar at its center, and world
trade rules developed at Havana, based on multilateralism and the most-
IO
favored nation principle and focused on tariff reductions and non-discrimina-
tion, had been adequate to cope with existing problems. As a result, the
Western industrialized world had made impressive economic strides. This
success on the economic side had in turn fostered close political ties and a
common sense of purpose, which helped the Western alliance to withstand the
political pressures ofthe cold war.
The success of the Kennedy Round, resulting in a more far-reaching reduc-
tion of tariff barriers than had seemed possible, had been the most dramatic
and - as it turned out - last great achievement of this period. It was to be,
unfortunately, not the threshold of greater economic cooperation, but rather a
turning point from an era of collaboration to one of uncertainty and crisis.
During the fast four or five years things had not gone well. Protectionism was
on the rise in the US and elsewhere, and the monetary system had broken
down. Collaboration on economic policies toward others - Communist and
Third World countries - had become the exception rather than the rule. To
many outsiders, including the US, European integration seemed a threat
rather than a benefit. The validity of existing institutions and rules in the
monetary and trade fields was being questioned.
This general deterioration had culminated in the crisis of August I 97 I.
While the December agreements on exchange parities had defused the most
dangerous elements of this situation, many fundamental problems remained
unsolved. Once again there was clanger that our inability to deal constructively
with monetary and trade problems would create disorder and hardship, that
recession in one country would lead to depression in another and to world crisis
for all. More than ever before, the interrelationship of our individual domestic
fortunes with the international politico-economic state of affairs had been
brought home to us.
II. The problems and the issues
What was the cause of the present state of affairs, and what was the agenda
of problems which the non-Communist industrialized countries had now to
face? In the author's view, our economic agenda contained some urgent un-
resolved issues left over from the Sixties, as well as a complex set of entirely new
questions, arising from the altered circumstances in the industrialized world.
These changed circumstances called for innovation in methods of economic
cooperation and in the reshaping of our institutions. But no new institutions
would be effective ifwe did not recover our political will to work together; ifwe
did not turn away from neo-mercantilistic nationalism in our economic affairs;
and ifwe did not resist the inroads ofcompetitive power bloc politics.
II
Without attempting to analyze the entire range of outstanding immes, the
author suggested three fundamental questions:
I. What changes in the international economic environment confronted us
in the seventies, as compared with the preceding two decades?
2. What problems arose from the new circqmstances, and which ones were
left over from the past?
3. Were our existing institutions still suitable, and what changes did they
need?
III. A changed international economic scene c
One important change related to the position of the US. Until the late sixties,
American predominance had been the major element around which the \Vest's
economic relationships were built. The US had accounted for a towering share
of world production and had been by far the major market and the largest
trading nation in absolute terms. The dollar had dominated the world's mone-
tary system, providing liquidity to finance the growth of international com-
merce.
In the seventies, US economic leadership was no longer unchallenged.
American dominance had been reduced as the power of Europe and Japan had
risen. During the past two decades, the US share of world GNP had dropped
from almost 50 per cent to 3ocper cent. In 1950, the US accounted for 76 per
cent of total world production of motor vehicles and 46 per cent of steel. By
I 970, these figures were down to 30 per cent and 20 per cent, respectively.
Meanwhile, the EEC's share of motor vehicle production had risen from 14. per
cent to 24 per cent, its share ofsteel output remaining eve11 at about 20 per cent.
Japan, producing almost no motor vehicles 20 years ago, made now 17 per cent
of the world's total. Her share of steel production had risen from 2 per cent to
16 per cent in 1970.
World trade trends and national reserve positions also showed a relative
weakening of the US in favor ofJapan and the enlarged European community.
The decline of the US's economic predominance had impaired its capacity
for leadership in the solution of common problems. This now had to be a
shared task, with the constructive impetus coming as often from Europe and
Japan as from the US.
America's will to play its old role had perhaps been diminished as much as
its power to do so. Vietnam had turned the country inward, toward greater
nationalism and protectionism. This trend might not be irreversible, but to
provide counterweights and to stimulate the most constructive American re-
sponses, intelligent non-US initiatives were needed.
12
A third changed circumstance of the seventies was that trade was 1w longer
the dominant element in international economic relations. The dramatic in-
crease in transnational investments was having a profound impact on our
relationships, fundamentally altering the agenda of issues confronting us. We
now had to deal not only with the problems ofmerchai1dise trade but also with
the large volume of direct foreign investment and exchange of services. The
explosion in communication and travel had altered the economic scene. Many
of the factors of production once considered as "fixed", had become quite
mobile.
During the decade of the sixties, the book value of US direct investment in
plant and equipment abroad more than doubled, to a total of $78 billion. The
share of these investments in Europe quadrupled from $6.7 billion to $24.5
billion. The output associated with these investments exceeded many times the
volume of imports or exports of any of the major trading nations.
The changing composition of the US balance of payments showed how
international economic relations had shifted. Jn 1970, gross income from US
private investmt>nt abroad was $8.7 billion; net US investment income stood
at over $6 billion. These figures were several times as large as those prevailing
a decade or two ago. US income from royalties and fees had increased more
than ten-fold - from $200 million in 1950 to $2.3 billion in 1970. At the same
time, while the overall volume of imports and exports rose significantly, the
traditional US annual trade surplus of $5 or 6 billion had dissolved into a
deficit.
There was nothing alarming about these changes; economic interchange,
reflecting technological advances, could mean greater prosperity for all. But
dealing with the accompanying problems and complexities would entail
changes in our focus and in our institutions.
A fourth important element of change for the seventies had to do .with the
rise of the multinational firm (MNF) -c through which international direct
investments and the transfer of technology and know-how had been effected. It
was so far largely an American phenomenon but the growth of the MNF was
bound to become generalized. Most developed countries would be both in-
vesting and recipient nations, and thus share a common set of partially similar
and partially conflicting interests.
While international investments through MNFs generally produced a net
economic gain for all, they posed vexing dilemmas. Although we were be-
coming more economically interdependent, each nation faced internal pressures
for change and social justice, for the preservation of the environment, and for
the protection of its citizens from the dislocations of rapid economic and tech-
nological growth. Each country wanted to deal with these pressures in its own
13
.
way, yet found its freedom of action circumscribed in the face of our increased
economic interrelationships. The MNF had thus put into question the ade-
quacy of many of our old ways of handling international economic problems.
Most ofour monetary and trade rules had been devised before the MNF was on
the scene, and needed reevaluation and adjustment.
The world of the seventies would also differ from that of earlier decades
because ofmajor structural changes in the developed world. With the accession
of the UK and others to the EEC, the US would be confronted with a large
European economic bloc, to which was associated a number oflimited partners,
developed as well as developing countries. This meant that negotiations on
trade, monetary and investment questions would have to be conducted on a
different basis than during the years when regional economic groupings were
still relatively unimportant. Would the old most-favored nation principle still
be relevant? Should the US develop a bloc of full and limited partners of its
own?
A second structural change was the rise ofJapan as a third major economic
force. Japan's. role among the industrialized countries would have to be
redefined, as regards both her rights and her obligations.
And, of course, the end of the Cold War and the shifting power relationships
in Europe and Asia had given rise to further structural changes in world
economic relationships.
IV. An agenda
A variety ofproblems arose from this new situation. But while these problems
could be stated as separate and distinct, there was a much closer interrelation-
ship between them than ever before. Problems of trade could no longer be seen
as separate from questions of exchange rates or investments; agricultural and
industrial trade problems were closely entwined. In an increasingly inter-
related world, economic issues and problems were inevhably more interdepen-
dent.
1. Agricultural Trade. This problem, which the industrialized nations had
never adequately faced, required urgent attention. Without new understand-
ings on this subject, progress in other areas of trade relations would become in-
creasingly difficult. The principal nations should not let this relatively limited,
though politically sensitive, sector of economic life frustrate across-the-board
advances on trade matters. Progress in liberalizing agricultural trade was
bound to be slow because of the complex interaction of domestic politics, in-
ternal support programs and international trade considerations.
14
Temperate agricultural trade, covered a wide range of commodities and
transformed agricultural products. Each country had practiced excessive pro-
tectionism, mainly for political reasons. But the EEC's Common Agricultural
Policy, with its particular system of supports, variable levies and export sub-
sidies, had immensely complicated the problem for everyone. Much of the US
frustration over the EEC was related to CAP's deep protectionist bias. The US
admittedly had its own quantitative agricultural restrictions, but their impact
amounted to less than half the volume of the EEC restrictions. The US was
also less restrictive than Japan or the UK in this area.
No single formula could resolve the problems of agricultural trade, but the
EEC's suggestion of negotiating total levels of protection and support was the
right approach. The problem lay in measuring these overall levels fairly so as
to enable all countries to contain domestic protectionist pressures. At a mini-
mum, negotiations on agriculture should be aimed at limiting export subsidies.
At the same time, broad differences in efficiency between countries should be
recognized.
No new major initiative or negotiation to deal with the problems of agri-
cultural trade should be left to ministers of agriculture. The best way to frus-
trate progress in this field would be to ignore the broader political context of
such an issue by restricting its scope to fun.ctional specialists.
2. Industrial Trade. The Kennedy Round by no means disposed of all remain-
ing problems regarding tariff protection on industrial trade. While average
tariff levels were generally low, these global measures hid the high levels of
protection, particularly on value added, in many significant sectors for most
advanced industrial nations. Furthermore, even low tariffs had a restrictive
effect on trade potential.
The remaining areas of relatively high tariff protection were the most diffi-
cult cases, such as the textile industry, with which past negotiations had had no
marked success. A new initiative was needed here, and perhaps the industrial
nations should consider committing themselves to the goal of eliminating all
tariffs within a decade or less. Negotiations on tariffs alone, though, would no
longer work. There had to be simultaneous progress on agricultural trade, as
well as on the removal ofnon-tariffbarriers to industrial trade.
The best approach might lie in sector negotiations. This was tried in the
later stages of the Kennedy Round, without notable success. But with careful
preparation, it offered the best way to enhance further progress on reducing
protection in industrial goods. Sector negotiations among principal industrial
countries would cover, in addition to tariffs, such non-tariff barriers as tax in-
centives, export subsidies, quantitative restrictions, sanitary, safety and eco-
15
logical requirements and the like. Probably a coordination of domestic adjust-
ment mechanisms would also have to be discussed.
3. The Case efJapan. Japan had become one of the p1ost powerful and im-
portant industrial and trading nations in the world, by every measure: share of
world GNP, industrial production index, reserve position, and export volume.
In the space of 20 years, her, total output had passed the economies of West
Germany, France and the UK, and now ranked behind only the US and the
USSR.
Politically and economically, it was vital to insure that Japan remained
firmly integrated into the Western trading system. Recent developments in the
Far East and US policy changes in this area underlined this necessity. Two sets
of economic negotiations were required. On the one hand, Japan had to end
her policy of protectionism, which was unbecoming a powerful trading nation.
On the other hand, the discrimination practiced against Japan by most in-
dustrialized countries had al~o to be substantially reduced ifnot eliminated.
A possible approach would be to set a date by which every major country
agreed to do away with any special rules or regulations aimed, directly or in-
directly, against Japan alone. In that way Japanese world trade, both ways,
would be integrated into general worldwide arrangements, particularly the
sector discussions on industrial trade mentioned above. The future of the
textile agreements (LTA) could also be_decided in this context.
4. Investment Rules and the Multinational Firm. Ways had to be found for re-
solving the problems created by transnational investments and the proliferation
of multinational firms. First, the relationship of direct investments to trade and
monetary problems had to be established. Second, consideration should be
given to establishing international rules and mechanisms governing direct in-
vestment operations, including g·eneral rules ofbehavior for investors and norms
for the treatment ofsuch investors by host countries.
For example, the GATT had set up a framework limiting the degree of
discrimination toward imports over domestic production. At the same time, a
mechanism had been created for negotiation of reductions in the levels of dis-
crimination, and a set of rights and obligations established for importing and
exporting countries alike. Perhaps a similar approach should be considered for
international investments, aimed at limiting direct and indirect discrimination
against foreign investments and defining a country's rights and obligations
when discrimination exceeded agreed levels. "Discrimination" should include
such matters as tax treatment, access to credit and government contracts, and
the like.
16
Inasmuch as an increasing volume of world trade between advanced coun-
tries was accounted for by multinational firms, all future trade negotiations
should recognize the growing importance of this trend.
5. Economic Policies Toward Communist Countries. During the cold war years,
there had been a reasonable Western consensus regarding economic and trade
policies toward Communist cquntries (understandings on the extension of
credit, strategic goods limitations, etc.) There was no longer any pretense of a
coordinated approach in these matters, though, and the Western industrialized
countries needed to reexamine the situation in light of their common concerns
and of the vastly changed circumstances of the post-cold war period.
The questions involved were complex and highly political: To what extent
should Communist countries be encouraged to become part of the Western
trading system? Should our trade relations be governed by special GATT rules
or by bilateralism? Was the COCOM List still relevant? Should credit policies
or the licensing of technology to the East be coordinated? Or should each of
our countries simply follow its own policies in these areas?
6. Economic Policies Toward Developing Countries. One of the most disturbing
aspects of the present international situation was the growing disparity in levels
of economic development between rich and poor countries. Unless the rich
nations could soon find means of assisting more effectively in the transfer of
resources to the poor countries - through trade, aid, investments, technology
and training - the common goal of a peaceful world might well prove illusory.
As this problem was shared by all industrialized countries, a coordinated
approach was needed. Past achievements in this area had left something to be
desired. The success of the policies we adopted toward each other, and our own
levels of economic prosperity, had a direct bearing 011 the development efforts
of the poor countries. We therefore had a considerable responsibility to weigh
the effects of our actions on the developing world.
Future trade negotiations had to include new steps to widen access for LDCs
to developed country markets, either through regional groupings or on an
overall basis. Consideration of investment rules had also to take into account
the problems of the developing world, and a renewed set of understandings and
commitments about direct transfers through economic assistance programs was
in order as well.
7. Monetary Reform. The world monetary system was badly in need of funda-
mental reform. The events ofAugust 1971 were perhaps the inevitable culmina-
tion of a progressive breakdown of the old system under the pressure of changed
I 7
realities and the unwillingness of the principal powers to play their part iJ
needed reform. , · . , . ~
Since Bretton W'oods, world trade had grown manifold. Foreign investments~
accompanied by large and rapid short and long term capital movements, ha·
become a major factor in international interchange. Communication and tech
nology had transformed the economic scene. The position of the dollar had
been altered. The old system could no longer adjust to these changes, and the
agreements reached at year-end were at best an interim solution.
The task of fundamental reform was urgent, if we were to avoid a divided
and restrictive monetary system. We needed to assure the free flow of money
which would provide adequate foreign exchange reserves to accommodate
steadily rising levels of trade and investment. It was important that new
agreements be reached as sooh as possible, so that the lirgest degree of con-
vertibility ofthe dollar could be reestablished. The new system had to contain a
better adjustment mechanism than the old one, so that individual countries
would no longer be forced to choose between domestic stability and interna-
tional disorder.
V. Institutional arrangements
The last few years had shown that the rules and institutions created in the
immediate postwar period, though they had served us well for over two decades,
were no longer adequate. No set ofinstitutions would work unless the advanced
industrial nations shared a common purpose and the political will to work
together and, compromise. On the other hand, historical evidence indicated
that the frari1ework of institutional arrangements could have an important
bearing on the ability ofnations to resolve vital problems arising between them.
r. GA TT Reform. Any review of existing rules and institutions bad to take
accoun,t of the increa,~ingly close interrelationship between trade, monetary
and investment problems. Therefore, a basic restructuring of the GATT was
necessary, to enable it to handle such issues as non-tariff barriers; sector nego-
tiations; agricultural trade; and the future ofthe most-favored nation principle.
Furthermore, GATT rules had to be brought into conformity with the changed
monetary situation.
2. An Investment "CATT". A new institutional frameivork was required to
deal with the growing problems of transnational investments and the multi-
national firm. This responsibility could be given to the OECD or to an affiliated
organization created especially for this purpose.
18
estructuring the IMF. A review of the IMF articles was needed to assess the
.tions of a movement from fixed to more flexible exchange rates and
,reliance on gold and a convertible dollar to non- or limited convertibility
.creased reliance on special cir.awing rights.
nititutional Coordination or Amalgamation. Would it continue to make sense
, ,~~,~'fhefuture to seek to resolve related problems in three separate organizations:
'th,fGATT, IMF and OECD? Given the interaction of trade, monetary and
: i~v~stment questions, a single forum with a coordinated set of rules might be
·'mote ·advantageous. In any case, the institutional framework and the rules
g~verning the future of our economic relations would require careful con-
si.deration and reform if we hoped to succeed in dealing with our major eco-
nomic problems.
*
* *
.In presenting his paper, the author confessed that he was somewhat pessi-
mistic about the prospects of "our not just drifting, but really sliding, into
serious trouble over the next few years." We no longer shared a common view
of the future. The US had become more inward-looking and less able to
provide world economic leadership, while Europe and Japan were preoccupied
with their own problems. Moreover, our institutional framework was "woefully
deficient."
The author suggested the following questions for discussion:
r. Was the underlying bias of the last two decades - in favor of multilateral-
ism, and the progressive reduction of barriers to the free n10vement of all the
factors of production - still valid for the seventies and eighties, as the author
himself believed? Or were we instead moving towards a new or intermediate
stage in which the development of a strong European bloc of countries ought
to be counterbalanced by a US-led bloc? This implied that there would initially
be discrimination between such blocs, but in the end they might work together
to coordinate their policies.
2. Given the complex economic agenda, who could and would define the
road ahead, the common direction in which we should move? Did the Europe-
ans realize that they would now be dealing with "a very different US for some
time to come"? Was Europe capable of assuming an important global leader-
ship role? The scheduled autumn summit meeting would give the Europeans a
timely opportunity to enunciate their goals and initiatives for the Western
world, if they were indeed ready to "look beyond their own very close commer-
19
cial interests and to take a somewhat broader and more enlightened view
toward the future."
3. Was there agreement about the nature of the new problems, such as that
of transnational investments, which promised to cause more friction between
nations than trade or monetary problems had in the past?
4. Which of these options should we choose as a blueprint for repairing the
institutional framework?
(a) Simply try to strengthen existing institutions: GATT, IMF, OECD.
(b) As a variant on (a), add more bilateral or trilateral links and relationships
among the principal countries, e.g., between the US and the EEC, or the US,
EEC and Japan.
(c) Create an entirely new institution, perhaps by merging the GATT and
the IMF, adding a superstructure for policy coordination, such as a more re-
stricted executive committee.
(d) As a variant on (c), revitalize the GATT and redefine the IMF, but bring
them more formally into a closer working relationship by establishing a coordi-
nating mechanism and executive policy-guiding group. The author indicated
his preference for this latter option.
* *
*
B. "WESTERN EUROPE AND AMERICA
IN THE SEVENTIES"
I. Introduction
I. The principal contentions of this paper, which was written jointly by a
Netherlands and an International participant, were: (a) that European securi-
ty was dependent on close relations between the US and Western Europe, to
which there was no alternative in the foreseeable future: and (b) that the inter-
national economic ~rder was dependent on joint leadership by the US, Western
Europe and Japan.
2. The authors were aware that "Western Europe" was an over-simplifica-
tion. With the exception of the relatively limited field in which the nations of
Western Europe had decided to operate as a unit (the European Community)
there was no "Western Europe" which could help to manage world affairs.
There was no actor, only a group of nations more or less closely organized in
different types of international organizations.
20
3. Important changes had admittedly taken place on the international scene
during the last decade:
- The USSR had achieved military parity with the US;
- A fundamental conflict had arisen between the two major Communist
powers, one effect of which had been to bring the US into a triangular
relationship with them;
- Japan had emerged as a major economic power and a potential political
and military one;
- The status quo in Central Europe had been accepted by the West;
- The US was no longer able to lead the Western system alone, as it had
during the two postwar decades, and it did not seem willing to continue in
that role, even if its resources were to enable it to do so.
The UK and three other West European countries were joining the EEC,
terminating an old conflict and enlarging Western Europe's potential for
playing an effective role in the world;
There had been profound social change in the industrialized countries,
marked by a shift of emphasis from quantity to quality, and a tendency to
become inward-looking.
But in the judgment of the authors, these numerous changes had not funda-
mentally altered the situation, and the most important assumptions underlying
postwar policy remained valid. ·
4. In analyzing the situation of the West and seeking solutions for the
seventies, one risked confusing the feasible with the desirable. In the past, many
of our policies had been based on the desirable, neglecting the limitations im-
posed by the feasible; an example was the concept of an Atlantic partnership
between two equals.
The European nation-state had proved to be a tough animal. Ten years of
Gaullist foreign policy and the Vietnam war had affected the course of history.
On the other hand, policies based on a restricted assessment of the feasible
would lack the inventiveness and vision required to assure security and econom-
ic order in the seventies.
II. European security
5. Although it could not be detached from the pattern ofglobal security, the
European security situation was as follows:
6. a. The USSR had achieved military parity with the US.
b. Soviet tactics were changing, but there were no grounds for assuming
that the Soviet Union's objectives had changed or would change considerably
in this decade.
21
c. NATO had a dual function: its forces had first to deter the USSR from
military adventures, and secondly be capable ofdealing with possible situations
involving armed conflict.
d. For the first function, the American strategic nuclear force was indis-
pensable; but without a sizable conventional US presence, America's strategic
nuclear force would lose its credibility in European and in Soviet eyes.
e. There was in the foreseeable future no credible European substitute for
the US strategic nuclear force.
f. Consequently the question whether the second function could be
fulfilled without American conventional forces was irrelevant.
g. The European contribution to the NATO effort was insufficient and
ought to be increased, either through higher expenditure or better organization.
h. This was essential to enable NATO to cope with its two functions, and
to maintain the climate necessary to permit the US administration to stand by
its nuclear and conventional commitments.
· 7. Re 6a - Soviet militaiJ' capabilities
The USSR had managed simultaneously: to build up a considerable force at
its Eastern borders; to become within ro years a global maritime power; and to
increase its military power on its European borders. The necessity to arm
against China had not involved a reduction of Soviet capabilities on (and
under) the high seas and in Europe. It was speculative to assess the reliability of
the Warsaw Pact forces from the Soviet standpoint, but the organization of the
Warsaw Pact could not be compared to that ofNATO.
The military organization of Eastern Europe was based on a network of
bilateral agreements between the USSR and the East European countries. In
the Czechoslovak conflict of 1968, the East European forces had been placed
directly under the Soviet high command and the Warsaw Pact structure had
not come into operation. Any negotiations between NATO and the vVarsaw
Pact had to take into account the fundamental difference between the two
systems.
8. Re 6b - Soviet intentions
Four strategic policy aims were clearly discernahle in Soviet policy toward
Western Europe: (a) to avoid a military confrontation with the US; (b) to
consolidate and legitimize its power in Eastern Europe; (c) to weaken the
Atlantic alliance, primarily by the removal of the American presence on the
Continent; and thus (d) to become the dominant power in Europe.
The tactics used in the pursuit of these objectives and the priorities given to
each of them changed with the times. The consolidation of Soviet power in
22
Eastern Europe was at times accorded priority over attempts to dissolve the
Western alliance. Max Frankel's statement in the New York Times (December
2
2, 1971) that "whatever long-term advantage they seek from a divided Europe
and declining American power there, it is thought to be secondary to the desire
to protect what they have, while the West seems willing to concede it", had to
be qualified by pointing out that tactics changed but political objectives re-
mained constant.
9. Re 6c - NA TO's military role
NATO's strategic concept was difficult to understand and to explain to par-
liamentary and public opinion, partly because of the intrinsic complexity of a
concept aimed both at deterrence and at survival in a military conflict should
deterrence fail. "Massive retaliation" had not been a particularly attractive
concept, but at least it had the advantage of being clear. "Flexible response"
was now the only acceptable military doctrine, but it had the disadvantage of
great complexity compounded by being couched in a military jargon compared
to which the language of medieval theological disputes was a model ofsimplici-
ty.
It was nevertheless important that NATO's role should be understood by the
average citizen. This was not primarily a task for NATO, but for national
governments; in the long run no meaningful defense effort could be maintained
without a broad basis of popular understanding. Flexible response required a
major nuclear strategic and tactical arsenal plus a major conventional element.
A change in the total force of NATO and in the relative strength of its com-
ponents would create unrest not only within the alliance but also in the USSR,
because major changes on our side tended to make it uneasy and nervous.
While military postures should be adaptable to circumstances, we should not
lightheartedly change a posture that had thus far preserved peace in Europe.
The desire to reduce defense budgets was universal i11 Western Europe. It
was dangerous to rationalize this d~sire by the introduction of new strategic
concepts, invented not because the situation had basically changed but as a
pretext for reducing expenditure. The most recent and fashionable of such new
concepts was labelled "crisis management".
10. Re 6d - The American milita~y role in Europe
Twenty-five years after World War II, the security of Europe was still
dependent on the American nuclear umbrella and on a conventional force of
approximately 300,000 troops. It had to be recognized, though, that the domi-
nation of Western Europe by the Soviet Union would be fatal to the security of
the US. However, this did not provide Europe with an automatic safeguard. In
23
a democracy the translation ofa fundamental security interest into an adequate
defense posture involved a difficult political process. Most countries, inch1cling
the US, did not need to go far back in their history to find examples of funda-
mental security interests not translated into defense realities. The fundamental
US interests could not, therefore, be viewed in isolation from the European
defense effort. A feeling that the defense burden was not equally shared could
result in such strong political pressures for the US to reduce its commitments
that this idea would prevail over what was and would remain a basic American
interest.
Western Europe and the US were faced with the following parndox; On the
one hand, the American nuclear commitment to Western Europe was not
seriously questioned in the US. However, in the light of US/Soviet parity, the
credibility of this commitment was being questioned in Europe. On the other
hand, the necessity for a sizable US conventional presence on the Continent
was not seriously questioned in Western Europe, although the necessity for this
force was seriously questioned in the US.
To understand this complicated situation, the following points hacL to be
underlined:
a. The clanger today for Western Europe, as well as the US, was not open
Soviet military aggression but the opportunities which a weakening of the
alliance would give the USSR to impose its will on Western Europe in one way
or another.
b. As John W. Tuthill had put it in a paper prepared for the Atlantic
Institute, "a substantial reduction in NATO conventional forces would induce
a reversion to reliance on almost automatic use of tactical nuclear weapons in
the event of a military action which was interpreted as an act of aggres~ion".
c. American conventional forces differed from their European counterparts
in that they belonged to the only power in the West whjch the USSR considered
as really relevant. These forces demonstrated to the Soviet Union that aggres-
sion in Europe meant war with the US. Favorable results from the German
Ostpolitik and of future East/West negotiations depended on their continued
presence.
d. There was no magic in the figure of 300,000, but NATO had preserved
peace in Europe because those men were there. To quote Tuthill again: "It would
seem reasonable to put the burden of proofon those arguing- with such persis-
tence - for a substantially lower figure. The issue is simply whether the credibil-
ity . . . of the US overall deterrence would remain unchanged after a further
substantial reduction of US conventional forces".
That, then, was the American "quid". What about the European "quo"?
24
11. Re 6e, f and g - The European role
A. In the nuclear field:
The authors did not expect much difference of opinion as to the irreplaceable
nature of the US nuclear guarantee. From a strictly technological and/or
economic point of view, the possibility of creating a European substitute might
be arguable, but politically this was hardly the case. Without a strong central
authority e1npowered to act immediately, a nuclear force was useless because it
lacked credibility. Western Europe would not have such a central authority
during the next decade. Furthermore, a European nuclear capability could not
be built on the basis of discrimination; neither the German Federal Republic
nor its Western neighbors, however, could accept German cooperation on a
non-discriminatory basis.
Even if this problem could somehow be solved, the present political climate
in Europe ruled out the immense economic effort required to build a nuclear
strategic deterrent. The idea itself would split public opinion right clown the
middle, making progress in European integration almost impossible. Again,
this long-range effort would postulate a continuation of the US guarantee - or
Soviet aquiescence - while the effort was being made. Both were unlikely.
However, this left open the question whether there should be any nuclear role
in addition to the American one, either for the nations of i-Vcstern Europe
collectively or for France and Britain, who already had nuclear capabilities. It
seemed improbable that either the French or the British nuclear force would
disappear in the near future. Recognizing that they could not replace the US
nuclear guarantee, there were several alternatives for their relationships to the
alliance, between themselves and with their European allies. But the compli-
cated problems inherent in each of these possible relationships would not be
easily solved. The differences between French and UK relations with NATO,
the US involvement in the construction of the UK nuclear capability, and the
problem of emergency decision-making all militated against an integrated,
joint Anglo-French force. However, there mig'ht be possibilities for less far-
reaching cooperation between the two forces, although a solution would have
to be found to the awkward problem of discrimination vis-a-vis the other West
European nations, especially the German Federal Republic and Italy.
The only way in the near future seemed to be careful {mrturing of the proce-
dures initiated in the NATO Nuclear Planning Group, aimed at improved
coordination of development and targeting and better information for the non-
nuclear NATO members. All the rest required time and prudence, but no
options should be foreclosed. The authors shared Ian Smart's conclusion
(Adelphi Paper No. 78) concerning the prospects of Anglo-French nuclear
cooperation:
25
"Caught between the inadequate, the impossible and the incredible, the idea
of Anglo-French nuclear cooperation will still offer obvious attractions. To'·
regard it as a logical step towards the ultimate creation ofa new Europe may:
not be unreasonable. But to regard it as an immediate contribution to the:,
cohesion ofthe West or as a sure escape from the internal problems ofalliance,
pr community would be obtuse."
For the for~seeable·futiire, the European ,contribution to NATO and the
Western defense burden would have to be mainly in the field of conventional
forces. ' . , ,
B. In the conventional field:
Current force leve'ls in Europe were already at a dangerously low point,
creating serious security risks. l\1oreover, the present political climate, a \\'rong
interpretation of the character of the present detente, the priorities given to
doniest,ic requirements and a general lack of willpower made it unlikely that
our forces could be maintained at present levels. To avoid a further weakening
of the aliiance, this trend had to be reversed.
It was dangerous to assume that an increased US defense budget and the
maintenance of the present American commitment to NATO could be com-
bined with a general tendency to reduce European efforts, even if such reduc;
tions were rationalized through new strategic concepts. The only way to reverse
the present trend was through greater "Europeanization" of the present contri-
bution.
At present, each country performed a national effort with la11d, air and naval
forces; this would be bard to continue during the seventies, and impossible
during the eighties. One was appalled by the inefficiency a,nd duplication, and
the. near-total failun; of substantiating the concept of "balanced collective
forces" adopted 20 years ago. What was presented as a joint NATO effort
generally turned out to be a shaky array of national efforts, often inadequate in
themselves. This situati9n 'lwd to be improved, through focµssed political will-
powfr, inventiveness and energy.
The obstacles were daunting: institutional vested interests, tra9itions and
national industrial policies had to be.surmollnted. Defense support was the ob-
vio~s field .:._ training, logistics and procurement of arms, leading to what
Fran~ois Duchene had described as a European Defense Support Organization
(Foreign Affairs, October r97r). Complicated multilateral arrangements with a
mai<imum of countrie's participating were not the only road to greater effec-
tiveness. Sensible arrangements between two or three countries might contribute
much to the solution of some of the most burning problems. Urgent action in
this field was need~d to prevent a serious weakening of the European· defense
effort, which was an indispensable part of the total NATO effort and was also
26
essential to insure the maintenance of the American contribution.
In' future East/West negotiations, the way had to be kept open for closer
Western European cooperation. If our intention about this were not stated
clearly now; the USSR might well try to block future developments of this
kind, claiming that European defense ·cooperation would endanger detente.
However, European security, involvh1g as it did the mainten'ance of a credible
American military presence in Europe, was not determined only by the politico-
military situation: It was closely linked to the state of economic relations be-
tween Western Europe and the US and to the problem of reshaping the inter-
national economic order.
JI!. Economic relations between Western Europe and America and their Joint role !1l
reshaping the international economic order
I 2., Tensions in economic relations between Western Europe and the US
would likely be with us for some time. Hard bargaining was going to take place
over a wide field, ranging from oranges to dollar convertibility, and these
disputes had to be seen in the right perspective. These points might be useful in
determining this perspective:
a; The way in which Western Europe and the US handled their economic
relations would have an impact, not only on their economies, but also on their
security and on the international economic order taking shape during the
seventies.
b. Transatlantic economic difficulties were the result of many changes that
had occurred since the institutions and practices of the postwar international
economic system had been elaborated.
c. As a consequence ofthese changes, the leading industrial· powers - the US,
the European Community and Japan - had to accept responsibility for the
'joint management" of the international economic system. ·
d. Western Europe's future was greatly dependent on the kind of economic
order that lay ahead. At the same time, 'joint management" posed institutional
problems for the member states of the EEC, which would have to be solved if
economic restrictionism with all its political consequences were to be avoided.
13. Re I w - The impact ofEuropean-US economic relations
The growth of the economies of\llfestern Europe and the US had been favor-
ably influenced by the freedom with which goods, capital and services had
moved between them since the war. Nevertheless, exports represented only 4.4
per cent ofAmerica's GNP. For the member states of the European Community
after enlargement, the figure would beg.7 per cent, excluding intra-Community
27
r·,
traffic. As of 1970, trade with the EEC represented l 7 per cent of US inter.1
national trade, and trade with the US 18 per cent of the Community's inter-
national trade.
Yet these figures did not give a complete picture of the importance of US.
European commercial relations. Industrial imports from the US contained a
high technology content of considerable importance to the European economy;
for the US, Western Europe was an area with which an appreciable trade
surplus was earned. Nevertheless, in purely economic terms, increased protec-
tionism between the two might not be terribly costly. But commercial conflicts
had a tendency to spread and to spill over into other fields, such as the flow of
services and capital.
Furthermore, the security of both Western Europe and the US depended on
their continuing close relations. Protectionist measures could easily give rise to
a state of mind which would not be conducive to the kind of relations that our
security required. Finally, ifthe two giants ofinternational trade really got into
each other's hair, then the prospects for a relatively open international econom-
ic system would be slim.
I 1· Re I 2b - The origins ofthe present economic difficulties
Since World War II, the economic order of the free market world had been
guided by the US in the general direction of a relatively liberal "one world"
perspective; American leadership had been based on that country's preeminent
economic strength and monetary reserves. Several factors had changed this
situation drastically:
28
- Japan had quickly become a major economic power, thanks largely to a
strong emphasis on exports, made possible by the US-led international
economic order. Some adjustment in this emphasis on exporting capacity
in favor of production for domestic needs was now necessary. Such ad-
justments, however, always involved a considerable time lag, especially
where governments were involved.
- The nations of Western Europe had risen from their ashes - with a time-lag
of30 to 50 years - and were applying Keynes' lessons.
A wide range ofinteracting factors - from telecommunications and aircraft
to the multi-national corporation - had speeded the movement of im-
portant factors of production: capital, know-how and management tech-
niques.
- Movements of capital and know-how, leading to further division of labor,
required adjustments. Rising standards of living, though, had decreased
the mobility of labor. Labor now refused to be simply a factor of produc-
tion, and as such made to bear a large part of the adjustment costs. Since
governments had taken few positive measures to ease adjustments, there
was a growing tendency among trade unions to "outlaw the 'law of com-
' parative advantage". In the US, for instance, the AFL-CIO were now in
the protectionist camp.
- Finally, affluence was leading to a greater emphasis on the "quality 'of
life". We would soon see new definitions of GNP, expressed to include all
those social burdens (pollution, noise, human adjustments, etc.) that haq
been excluded as long as full emphasis was laid on the efficient production
of more goods. This change of emphasis was all to the good, but it would
create new problems in international economic relations.·
15. Re I 2c - Joint US-EEC-Japan responsibility for the international economic order
The changes in relative power between the US and its partners made it im-
possible for the US to continue to lead the system single-handed. However,
leadership exercised jointly by equals was in general less effective than that
exercised by one leader who happened to be stronger than his junior partners.
Leadership of the international economic order would today have to take
into account the new emphasis on the "quality of life" and the resultant politi-
cal pressures. The most important rule of the trade game as played over the last
25 years had been a negative rule, limiting the freedom of the players - the rule
of nondiscriminatory and most-favored-nation treatment. Progress towards
trade liberalization had been based on this rule and measured through an ex-
change of tariff concessions. In monetary matters, the rule had been fixed
exchange rates, adjusted only when the balance of payments position became
desperate. This old order had simply required a certain amount of faithful
observance of those rules by the players, and a leader, relatively law-abiding
himself and strong enough to move the others in the right direction.
The pressures from the present "quality of life" emphasis, however, would
often lead to action on the national level, not subordinated to those relatively
simple international rules which had hitherto formed the basis of the system.
The growing number of "voluntary" restraint-of-export agreements were at-
tempts to deal with problems that could not be settled by the official rules. The
growing reluctance to accept the social costs of adjustment would probably lead
to mote, not less, discretionary (and discriminatory) action by national govern-
ments. For instance, greater flexibility ofexchange rates between the US, Japan
and the EEC seemed now generally accepted as necessary, but this would call
for more discretionary governmental action than the fixed-rate system ofthe past.
Today's situation therefore compelled us to abandon the relatively simple
implementation of a set of rules in favor of the more difficult task of continu-
ously harmonizing diverging interests in fluid, unpredictable situations. The
29
choice was between some form ofjoint international management or growing
economic disorder, with all its political consequences.
For private enterprise, management was a difficult science but one that had.
to be mastered to survive. For public administrators - public administration
being to business administration what astrology was to astronomy - "manage-
ment" ofte11 meant simply the ability to muddle through, to deal sensibly with
critical situations. In the present context, therefore, ''.joint management" did
not imply something neat, logical and coherent. We would certainly not see in
this decade proper coordination of monetary policy, or of pollution adjustment
and employment policies.
But in a world where the conventional distinction between internal and
external economic policy was increasingly meaningless, there would be a vital
need for a great deal of intelligent and far-sighted "ad-hocery" (to borrow a
term from Sir Alec Cairncross). Governments would be well aware of the im-
portance of their joint interests and of the price their nations would have to pay
for the failure to "muddle through": i.e., growing international disorder and a
threat to the political climate of communication and comprehension, essential
to our security and to our chances of moving towards a world in which people
would be "free", however vague that term might be.
16. Re 1 ad - The enlarged European Community's stake in reshaping the international
economic order
The enlarged European Community had a vital stake in the maintenance of
international economic order. Although the' Community as a whole was much
less dependehf on international trade than its members were individually, its
reliance on trade remained considerably greater than that of the US (not to
speak of the Soviet Union) and was only slightly less than that ofJapan. As its
share in world trade was greater than that of any one country, its leverage was
considerable.
International economic order was also vital to Western Europe for !1on-
economic reasons. Whatever pi,ogress Western Europe might achieve towards
unity, in sheer power terms it would remain highly vulnerable, because of its
geographic situation and its essential diversity. Its geopolitical vulnerability; its
"identity", inseparable from diversity; the aspirations of its peoples: all these
factors would lead a Community of Western European nations to favor a world
of "contractual relations", (Franc;ois Duchene's term) over a world of "force
relations", be those forces economic or military. Thus not only Western Euro-
pe's economic interests were at stake in the reshaping of the international
economic order, but also its conception of civilization itself. Outside necessities
and this conception were driving its nations towards forming a Community
30
'
~'He:re diversity was maintained, but where the ancient right of a nation to be
:;ji'4ge in its _own cause :vas gradually relinquished. The defense of th~ir ~wn
interests obliged the natwns of vVestern Europe to pursue these same objectives
liJ.'.theirjoint external relations.
'.'17· Re I 2d - Western Europe's specialproblems in contributing to ''.joint management"
A sense of.history and an understanding of their own interests would not in
themselves endow the nations of Western Europe with influence in the world.
They could only take an active part in reshaping and maintaining the inter-
national economic order by speaking with one voice. Continuing inability to
speak with one voice to its most important trading partners, would not only be
a threat to the internal cohesion of the EEC·but would severely limit Western
Europe's influence in the world, as well as its chances to construct an inter-
national economic order conducive to its vital interests.
18. What should Western EurojJe and the US do?
If the enlarged EEC made progress in solving its formidable institutional
problems, what should the Community and the US then actually do? On both
sides, the complaints were many: undue protectionism in agriculture, disregard
for the MFN clause on one side of the Atlantic, monetary policy and a growing
range of protectionist measures on the other, etc. For the important problems,
there were no ready-made solutions. They could only gradually be discovered.
Here, as in most important matters, it was procedures that counted. The
authors offered a few final words about these procedures:
Today's problems could not be solved by applying absolute principles
such as "nondiscrimination", or "free trade in agricultural products". In
many cases, the need would be for joint discretionary action that took
account of general objectives and of the context in which international
economic problems arose - a context that would often make internal ad-
justment measures a sine qua non for liberal trade policies. In future, then,
more and more internal measures would have to·be influenced by inter-
national discussion.
When and wherever possible, rules of conduct ought to be established, be-
cause without accepted general objectives and a minimum of ground rules
"joint management" would be impossible.
But a great deal of not-so-neat "ad-hocery" would be required. In such
situations, continuous consultation plus readiness to state one's interests
bluntly, but also to make sensible adjustments to meet the interests of the
other party, would be vital clements in "joint management".
These consultations would have no chance of success, though, if conducted
31
withi.n the framework of a narrow mandate. For the difficult . •, 1 n . · · ·
sol~t10ns could not simply be negotiated, but had to be 'ointl dpioblems,i ,;~,z';,i'.fh~ Internat10nal author sug~ested t1:at the .d1sc~1ss10n should.deal with the
Tim presupposed free-ranging discuss· d
1
~
1. Y iscovered.;.. ,,, .·.· q.uest10n of whether there was still any hfe left m Ricardo and his law of com-
. 10ns an t 1e ab11ty to search fl · ' ,.,..· h' I J d · · ·
vanous possible solutions together so ti . l d or, c'.' <'•'p'arative costs, on w 1c 1we me! constructe our mternat10nal economic under-
. . . , me ung ru c out by detaile I d ·· i' • ' · · · ·
hm1ted mstructions. c an }tanding. In the speakers view, Ricardo "may not be dead, but he 1s 111 pretty
For Washington as well as for Brussels it Id
1
:~~orshape." As in Christian or "pop" theology, the death or dt:cline ofGod had
, wou not Je enough to lay <low ·· d · · f f · · · ·
a mandate for negotiators Tile collere d . f n th
.. e effect of eprivmg us o a system o simple etlucs or pr111c1ples, and forced us
· nee an secunty 0 th W d · ,
the next decade would depend to a la. t
1
e . est urmg ti:> find our way in a very different world.
.
11
. 1ge ex ent on t 1e capacity and th 'II · h h · l I · f ffi · ·
w1 mgness of the liS government (ii
1
d' C e As an 1 ustrat10n, t e aut or ment10nec t 1e issue o e c1enf;y versus mob1l-
. 1c u mg ongress) and the inst't . · d . . , . . .
t10ns of the enlarged European Com 't I I 1 u- ity. 1fR1car o were fully alive, then mobility, even with its disadvantages, had
. mum Y to ce egate the task of . d 'f' . . . . .
shapmg and managing the international ec
1
. cl re- to. be accepte 1 it meant mcreased efficiency. But with the emphasis which our
k
. o 1om1c or er to people able to ' ffi · J · h " 1· f J'fi " · · h II b
spea with authority and entrusted not
1
.
1 1
a uent society was p acmg on t e qua ity o i e , 1t nug t we e that
. on Y wit 1 t 1e task of negoti f . .
but also with a much more demanding . ti f' . a mg efficiency had to suffer. Workers who refused to move from one reg10n of a
' one· mt o mvent10n . . .
' country to another, or to change jobs several times, might turn out to be
"rather fundamentally right".
One conclusion to be drawn from this was that the distinction between in-
* *
*
The Netherlands author suggested these questions for discussion about their
paper:
ternal and external policies would become even less clear. For example, the
failure of the US to apply "serious policies of adjustment" could be a greater
impediment to international trade than even the common agricultural policy
I. Was their fundamental assessment about East-West relations correct?
Although tactics had admittedly changed, was it still the strategic aim of the
Soviet Union to be the dominant political power on the continent of Europe?
The author felt that this view was "not shared, to say the least, by a very sub-
stantial and powerful element of our public opinion", including the leftist
political groups, certain segments of the news media, much of the intellectual
community, and adherents of various churches.
2. Given the broad disagreement on that subject, what could be done to
formulate an assessment that was more acceptable to a broader segment of
political and public opinion, so that the West could enter into discussions with
the East backed by some sort ofconsensus?
3. Was it true that the vital nuclear and conventional presence of the US on
the Continent was conditioned by a meaningful European defense effort? Did'
this not imply much more effective integration of some elements of the Euro-
pean contribution, and perhaps even a role in the nuclear field?
4. Was it also true that the continued American presence was conditioned as
well on a minimum of order in the economic relations between the US and
W'estern Europe?
5. Could the institutions which had worked well in the past, but seemed out-
moded today, be readjusted to the new circumstances, or would entirely new
forms ofcooperation need to be devised for the future?
* *
*
32
of the European Community.
If we were not going to be ruled by eternal principles and by the living
Ricardo, we were going to be ruled by man. This meant lots of "discretionary
action", aimed at specific problems in a specific context, and not based on clear
and absolute rules. In that case, the resolution of internal institutional problems
within the US and within Europe would be decisive for their relationship.
The first big Common Market had not been in Europe but in the US, and it
had provided a splendid demonstration of increased efficiency and decreased
dependence on international trade. Following that example, the European
Community was considerably less dependent on the world than were its
member states themselves. But though trade might become less vital, the danger
was tha.t increased protectionism might easily lead to a state of mind that could
imperil the minimal international order we were seeking.
The maintenance of sound European-American relations would require that
we all give leeway to our representatives, not simply to execute a negotiating
mandate, but "to invent the ways and means of living together in 'ithe twilight
of Ricardo".
* *
*
33
•
C. "POWER RELATIONSHIPS IN THE FAR EAST:
A EUROPEAN VIEW"
I
The British author of this paper alluded to the fact that the structure of th~
international system developed in the later 1940s was now undergoing a con-j
siderable modifica,tion; in an age of rapid social, economic <tnd technologica!W.'
change, a quarter \:e11tury was a long time for any one pattern of interstatelJ
relations to endure. It was in Eµst Asia, where the interests of four powerful'·
states were involved, that the transformation of alignments, policies, and per-
spectives was likely to be most marked. Writing in January 1972, .before
President Nixon's visit to Peking and Moscow, before the presidential election,
before the end of the Vietnam war, and before it was clear how some of the
economic problems between Japan, the US and Europe were to be resolved, .
1
the author said it was difficult to do more than construct a series of alternative
hypotheses about the nature and the effect of the new Asian power balance.
Several factors clouded one's estimate of the future. The first concerned the
degree of popular and Congressional support in the US for an active foreign
policy over the next eight or ten years. By comparison with his four predecessors,
President Nixon had attempted a much sharper definition ofAmerican external
interests. The country at large was preoccupied with domestic concerns and
there was resistance in Congress to large defense and foreign aid costs. In
particular, it seemed that the American sensitivity to developments in the
Pacific and East Asia, which could be traced back to the late 19th century,
might now be undergoing a sea change.
The second uncertainty was whether the Soviet Union, as she increasingly
acquired the characteristics of a global superpower, would become more mili-
tant and egocentric, or more. relaxed and accommodating towards other major
states, more or less concerned with international stability and internal economic
development, less or more cautious in her external policy.
The third was the effect on Cl1ina of being fully accepted once again as a
great power, a member of the Security Council, in normal diplomatic relations
with a growing number of states. Would this affect her attitude of suspicion of
the West and ofJapan, of hostility towards the Soviet Union, or her determina-
tion to pose as the champion of the developing world?
Finally, how would Japan interpret her political and strategic interests as the
relations of the other major powers developed in the next few years? How
would she use her formidable economic power and influence?
In any case, the politics of East Asia were likely to be dominated by a
34
balance in which the policies and attitudes of each of the four major
powers would be affected to a greater or lesser degree by those of the other
·three. Indeed the balance had been multipolar in that area since the early
ig6os in the form ofa triangular relationship between the Soviet Union, China
and the US. The 1970s might see the entry ofJapan, to convert a triangular
into a quadrilateral balance. Such a multipolar relationship had existed in
East Asia in the early. part of this century, up to 1940 (although the relative
strength of the major actors was then quite .different, with two mainland
powers relatively much weaker); and, despite moral disapproval of balance of
power diplomacy, the US had participated in it.
One difference between the East Asian power balance of the early and of the
late 20th century was that the absolute power - strategic, economic, demo·
graphic - of all participants had greatly increased. But the nature of the new
relationship would be profoundly affected by the forms of power which were
considered by participants and their allies as most relevant. Because of its
European origin, the phrase "balance of power" evoked the assumption that
political and military power were the dominant considerations in maintaining
equilibrium. But this had been in an era between the end of religious ideology
and the rise of massive economic power: today both ideology and exportable
wealth - aid, investment, trade - were conventional techniques for asserting
the interest of great powers. What form of power would be most relevant in the
diplomacy of the East Asian quadrilateral in the next decade and beyond? Ifit
were strategic nuclear power, then the two superpowers would be in a much
stronger position than China,. and Japan might remain very much the junior
partner. Ifrivalry placed a high premium on conventional military power, then
the US would be in a relatively weak position vis-it-vis the mainland states and
Japan could more readily augment her strength. If nuclear weapons were seen
increasingly as frozen assets and the level of territorial conflict remained low,
then economic considerations would become important, which would give a
premium to Japan and make China the weakest of the four. Ifnational will and
ideological consistency were prime assets, then China's position would be
relatively much stronger. The wisest assumption was that all four forms of
power would be relevant, although probably strategic nuclear power would
play a less decisive part than in the first quarter century of the nuclear age, or
than it still did in Europe.
One had to be careful about applying the classic European balance of power
concept to the future situation of East Asia. It had been made possible largely
by the existence of a common diplomatic language and common standards of
behavior among all the European ruling classes, combined with a minimum of
domestic political pressures. This was not true of the developing situation in
35
East Asia, where the balance was likely to be operated by four powers repre.
senting four different civilizations, ideologies and economic systems. Align.
ments would .be harder to construct and harder to undo than in the ballet
dance of mid-18th century Europe.
Moreover, ambiguity surrounded the Western notion of "balance", which
had been used historically not only in the sense of an equipoise between a
number of states, but also, particularly in the last 150 years, in the sense of a
coalition to contain the ambitions of a dangerous power or group of powers.
The Asian balance could as easily fall into this latter pattern of balance as the
classic one, even though at present there might be a considerable element of
mutual distrust among all four partners.
II
The author thought that these were the most likely assumptions about the
participants in, and the nature of, the developing Asian power balance.
(r) 'There would only be four major parties to the Asian balance, at any rate
for the next decade or more. India was potentially one and so was Indonesia.
But Indonesia now had her hands full with domestic reconstruction; and India
not only had the problem of recreating a viable balance in the subcontinent
itself but had become an ally of the Soviet Union. Neither country could
project any significant power abroad. Even in the unlikely event that India
became a nuclear power, her preoccupations would be with her own security.
(2) Western Europe would not be a direct participant in the Asian power
balance, although it would have an indirect bearing on it by reason of its
relationship to both American and Soviet policy. But the constituent countries
of Western Europe would be too concerned with their own organization and
the protection of their interests in Africa, the Middle East and Eastern Europe
to become deeply involved in the politics ofthe Far East.
(3) With respect to the American definition of US interests in Asia, the
author did not belong to the school who would apply Hume's analogy "The ·
Athenians, . . . finding their error in thrusting themselves into every quarrel,
abandoned all attention to foreign affairs" to future American policy. Despite
the process of narrowing and sharpening American external interests and the
pressure of domestic concerns, the central position of the US in world politics
and economics was not going to permit isolationism. But, while President
Nixon, if re-elected, and probably any Democrat who might succeed him,
would oppose any precipitate reduction of military and economic involvement
in Europe, major American force reductions were taking place in Asia. Those
forces that remained would be primarily for the support of allies, and not to
36
:}~iii.ntain a general concept ofinternational order or to sustain an overall Asian
>::1.Jialance of power. Although a diminishing American concern with the shape of
':' ).~Hings to come in East Asia was not likely, in view of US security interests
'•'there, it was probable that America would narrow her interests from a general
. 'sense of responsibility for Asian order to certain key countries of Pacific Asia,
such as Japan. . .
,.,:: But the American role in the Asia power balance would be more diplomatic
~nd economic in its emphasis. If a conflict between the major participants and
· .their allies should threaten, the US would be less willing to ihtervene directly
.
0
r with military force than she had been in the 'past. This wa:s not so much a
consequence of strategic parity as of a general American reluctance to deploy
'ships and divisions across the Pacific.
(4) The approach of the Soviet Union to the foursided relationship in East
Asia might be easier to predict. Moscow's new confidence had been born of its
strategic parity with the US, its presence in the Middle East and the Indian
subcontinent, the global diplomatic value of its expanding navy, and the pro-
spective recognition of the status quo in Europe. But in East Asia the Soviet
Union had to tread warily. Her ideological dispute with China might even-
tually ameliorate, but their border dispute would be a cause of continuing
friction, especially in view of the xenophobia many European Russians felt
about the Chinese menace. North Korea was an unreliable ally, and Russian
military support of North Vietnam did not seem to yield much influence over
its policy. The relationship with Japan was diffident and suspicious, but the
Soviet Union might become dependent ·on Japan for the development of
Siberia and for technological products in general.
The Soviet Union would therefore probably pursue a cautious policy in
East Asia, at least for the next five years or so. But one of her prime interests
would continue to be to prevent the expansion of China's influence into South
and Southeast Asia, into Africa and the Middle East; and to do this so as to
disorient Western interests at tpe same time.
(s) China's attitude to the emerging balance had to be governed in large
part by her economic weakness. Despite a large conventional military establish-
ment, she could not project power far beyond her borders. Her gradually
augmenting strategic nuclear capability might give her influence dispropor-
tionate to its actual size and range, but she would remain vulnerable to strategic
threats by either of the superpowers. Her principal source of strength was the
example she provided to other developing countries, of how they could escape
the embraces ofthe superpowers and how a poor country could pull itself up by
its own boot straps.
China's attitude to the other three partners in the balance would be one of
37
almost equal suspicion. The USSR was the prime adversary for the time being,
and it was difficult to envisage a rapprochement between Moscow and Peking
except for purely tactical purposes, barring the appearance of a rising threat
from the West to the security of China. But rapprochement with the· US or
Japan appeared no mote likely. As long as there were American military in-
stallations in Thailand and Vietnam, near China's southern border, the US
would be seeri as an adversary state. The distrust ofJapan was based not only
upon fe~r of the succe~s ofa country which was originally a cultural province of
China, but on mernorles of recent aggression and the sense that Japan, more
than the US, might be th!! stumbling block to a recovery of Chinese sovereignty
over Taiwan and of influence in Korea.
There was an apparent paradox in the situation confronting the Chinese
leaders in the next decade. A country that for two millennia had regarded it-
self as the center of the world and participated only fitfully in the modern states
system did not take readily to the adjustments required of a multiple balance.
Yet China had a greater interest than the othl"r three in the maintenance of a
four-cornered relationship, including driving a wedge between Japan and the
US. The resolution of this paradox might lead her to place only part of the
emphasis of her foreign policy in securing the maximum autonomy in her
relationship with the Soviet Union, Japan, and the US, while making a maxi-
mum eITort to secure the moral leadership of the Third World. But she was not
an expansionist power in the territorial sense, though she was revisionist in
relation to the other three partners on the issues of Taiwan and the Sino-Soviet
border. "
(6) A fully independ!"nt Japanese foreign policy would be slow to evolve. _
Though the next decade might be one of domestic social and economic con-1
solidation after the fabulous economic growth of the sixties, .Japan would be a
large exporter of capital and therefore increasingly interested in the political ..
stability of the societies of the Pacific littoral, Australia and Southeast Asia
where it would primarily be invested. She would be increasingly concerned r
about markets, but she would continue to feel vulnerable both to direct strategic :
pressure and on her sources of raw materials, which would make her unwilling
to throw her weight around in East Asia. I
Japan had learnt that economic cooperation with the Soviet Union would ~
not lead to political concessions over Sakhalin and the Kuriles and she feared I
the return of Taiwan to China. She would be reluctant to forego her security I
relationship with the US, unless some catastrophe should prove that the US !
could no longer guarantee her security. Though Japan could become an oper-
ational nuclear power comparatively rapidly, the author foresaw continuing
reluctance to take the risks involved. Some Japanese with more ambitious
38
~ncepts saw Japan playing the same balancing role in the quadrilateral rela-
,_onship of East Asia as Britain had played in the pentagonal power balance of
·;'fu.id-rgth century Europe, but presumably they would remain in a minority.
III
'':· ·i}'":,'.,
::·;:, More than a generation had passed since we had had any experience of a
\)llultiple relationship ofstrong powers, and the future would not be a projection
'.6fthe immediate past. To the author, the following were conceivable combin-
ations, listed roughly in ascending order of probability:
r. A revival of the Sino-Soviet alliance to contain Japanese economic power in
Asia and oust Western influence for good.. Undoubtedly there had been ad-
vocates of this in high places in both capitals for the past decade, but serious
'students of the Sino-Soviet rift seemed agreed that, even though Moscow might
now be prepared for this, Peking was not. It could not be ruled out, but it
looked increasingly unlikely, not only because of xenophobia in both countries,
but because "imperialism" no longer presented a sufficient challenge to over-
come national and ideological rivalries.
2. A Soviet-American understanding to restrain their competition in East Asia
while maintaining strategic postures, which would neutralize the effect o
Chinese nuclear weapons and discourage Japan from going nuclear. This
implied broadly parallel action by the superpowers in the UN and elsewhere if
conflict occurred among local powers. However, as it suggested just the kind of
collusion that Peking assumed was taking place, it risked arousing further
Chinese hostility a.nd justifying in her eyes an active policy of disruption in
southern Asia and elsewhere in the Third World. It might also provoke the
hostility ofJapan. At the same time, experience in the Middle East had shown
that, even where the two superpowers did have some common interests, they
had limited control over the acti.ons of the local powers.
3. An American-Japanese-Soviet entente to contain China and promote the com-
mon interests of major industrial powers. In many ways this would give Japan
the best of both worlds; a continuing American security guarantee and access
to Soviet raw materials and markets. But as a political combination it had
several of the defects of a purely bilateral Soviet-American entente, with the
added disadvantage that it would lead to a hardening of Chinese attitudes and
the hostility of the rest of Asia.
39
4. A Sino-Japanese entente, with the US playing a muted role in East Asia and
the USSR concentrating on the containment of China in Southern Asia and
elsewhere. While this would have various attractions for Japan, it would be
difficult for China to embrace in ideological terms, despite the prospect of re-
straining Japan's military activity and gaining access to her technology. The
US and Europe would probably feel that Japan was leaving the Western
system, which would complicate her access to Western markets and would
probably jeopardize the continuation of the Japanese-American security treaty.
The Russians would sense a resurrection ofthe "yellow peril"; and, sinceJapan
was as vulnerable to Soviet as to Chinese strategic pressure, it would probably
be seen in Tokyo to create as many risks as advantages.
5. A Russo-Japanese entente, which seemed to the author fairly probable if
strategic competition were stabilized and the Asian balance became more gov-
erned by economic considerations. Japan could accelerate the exploitation of
Siberia, while the consumer market of European Russia was ripe for cheap tele-
vision sets, cameras, and washing machines, which the Chinese market was not.
If the US and Western Europe turned increasingly hostile to Japanese com-
mercial penetration, this possibility would have to be taken seriously. But if
this change in economic relationships appeared to lead on to a Russo-Japanese
poltical alliance, it would represent such a decisive shift in the central balance
as to cause second thoughts in the West.
6. A modified version ofthe status quo, in which existing alignments held but the
major powers ceased pursuing universalist policies in Asia, and tacitly acknow-
ledged each other's spheres of primary interest. At the strategic level, the direct
interest of the US in the security and well-being of Japan, the Philippines,
Australia and New Zealand would be accepted, as would that of the USSR in
the Indian subcontinent and South Asia. At the economic level, the interest of
Japan in the well-being of Indonesia would be recognized. Encircled by these
countries lay the small states of Southeast Asia - "the Asian Balkans" - which
would be open to the political or economic penetration of the four partners in
the Asian balance but not to the point of dominance.
This pattern would have several advantages for the US. Her sphere of
primary interest would not be contiguous with that of the USSR, thus mini-
mizing the risks of superpower confrontation. Since the US-Japanese security
treaty would be maintained, it would not involve a crash program ofJapanese
rearmament. The economic and political development ofSoutheast Asia would
continue to elicit resources from Western Europe or its major individual powers
who still had interests in the area. But it also posed difficult decisions for the
40
'rs, by turning China into a status quo power, at least in her relations with the
... .1ii:U$ and Japan. This would mean the return of Taiwan to China, the eventual
:.i'\\~rnoval of all American military forces from Thailand and South Vietnam,
\ :~nd the quiet burial of SEATO.
·' "i<:Jt presented equally difficult choices to the other three P°'~e~s; Soviet ac-
ceptance of the legitimacy ofJapan's interest in Korea and of China in North
Vietna111; Japan's acceptance of the return of Taiwan to China and of the
principle of self-restraint and generosity in her economic relations with South-
east Asia; China's recognition of the legitimacy of her partners' interests in
what she regarded as her own continent, as· well as the ii.doption of a tll;cit
preference for exercising influence with small gove.rnments rather than working
for their overthrow.
Despite these difficulties, this sixth pattern of the Asian balance seemed the
most realistic objective, and the one most likely to promote order without,
hegemony in Asia. Granted it implied the acceptance ofsimilar rules of conduct
by four wholly dissimilar countries, but since a multiple balance of power was
in any case emerging in Asia, the leaders of all four countries were bound to
give serious thought to the conditions for its maintenance; in the process they
could not fail to discover that equilibrium in any form depended as much on
the development of common attitudes about the limits of competition, about
the balance between initiative and self-restraint, about mutual rights of inter-
penetration in areas of secondary importance, as it did on any pattern of
political alignment or military deployment.
This process might take time, but fortunately the experience of the past 10 or
15 years had shown that modern communications (aided now by the presence
of all four partners in the UN), combined with the awful consequences of a
potential breakdown in balances of power, could bring leaders, brought up in
isolation from each other, to a working consensus much more rapidly than in
the past.
* *
*
In his introductory remarks, the author noted that Taiwan might not in fact
prove to be the stumbling block to Sino-Japanese relations that it had seemed
when he wrote his paper. Furthermore, he was not sure that he agreed with the
contention ofworking paper "D" that Japan was potentially the most powerful
Asian-based nation. Could this not be equally true of the USSR? However, he
concurred in the view that the greatest danger to the stability of the Far East
was the re-emergence of an alienated and nationalist Japan.
The author pointed out that, in discussing the various alternative develop-
41
ments which were conceivable in the next 10 or 15 years, he had not necessaril~
been talking about alliances or renversements des alliances. He had used with somej
care such expressions as "entente", "understanding" and "parallelism ofj
policy".
* *
*
D. "THE CHANGING CONFIGURATION OF POWER
IN ASIA"
This paper, submitted by an American participant, began with the observa-
tion that for' more than two decades the Atlantic nations had concentrated on
assuring that the power balance was not shifted toward the East by a Soviet
lunge across the Irol1 Curtain. Now tensions had diminished as the Russians had
lowered their voices, while the geographical focus of conflict had changed.
Today world attention was diffused. Europe was no longer the center of anxiety
as men spoke of "detente", while in Asia new arrangements of power were
taking shape.
The author was aware that the following analysis might seem overly cautious
and pessimistic, but he felt we were passing through a particularly dangerous
time when euphoria could overcome logic and hope be confused with reality.
,,
I. The new situation in Europe
Although the Soviet Union was no more immune to change than any other
nation, it was prudent to assume that its leaders had not aba11doned their am-
bition to dominate Europe, in spite of their changed tactics. Preoccupied with
China and aware that they had gained nothing by their frontal drive against
Western Europe, they were seeking to consolidate their Eastern European
empire. At the same time, they were exploiting Middle Eastern chaos to circum-
navigate Europe's southern flank, push into the Mediterranean, and establish
a beachhead in Egypt.
Their naval build-up was freeing them from the limitations of land-based
power, so that, once the Suez Canal was reopened, they could strengthen their
presence at the mouth of the Red Sea and begin to build up leverage in the
Persian Gulf. They might establish a naval force in the Indian Ocean to cause
mischief in Africa and the subcontinent and create a valuable nexus between
their Atlantic and Pacific fleets. This hypothesis would explain Russia's costly
42
championship ofDelhi, the hope offorward bases, either m India or Bangladesh.
,,The current Soviet tactics toward Europe seemed aimed at two central objec-
tlves: to stimulate an American withdrawal from Europe, and to bkick progress
toward European unity. Whether this tactic would succeed depended on re-
sponses from both sides of the Atlantic. Vietnam had revived a latent American
isolationism, and, barring a more ample European response, Washington would
be forced to deploy its troops from the eastern hemisphere.
Once the US Senate had tasted blood, so to speak, pressures would mount for
the removal of the Sixth Fleet from the Mediterranean. Without the visible
deterrent of American naval and ground forces, the Soviet Union might pursue
an adventurous Mediterranean policy - reopening the Canal unilaterally, iso-
lating Israel, and driving toward hegemony over the southern littoral of the
L
Mediterranean.
As for the Kremlin's second objective - to slow European unity - the prospect
of an enlarged Community had raised the hopes of those who believed, as many
Americans did, that the British would apply their pragmatic political genius to
the building of institutions that would give reality to Europe. This could come
none too soon, as the ties of common purpose were beginning to unravel. Soviet
agitation for a European Security Conference was breeding further dissension
within the Atlantic alliance, and it was disquieting to foresee the disarray of an
unravelled West confronted with the disciplined representatives of Eastern
Europe.
Thus, many in the US viewed Europe as being in a race against time, to see
whether the drive toward unity would gain sufficient momentum to offset the
old forces of fragmentation. Without a sense of common purpose, and the in-
stitutions to make it effective, Europe's resistance to the Kremlin's divisive
tactics might not long survive the withdrawal of the American presence. If the
USSR emerged as the most powerful organized force on the European land
mass, one could imagine one \Vestern European nation after another accom-
modating to this "new reality" ~ making its separate peace with Moscow on
conditions that might jeopardize Western freedom and common values.
America and Europe together now faced the practical question of how to
avoid giving the game to the other side, taking account of domestic currents in
every country that might frustrate realistic policy.
II. The new situation in the jar enst
Political analysts disagreed about which geometric figure best described
the emerging power arrangements in the Far East. Some spoke of a power
triangle of the US, Japan and China; others insisted on a second overlapping
43
nuclear triangle of the US, China and the Soviet Union. The author preferred,,
the trapezium (or, in British usage, "trapezoid": a quadrilateral, no two sides
of which were parallel) composed ofJapan, the Soviet Union, China and the
Atlantic nations of North Amedca and Western Europe.
In analyzing the power of each side, one could define national "power" as
the ability to influence the conduct ofother nations. This had traditionally been
thought of mainly in military and economic terms, but there were also less
tangible elements, as had been shown by France under General de Gaulle and
India in its brief season of moral leadership among the non-aligned nations.
Side one - China
China's gifted and diligent population comprised perhaps 800 million people,
or nearly one-fourth of the human race - homogeneous in culture and social
behavior, ifnot fully in ethnology. Ninety percent ofits population was jammed
into the.eastern one-third of the country. Some agricultural areas supported six
or more persons per acre.
This extreme overcrowding caused chronic food shortages, while the poverty
of the countryside made capital formation and industrial development slow
and painful. Its gross national product was probably about $100 billion -
roughly Italy's - much of it subsistence farming with no surpluses. Despite the
alluring prospect of800 million customers, China would not, for many years to
come, be a world economic power, or even the most important power in the
Far East. Its present role in world trade was less than that of Finland or Hun-
gary; imports and exports in 1970 were each little more than 2 %of GNP. Nor
was the self-reliant Peking government likely to incur the substantial external
debt necessary for accelerated industrialization.
China's rudimentary nuclear capability probably added little to its political
strength, and it was unclear why it had chosen to divert resources into nuclear
weaponry. The deterrence of Japan or the Soviet Union seemed an unlikely
motive; they were more likely to be provoked by a Chinese nuclear arsenal. It
might represent simply an instinct for protection against whatever aggressor
might appear, combined with a vague longing for great power status. Though
China's nuclear strength was minor compared with that of the US or the
Soviet Union, it held special awesome appeal when coupled with her vast
manpower reserves.
Those reserves were an important but elusive factor in assessing China's
power. Despite its limited economic resources and military competence, China
was impossible to ignore. It had a special fascination - the magnetic attraction
of mass - and the industry, discipline and intellectual capacity ofits people were
44
pound to cast a spell. Its influence wo11ld be greatest among other poor nations,
who would look to it for leadership.
'·: But, beyond that, China was no longer the sick man of Asia. Deplorable as
, the authoritarian character of the Peking government was, it had replaced a
corrupt and antiquated structure with one that appeared to work, Public health
had been improved and people were adequately fed and reasonably well pro-
vided for.
In spite of traditional xenophobia and the strident tone of Chinese propagan-
da, one felt that the people were not being prepared for foreign adventures but
for improving and defending the domestic scene.
China's ability to throw its weight about in the world arena had been con-
siderably enhanced by its United Nations membership, with the veto power
acquired as a permanent member of the Security Council,
China's position in the calculus of Far Eastern - and, indeed, of world -
power rested not so much on quantifiable factors as on intangibles. Perhaps the
most important of these intangibles was Peking's position as the rival Eastern
capital of the Communist Church, which, combined with its military threat to
the Soviets' Siberian territories, gave China special importance as a constraint
on Soviet freedom of action.
Side two - Japan
Japan's claim to a superpower role rested solidly on its achievements as the
world's third industrial power. Although Japan had so far been content with a
"low posture" in political and military matters, this was likely to change. Recent
events had shakenJapanese complacency and precipitated national soul-search-
ing. Japan was a nation with fragile moorings, and the direction in which it
finally set sail would do much to shape Far Ea~tern and - ultimately - world
politics.
Sides three andfour - the Soviet Union and the Atlantic powers
The US and USSR had long occupied center stage as political and military
superpowers, but the Soviet Union was not likely in the near future to make
much impact on the world trading and monetary system; its economic power
was only a fraction of that of the Atlantic nations.
America's economic dominance was being challenged by the enlarged Euro-
pean Community and the rapid growth of the Japanese economy. In the mili-
tary and political sphere, the situation was less clear. The European nations
were essentially a regional power factor concentrating on their own defenses.
45
Without greater political unity, their voice in the shaping of Far Eastern
politics would continue muted.
III. Relations with other nations in the trapezium
Relations between China and the Soviet Union
The fear and antipathy between Moscow a11d Peking were more than ideol-
ogical; they were compounded ofhisfory, geography and population. Although
China was a hopelessly crowded country, Siberia·, to the north, was an empty
continent, large parts of which had been taken from China in the rgth century.
In the whole of the USSR east of the Urals, there were only 58 million people,
roughly two-thirds of whom were non-Slavic.
The Soviet leadership had long feared separatist movements in these non-
Slavic states. The c;haracter of the terrain and the inadequacy of transport and
communications made disaffection there hard to put down, and some recent
outbreaks had been stopped only with the expenditure of considerable blood
and treasure. The Soviets were alanned not only by China's claims to large
areas of Siberia, but also by her intensive propaganda broadcasts in local
languages to the Soviet republics of Central Asia.
The USSR now had perhaps a half-million men along the border, and as
many more guarding the Maritime Provinces, which were strategically vital to
the Soviets for easy access to the Pacific.
The maintenance of nearly a million men to protect Siberia against China
was a critical drain on Soviet resources. It was most probably based on the
Soviet's belief that, before the task became too costly and difficult, they would
need to destroy China's growing nuclear installations by a strike based on con-
ventional weapons, aimed not merely at reducing the nuclear menace but also
at teaching the Chinese a lesson. Under this hypothesis, the enormous array of
force along the border Was there to check a massive Chinese northward surge
that might follow a Soviet aristrike. Unquestionably Peking feared such a strike
and hoped that visible Sino-Am'erican communications might deter the USSR
from a reckless move. Even if fear and antipathy did not lead to a Sino-Soviet
clash, they were likely to continue to poison relations between the two coun-
tries.
Relations Between China and Japaiz
The possibility of a remilitarized Japan offered more seeds of future inter-
national conflict for China. The bruta!Japanese occupation of China accounted
for the deep fear and hatred ofJapan in the minds of many Chinese. The in-
cessant bluster on this subject was not without its political purpose, but com-
46
parisons with the Soviet fears of German revanchism overlooked this critical
difference: postwar Germany was far less powerful than the USSR, while
Japan was now potentially more powerful than China.
Forecasting relations between China and Japan was complex because of the
intermixture of politics and economics. Now that the US had opened commu-
nications with Peking, American policy was no longer a constraint on Sino-
Japanese trade. The Japanese shipping lines serving Taiwan had been reduced
from five to two, while Japan geared for the aggressive penetration of the Chi-
nese market. That process had in fact already started, since Japan's trade with
China in 1970 had been approximately equal to its trade with the Soviet Union.
Yet the shift ofJapan's interest from Taipeh to Peking would not be a simple
exercise. It had invested roughly $200 million in Formosa and the volume ofits
trade with Taiwan exceeded that with Mainland China. Nor would Peking
submit to Tokyo's embraces without exacting a high cost. Japan would be ex-
pected to repudiate the San Francisco Peace Treaty and to conclude a new
treaty with the Peoples' Republic. This would pose problems in Japan's rela-
tions with Taiwan, and it would require Tokyo to face new demands for repa-
rations which Chiang Kai-shek had been gracious to waive. This would generate
almost intolerable tensions in the overwrought environment ofJapanese politics.
Problems of this kind did not, however, preclude doing business, and J apa-
nese businessmen had already indicated that they would not let sentiment inter-
fere with commercial relations. Of all the nations of the trapezium, Japan had
the greatest interest in, and capacity for, developing substantial trading rela•
tions with China. With 80 to 85 per cent of its population engaged in agricul-
ture for domestic needs, China's raw materials would be its only substai1tial
exports, while Japan was poor in raw material terms. But it was clear that
China would accept much help from Japan in developing its resources. The
Chinese would probably seek to build their economy with minimum depen-
dence on any other nation. As they would be especially careful not to become
dependent on Tokyo, the Chinese might spread the risks by encouraging modest
economic and technological relations with the Atlantic nations.
Although Japan and China shared deep historical and cultural ties it appear-
ed that they would sooner or later become active rivals for the dominance of
East Asia. Japan had already gone far toward gaining control of those raw
materials that had formed the target for her East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere,
but China had assets to redress the balance, including 21 million overseas
Chinese scattered throughout Asia and the Pacific. Peking's enhanced standing
after President Nixon's visit would bring to many overseas Chinese a new sense
of community with the homeland, an important factor in the game of power
politics.
47
In political relations with the rest of East Asia, China might well hold an
advantage over Japan, due to the memories of the Japanese occupation. Some
might also have memories of an earlier Chinese dominance. But China today
did not appear to be in an expansionist mood, and until it began to rattle its
nuclear weapons, the nations of the area were not likely to stand in much fear
ofit. What had keptJapan thus far from a more assertive political role had been
largely its dependence on America and the consciousness of resentments result-
ing from World War II. But with the advent of a new generation, a more
assertive policy was inevitable, and it was here that Sino..Japanese political
rivalry could become acute. If one tried to predict Asian power relationships
over the decades ahead, Sino-Japanese rivalry appeared a more likely prospect
than Sino-Japanese cooperation.
Relations Between China and the Atlantic Powers
It seemed generally agreed that the security of the World was better served by
having China looking outward across its borders rather than seeking to shut
itself off from the world. Yet the resumption of communications by no means
assured that China's role would be constructive in terms of Western desiderata.
Peking's welcome to President Nixon seemed to be a tactical maneuver to put
the Kremlin off balance by generating doubts that the US would remain a
.passive bystander ifthe Soviets were to launch a strike against China's nuclear
installations. In addition, it was reasonable to assume that China's talk about a
remilitarizedJapan reflected a genuine fear. In view ofthe Nixon Doctrine and
America's withdrawal of forces from Southeast Asia, it was unlikely that China
still feared American encirclement. If it could now alienate Washington's af-
fections and lead to a loosening of America's bonds with Japan, it would cer-
tainly try to do so. But that did not mean that China and the West were likely
to develop common interests or to establish close relations. Certainly, so far as
the US was concerned, political relations were likely to remain in.limbo until
there was some deal between Peking and Taipeh.
Much the same could be said of economic relations. As the Atlantic nations
were farther from China than was Japan, and had less need of China's natural
resources, the possibility that China's trade with the West would reach sub-
stantial proportions seemed highly doubtful. In bad crop years there would be
sales of agricultural products and quite likely we c.ould all sell substantial
amounts of capital and consumer goods to China if we were willing to extend
soft credits, but that seemed improbable. Since trade with Communist coun-·
tries largely involved nonconvertible currencies, it had to be arranger! on a
bilateral basis or through cumbersome barter deals. The hard fact remained that
consumers who earner! S100 per capita each year were not likely to swell trade.
48
L
Relations Between. Japan. and the Sovfrt Union
Japan's relations with the Soviet Union depended on a number ofimponder-
ables, the most important of which was probably the durability of American
influence in Tokyo. Almost by reflex, the Japanese had responded to the Amer-
ican shocks by rolling their eyes toward Moscow, and the Russians had been
quick to respond. ''\'hether the Soviet~Japanese talks about the i$lands off
Hokkaido would lead to a treaty between Tokyo and l\.foscow was for the
future to decide, but progress on the commerdal and economic fronts seemed
assured. It was another sign of growing interest that the Japanese had sent a
mission to study a pipeline from oil and gas fields in the Soviet north that would
give Japan access to a source of energy other than by the long haul from the
Persian Gulf, through which it new obtained Bo to go per cent of its oil. Here
again though, there was no assurance that a deal could be made.
The Japanese antipathy towards the Russians went back to the 1905 war, nor
could Japan forget the Soviet intervention of 1945. Thus - provided the Atlantic
nations shut off commercial outlets for Japanese goods - no one should expect
Japan to take any action that might jeopardize its position in Western markets
for the limited advantage of Siberian raw materials. After all, Tokyo had little
respect for the Soviet economic system.
Yet, though the Japanese were wary of the Kremlin, their political strategists
still toyed with improved Soviet relations as a counterbalance against China,
and a hedge against the loss of American support. If, as a result of insensitive
American policy, Japan should be led to play an independent political or mili-
tary role, it could hardly avoid thinking in a classical balance of power pattern.
Relations ofJapan With the Atlantic Nations ,
The Atlantic nations had so far regarded Japan primarily as an economic
rival that exploited the advantage of lower cost labor and did not always live
by the trading rules followed by other nations. The Western European nations
had interposed a number of discriminatory provisions against imports ofJ apa-
nese products, while the US had improvised a series of "voluntary agreements"
and other quantitative devices. The Japanese meanwhile had been 9ilatory in
moving toward the liberalization of their restrictions on trade and investment.
The result of this uncoordinated approach had been to embitter relations with
Japan and to create distortions in trade patterns. While the US had been ac-
cepting at least 30 per cent ofJapan's exports, the share going to the European
Community had been not much more than six per cent.
Here was a situation which called for multilateral diplomacy. Unless the
problem were approached through a concerted effort of the Atlantic nations,
mounting pressures in the US were likely to lead to the closing of the American
49
market to a growing sector of Japanese production, diverting surpluses to be
dumped in the markets c;if Europe and elsewhere.
The Japanese were only a hul'ldred years away from a feudal system, and
their economic structure, institutior1s, and ways of doing business were funda-
mentally different from those of the Western nations. To accommodate Japan
to Western trading and monetary systems would be a subtle and difficult task-
not to be undertaken by one country, but by the whole Western community.
Only in this way would it be possible to absorb Japanese e~ports under condi-
tions where all the industrialized 'nations faced similar competition and no
nation profited from protectionism. ·
The response to this dileinma had been quite inadequate on both sides of the
Atlantic. The nations ofEurope had te11ded either to dismiss the problems posed
by Japan's economic ascendancy out of confidence in their ability to protect
their own markets or )lad dismissed the whole question on the grounds that
Japan was a special problem to be dealt with by the US. Unfortunately,
Washington had done much to encourage.this reaction. Such a procedure was,
however, finally bankrupt and it was long past the time when the Atlantic
nations should face that fact honestly. Ifthe Western European nations had not
yet progressed sufficiently to play a world political role, they had certainly gone
far enough to play a major role in trying to make sense out of our system of
trade and investment. In America today there was much learned talk about
Japan being capable ofsustai11ing a consistently higher rate ofeconomic growth
than could other industrial countries, but this should not be taken for granted.
Several developments might mitigate the current in1balance. The Japanese
were embarked on a period of national rethinking, questioning the assumptions
of the past. Did their mercantilist instinct to pile up increasing reserves from
exports any longer make sense? Should they not divert more of their resources
and energy to elevating the quality ofJapanese ·life and improving their infra-
structure? Was their'single-minded penetration of markets, with no attention
to the attendant diSruption, producing an undesirable backlash? They were, in
short, beginning to take account of the requirements imposed by the world's
increasing interdepe'ndence;
Another factor was the limited size of the labor reservoir, which was likely to
cause a massi1·e flow of investment into the labor-intensive industries of the less
developed countries to build sources of production not only for industrial com-
ponents but simple manufactures, leaving Japanese domestic industry to con-
centrate on increasingly sophisticated products.
These imponderables cast doubt on the assumption that Japan would con-
tinue to increase its productivity far faster than the \-Vest; indeed, one could not
yet measure the degree of competitive advantage Japanese goods might have
50
lost in the recent adjustment in currency parities. But the maintenance of dis-
criminatory trade restrictions against Japanese products would have corrosive
political consequences and in any case it would not improve the situation in
third markets, which theJapanese would more and more preemptfor themselves.
Solving this problem· with a minimum of political damage might call for un-
orthodox measures that could result in fundamental changes in our world
trading system. But no solution could be found in the unhealthy environment
that now persisted, in which American industry felt increasingly impotent
while the Europeans washed their hands of what they regarded as an American
problem. Europe could no longer turn its back on the problem of Japanese
exports, the most critical problem confronting our trading system today. By the
same token, the US could not expect to resolve that problem through bilateral
restraint arrangements of one kind or another. For the foreseeable future,
though, the US would need to continue its special responsibilities in military
and political affairs. If the Japanese lost confidence in the American security
commitment, remilitarization would become a necessity.
There were those who disputed this, but in the author's view it was dangerous
to gauge the future conduct of a nation by the transitory mood of its people. As
Japan felt its own burgeoning economic strength, a new generation would
demand that it cease playing a diffident role in the political affairs of the Far
East. Since political stature had traditionally derived from military competence,
Japan would not be content to rest its security solely on an American promise.
How Japan shaped its own destiny and what kind of military establishment
it built remained the most important issue in the Far East. No one could predict
what the process of remilitarization might do to the Japanese psyche and the
tranquility of Asia, where scarcely a country had not known conquest and
occupation by Japan.
IV. The basic requirements of a Far Eastern poli~y
The position of Japan as potentially the most powerful Asian-based nation
was thus central to an effective Far Eastern policy for the Atlantic powers.
President Nixon seemed to have assumed that traditional balance of power
politics were not only possible but necessary in a mnltipolar world. His trip to
China appeared to lend American support to the weaker of the two nations in
the Communist power constellation, with the hope ofdeterring the more power-
ful from a policy of adventure and providing a further inducement for it to
come to terms with the West. Behind this drastic departure from postwar policy
was the President's concept of a "strong, healthy" balance between five super-
powers assuring the peace of the world.
51
The President's frank recogniti01; of realpolitik was ·novel and refreshing, but
the concept of an "even balance" among five powers needed considerable
qualification, as it was clear that the five powers were not in fact equal. The
game of balance of power politics in the Far East today could not be success-
fully played by the US alone. The President's trip to China had created great
uneasiness in Tokyo, and it ought to be the objective ofboth the US and Europe
to assure that Japan was a full party to the strategy.
In the author's view, these elements seemed essential to an effective policy
for the Far East:
(1) The Atlantic powers should strive together to solve the problems pre-
sented by Japan's extraordinary economic competence, developing through
multilateral discussions with Tokyo the accommodations necessary to bring
Japan into a full and equal participation in the world trading and financial
system.
(2) As Western Europe moved toward unity, it should broaden its horizons,
breaking free from its preoccupation with regional problems so that it could
again play a role in Asia.
(3) The Atlantic nations and Japan should develop an effective coalition to
deal with the two Communist capitals. Balance of power politics had to be
played in the Far East in a manner that did not detach Japan from the West
but gave it a full role in shaping a common strategy.
This prescription would be difficult to follow, because nations found it easy
to go their own ways, while coalitions were slow and cumbersome; but if one
accepted the author's central thesis that the gravest danger to the stability of
the Far East was the reemergence of an alienated and nationalised Japan, then
the indicated lines ofpolicy should not prove too much ofa burden.
* *
*
The author of this paper summarized for the participants the impressions he
had gathered during a very recent trip toJapan at the invitation of theJapanese
government.
Of the various "Nixon shocks", as the Japanese referred to them, of the pre-
vious summer, the most disturbing to them had clearly been the news of the
President's trip to China. The way in which that had been announced had been
particularly embarrassing to Prime Minister Sato, who had been under pres-
sure from his own party as well as from the left-wing opposition to make a
vigorous overture towards Peking.
Even more discomforting had been the implications for what the Japanese
had regarded as .their special relationship with the US. Many of the Japanese
52
had long hoped that their mutual security agreement with the US would in time
ripen into a mature partnership or coalition. But President Nixon's concept of
"an even balance of five powers" seemed to go directly contrary to the idea of a
mature coalition. The Japanese feared that some of the long hours of American
discussion with Chou-en-lai were devoted to balancing the power of the US
against that ofJapan. .
The result for the Japanese was an atmosphere of suspicion, an enormous
sense of doubt about their relationship with the US, and a feeling that perhaps
they should look for new friends. For complex reasons, there was a feeling that
this search should start on the mainland. The Japanese felt guilty for their part
in the rape and partition of China at the end of the 19th century, for their in-
vasion of Manchuria in 1931, and for the death ofmillions ofChinese during the
last war.
More subtle than this historical background was the cultural one. The J apa-
nese seemed burdened with a sense of having turned their backs on the East, of
having betrayed their own heritage, when they emerged from their isolation a
hundred years ago and began consciously to imitate the West. Many of them
felt that their society was rather empty and sterile, and that they had perhaps
given up too much. This led to a desire to re-establish roots in the mainland, to
try to regain something of their Asian heritage.
The author's impression from his talks with political and intellectual figures
was that the Japanese were prepared to make very substantial concessions to
achieve that goal. For their part, the Chinese were likely to drive a hard bar-
gain, to demand that the Japanese ack11,0wledge that Peking was the sole gov-
ernment of China, and that Taiwan was a part of China, and to insist that the
Japanese abrogate their 1952 peace treaty with the Nationalist Chinese. The
· Japanese were prepared to do all these things promptly, and no one could stop
them.
Far more serious, though, were two other conditions which the Chinese
would probably pvt up to Japan. The first was that the Japanese should deny
the Americans the use of bases in Japan to carry out their defense agreement
with Taiwan. The second might be the same sort of demand with respect to
American bases in Japan for the defense of Korea. As such conditions would
make the defense of Taiwan, and especially of Korea, almost prohibitively
costly, American opinion would begin to question whether the US could con-
tinue to underwrite the defense of Japan itself. Thus we were presented with
this dilemma: Whatever concessions the Japanese made to China out ofconcern
that their commitment from the US was not dependable enough, might tend in
effect to erode that commitment.
The author did not foresee a friendly Sino-Japanese relationship persisting
53
for a long time, because of the contrast between the industrially thrusting
power of Japan and the economically backward state of China, and the fact
that both were ve~y proud peoples. An intense rivalry could be expected to
develop between them for the hegemonic 'dominance of Asia. ·
In the process, though, the Japanese might be pressed by their own anxieties,
internal dynamics, and disillusion with the West, toward neutralism and then
rearmament. Unless some very active measures were taken jointly by the US
and Europe to restore confidence in the total situation, we could expect to see a
succession of abrasive problems driving the Japanese toward remilitarization.
The eventual result - a nuclearized Japan - would be most unstabilizing, like
an armed ship that had broken its moorings and was crashing about ori the high
seas.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
The wording of the single agenda topic, as well as the tone of the working
papers, emphasized the interrelationship of diverse elements - geographic,
cultural, political, industrial, commercial, military - and the discussion in-
evitably reflected this complexity.
For ease of summary, however, the subjects touched upon during the Con-
ference can be dealt with under two broad, and somewhat arbitrary, headings
- ''economic'' and ''security''.
* *
*
ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS
The crumbling community ofpurp~se
One theme running throughout the discussiOn was the "crumbling of the
community of purpose", as the author of American working paper "A" had de-
scribed it. After a postwar period of cooperation, and then of increasing dif-
ficulty, "the reasonable management of our part of the world - of like-minded
countries - had fallen into a measure of disarray", in the words of a Canadian
participant. We were threatened with polarization that could lead from com-
mercial irritation, to trade war, to political estrangement. The agenda of this
54
Conference offered "the challenge of seeing the situation as a whole, so that
some answers might become dimly discernable".
There had been an .erosion, not only of our consensus, but of our rules and
institutions, in the eyes of an American observer. International bqsiness was be-
coming "a mixture of absentminded optimism and adversary. proceedings",
and the task of defining problems and solutions was bound to be infinitely more
difficult in the present climate. A German speaker agreed that, without a sense
of community and partnership, we were heading for a destructive confrontation
of national interests.
An International participant expressed the widely held view that there were
no fundamental transatlantic differences; we belonged to the same civilization,
and our economies and our security were linked together. Yet our day-to-day
relations were increasingly marked by frictions, such as on trade and military
questions, which over the longer term risked permanent damage to the com-
munity. What was missing was a minimal consensus about objectives for the
medium term of the next five to ten years.
A Belgian speaker conceded that a certain optimism was warranted by the
fact that the free industrial countries agreed on ultimate aims, and that French
policies were now more in line with those of her partners and less hostile to the
US. But he, too, was worried about the lack of procedures for tackling the
secondary problems which had recently proved so irritating to our relations.
We needed a timetable for establishing some cohesion between Europe and the
US within the next five years on medium-term problems.
The American author of the working paper recognized that short-term
problems should ideally be viewed against the backdrop of medium- and long-
term considerations, but he warned that, if this became a guiding principle for
action, it would be "a formula for disaster and inaction". Vve needed to under-
stand these interrelationships, but we had to be satisfied with partial and lim-
ited progress on individual problems. It was impossible to keep all of the ele-
ments in balance at all times. "We are just not smart enough, and the world is
too complicated."
In the introduction to his working paper, the American author had asked,
"Who is going to define the road ahead ... the common direction in which we
must move?" A suggestion in this regard was offered by a fellow American
participant, who summarized a proposal he had recently made for the establish-
ment of an "International Commission on Peace and Prosperity". This idea
had grown out of a conviction that national governments - and even interna-
tional organizations, such as the UN - were so preoccupied with the day-to-day
business of managing the complex problems of society that they had little time
to think about the future, to try to anticipate the issues of a decade or two
55
hence, and to initiate some thinking about them now.
The accelerating pace, ofchange in social and political life, in technology and
communications, was engendering anxiety, confusion and uncertainty. Popula-
tion growth and rising rates of production and consumption were imperiling
our environment. As existing institutions were ill equipped to undertake a
comprehensive review of such problems, perhaps a useful contribution could be
made by the private sector.
The speaker recommended bringing together a group ofsome 30 to 50 "wise .
men" from the leading industrial nations ofthe non-Communist world: Europe,
North America and Japan. These citizens would represent a broad spectrum of
the private sector: science, business, labor, the church, the academic and pro-
fessional worlds. They would be drawn as well from different age.groups, but
the primary criteria for their selection would be such personal qualities as
leadership, judgment and breadth of unclerstancling, and insight into contem-
porary issues. The aim would be to try to find "theJean Monnets oftoday". To
enlist the most qualified people, and to foster a concentration of effort, the life
of the Comm.ission should be limited to two years. To insure its inclepenclence,
it should not be identified with any existing organization.
The subjects to be dealt with could be cliviclecl into a number of categories,
and subcommissions might be created, which in turn could draw on additional
people. Nonmember observers might be invitee\ to participate - from govern-
ment, the developing nations, even the Communist world. A small secretariat
would concentrate, not on fresh research, but on gathering data from available
sources. The Commission could deal with such issues as environmental control
vs. economic growth; individual freedom vs. egalitarianism; problems ofurban
life (housing, crime, drug aclcliction, financing urban education); and so on.
The Commission's report would be given to got·ernments and to the public
in a manner designed to produce the maximum inipact. Whether its conclu-
sions would be supported or acted upon would depend largely on the quality of
its work.
The notion ofsuch a Commission was endorsed by a number of participants,
some ofwhom suggested specific items for its agenda. An International speaker
saw it as a tool to help reestablish the necessary balance between understand-
able domestic pressures and responsible governmeht, to "aid those in our
governments who want to take, and are capable of taking, a responsible
position in these fields". A Netherlands participant welcomed the idea of a
commission from the private sector, which he said could come to conclusions on
these multifaceted problems in one-third the time required by a governmental
organization. He wondered whether the Business-Industry Advisory Com-
mittee to the OECD could not be useful in launching the proposed ~ommission.
56
An American speaker reminded the conference that the "wise men" tech-
nique had been used before. He was all for it in principle, but unless there was
"a political will on the part of governments to really move in some direction, to
really use the efforts ofsuch a group, it will be just anpther set of clocuments that
will be read by a small group of interested people and :filed for future reference
... hopefully". ·
The claims qf domestic priorities
"The underlying tension in the internatiom1l economic system", according to
an American participant, "is the one between the increased economic inter-
dependence of countries and the national desire of i~divic\ual ~ountries to
maintain sovereign control over their own economies ... It's the vitality of
Ricardo, not his death, which is causing so many of our problems today." The
intensified interaction among the economies of the industrialized countries had
brought them into such intimate contact that any interruption in the flow of
goods, services or capital was costly in both economic and political terms. Many
people did not yet realize, the speaker added, "how much the US attitude
toward that trade-off between economic interdependence and national control
over its economy has in fact changed."
The American author of the working paper felt that the US still had an in-
stinctive drive for leadership in international economic affairs, but that its
domestic preoccupations were such that it would be difficult for any admini-
stration in the foreseeable future to provide the sort of leadership that Europe
had become used to. A compatriot sens~d "a lack of will, of conviction" on the
part of his government.
A Swiss participant recognized that Europe should make a greater effort, but
he was more optimistic about America's ability to continue taking the lead.
Economic problems today were not so fundamental as to justify a mood of
negative resignation.
This issue was of course by no means confined to the US. In the view of a
Canadian speaker, an essential condition for progress in international coopera-
tion during the seventies would be a recognition both of the legitimacy of
national aspirations and of the means of setting limits to them. He quoted a
European analyst who had written, "Those who wish to prevent a revival of
nationalism are well advised to pay special attention to the defense of national
interests."
The speaker went on to discuss some special characteristics of the Canadian
economy which conditioned her foreign economic policy. Canadian manpower
was increasing at the exceptionally high annual rate of three to four per cent,
57
making it difficult to contain unemployment, which was unequally distributed
over the country, as language differences hindered the mobility of labor.
Traditional stabilization policies were therefore ineffective. With full employ-
ment, Canada's accounts would probably be in the reel, and a constant rate of
exchange would have to be financed by the entry of.capital. These domestic
pressures explained Canada's traditional dislike of economic blocs and her
preference for free, multilateral trade relations and a fluctuating rate of ex-
change.
An International participant referred to the consequences of a possible crisis
of economic growth in the clevelopecl countries. While it would not, in his
mincl, justify a "modern ideology ofcultural despair'', it did threaten to limit the
room for maneuver of governments, who might be less able in the future to
resist domestic pressures against free trade and open exchanges.
Added to these economic pressures were changes in social and philosophic
values. An Italian speaker remarked that the classical concept of GNP was
nearly obsolescent, as. the objective of mere economic. growth was being sup-
planted by a concept emphasizing balanced, qualitative elements. But at least
some growth was a prerequisite for socio-economic stability, so that in shifting
toward more social goals we could not afford to sacrifice high economic effi-
ciency. This required a new coordination of the technological and social sci-
ences to improve the productivity of the tertiary social services sector; a pre-
mature and abnormal growth of that sector would not improve the quality of
life.
A French participant observed that young people today were less vitally con-
cerned with the equilibrium of the i'\'estern world than their counterparts of 15
to 20 years ago had been. The "cement of anti-Communism" had been dis-
lodged by the "friction of economic prosperity". While those in power now
were still influenced by their cold war experience, the leaders of tomorrow
risked being conditioned by nationalistic, isolationist reflexes. Unless they were
reached by an appropriate political appeal, they were likely to gravitate toward
irrational, utopian solutions.
Another French participant alluded to some of the controversial aspects of
the "quality of life" concept. For one thing, some of those who were most ac-
tively interested in it were apparently not much interested in anything else.
For another, it alienated many people in industry to be told that all they had
learned about more and better production was outmoded. Finally, these non-
quantitative notions were incomprehensible to large segments of the population
in all of our countries, as well as in the Third World, who were still striving to
achieve a satisfactory level of subsistence.
The speaker was not convinced that an individual's search for "quality of
58
\
l,,
life" was prompted by an anti-economic bias. Rather, it seemed to be an ex-
tep.sion of the evolving demand of the consumers for better products, and not
simply more of them. But "quality" was always a costly luxury, and it would
only be achieved if society made an economic effort at least as great as that
which it had made.to reach a subsistence ievel. This would require new initia-
tives by industry and governments.
Trade relations
A Swiss participant, who said that his country was interested in both regional
and worldwide cooperation, felt that the objective of a truly multilateral trading
approach did not rule out. bilateral, trilateral, or bloc-to-bloc negotiations.
These were not mutually exclusive alternatives, but complementary approach-
es. Some issues were too complex to be handled except on a regional basis,
while European-American relations suggested a bloc-to-bloc dialogue. In any
case, he hoped that the major trading partners would adhere to their pledge to
begin new negotiations by 1973, a view shared by a Canadian speaker.
A British participant doubted that negotiations would get going at the pace
required until the main motivators of world agreement, notably the US,
clarified their objectives "in maintaining a cooperative development of the
monetary and trade systems". He feared that America was suffering from too
rapid a liberalization without any controls. What was required was, "not a
wholesale onslaught on all trade restrictions, but a serious creation of a system
of international disciplines that will allow liberalization to proceed at a pace
consistent with the capacity for organizing structural ch~nge".,
In the opinion of an American speaker, it would be a mistake to insist that
trade and monetary negotiations move ahead. at the same pace. Trade discus-
sions, which should begin within the next year or so, would have to take account
of developments since the Kennedy Round, particularly the new position of
Japan and the tendency of the European Community to give special access to
its market to its associated states, the former colopial areas, which carried
serious implications for the rest of the world.
An International participant observed that, while protectionism had de-
creased gradually over the past 20 years, we had come to a sort of stalemate,
where the will to move ahead was blocked by formidable obstacles. Ifwe want-
ed to go further, we had to be prepared to go a great deal further. It was useless
to try to deal only with customs duties; one had to put on the table such matters
as the free movement of capital and labor, rules of competition, and state sub-
sidies.
The speaker went on to express reservations about the systematic use of
.19
sector negotiations, which had a certain logic but tended to compartmentalize
international trade. This concern was echoed by a Canadian participant, who
alluded to his country's rather ii1conclusive automobile agreement with the US.
He also mentioned that, while tariffs had been reduced in recent years, there
had been a rise in nontariff barriers, which were "far more arbitrary and
discriminatory".
The author of the American working paper intervened to say that he had
meant to recommend sector discussions only as one technique in the context of a
broader understanding. The US/Canadian automobile agreement was not a
sector settlement, but "a very special arrangement between two countries, ill-
conceived and poor in execution".
A US participant thought that it had been a mistake at the time of the
Kennedy Round not to include ''fair international trade" among our objectives.
An across-the-board slashing of tariff rates had been unwise in the absence ofa
simultaneous attack on nontariff barriers, such as subsidies, indirect taxes and
investment restrictions. To illustrate the result, he mentioned the loss of 125,000
jobs in the US consumer electronics industry, which had provoked such pro-
tectionist responses as the Burke-Hartke bill.
The author of the working paper did not agree that problems of adjustment
in individual countries constituted a valid excuse for not reducing trade
barriers; it was up to each nation to work out its own adjustment policies. If
there were any life in Ricardo, the loss of 125,000 jobs in one sector should
eventually mean an overall improvement in the welfare of the US through the
creation of new jobs in more productive sectors. The question was not of the
gross effect on certain jobs, but the net effect, and the answer lay in enlightened
leadership.
An International speaker suspected that proponents of "fairness'', or of
"orderly marketing", were really aiming to protect a position which they had
achieved, instead of continuing to try to work by rules which gave them an
opportunity to make further advances. An American participant found cause
for optimism in the fact that a recent speech by a tJS Treasury official on "The
Fairness of Tracie Doctrine" dealt only with nontariff barriers. It omitted all
mention of wage differentials, which had been at the heart of the "fair trade"
debates of the 1950s.
A German speaker observed nevertheless that differences in wage levels, as
well as in fringe benefit~, slowed progress in. European economic integration,
for instance by complicating transnational company mergers. Better coordina-
tion oflabor and social legislation was needed.
With respect to agricultural trade, an International participant made a plea
for restraint in discussions on this subject, to avoid hostile polemics which could
60
lead to general estrangement. It was easy to attack Europe's Common Agri-
cultural Policy, but the US benefited from its own farm protectionism. Agricul-
ture was not simply a matter offoodstuffs; there were human and social aspects.
It was important to try to keep our farmers from forming a permanent mentali-
ty of anciens combattants. All of our countries would agree that the present system
was unsatisfactory if for no other reason than that it was too expensive for
everyone, and we had to work together to shape an alternative.
The case ofJapan
The Japanese economic situation was the key to most of the problems under
discussion, according to a Norwegian speaker. Japan's recently-acquired
strength derived from her exports. Last year, for example, steel exports had in-
creased 30%, and she had shipped abroad 1.5 million cars out ofa total produc-
tion of 6.5 million - an impressive record for an industry that had really started
only a decade ago. Japan was obliged to import virtually all her raw materials,
and she bought roughly half the coal and iron ore shipped in international
trade. Even these enormous purchases were not enough to balance her accounts,
and the speaker felt that she must begin to import consumer goods, too.
Underpinning this gigantic trading machine was a unique working partner-
ship of industry, government and society, which welcomed bigness as an asset
and imposed no antitrust restrictions. Given the Japanese competence and
ambition, one could extrapolate from the present situation a formidable growth
curve. The business philosophy of the Japanese amounted to a religion. "Ad-
vising them to do some rethinking" was not enough. The speaker, who said he
was a liberalist, advocated some hard "missionary" work to try to produce a
change in Japanese philosophy. As the Nixon administration had already taken
unilateral action, perhaps some help could also be provided by the Europeans
in this regard. They had not yet felt the pinch, but they probably soon would.
An American participant agreed that it was in the mutual interest of Europe
and the US to try to knit Japan into the framework of our overall economic
relationships, even though trade patterns up to now had been predominantly
Japanese/American. The Japanese had to reorient fundamentally their way of
doing business with us; some of it was cultural, which would be difficult to
change, but much was planned and systematic.
A British speaker added that the Japanese had particularly to learn the lesson
of restraint in their dealings with their raw material suppliers, to whom they
sometimes displayed a certain ruthlessness. Moreover, they were acquiring
some of the classical motives of imperialism in the cheap labor areas of South-
east Asia, to which they looked increasingly for the manufacture of component
61
parts. It seemed to a Canadian participant that the improper exploitation of
natural resources, at least, was within the capacity of the host country to con-
trol.
An International participant referred to the growing volume of offshore
direct investment by Japanese firms, especially in Southeast Asia. Some of this
was being forced by land shortage and environmental problems at home, and
some was at the invitation ofmultinational firms who wanted Japanese partners
for political or economic reasons. The Japanese were also investing in the
Middle East to insure their oil supplies. These were welcome developments, as
they helped bringJapan out of her isolation.
A French participant wondered what the reaction would be to an attempt by
the Japanese to take over a large, publicly-held US company. An American
replied that it would probably give rise to much debate, concern, and useful
self-analysis; and that the Japanese "might succeed if they picked the right
company".
A Portugm;se speaker emphasized the dependence of the Japanese on the rest
of the world for both raw materials and outlets for finished products. He felt
that they had demonstrated neither remarkable scientific ability nor marketing
capacity, but had succeeded in world trade thanks largely to the pressure of
lower prices. Yet the Japanese people had become used to prosperity and full
employment, and a slowdown in their economic expansion might produce
social unrest which would be difficult for their political institutions to manage.
An American participant with extensive experience in international business
cautioned against underestimating the Japanese, technologically or commer-
cially. They were spending over $I 70 million annually in the computer in-
dustry, and would soon surpass the entire American research and development
effort in that field. They were already investing about as much as the US in
consumer electroni\:S research. Moreover, Japanese firms would soon be multi-
national in investment as well as trade.
Another American speaker said that it would be to the advantage ofJapan
and to the rest of the world if she were to devote a larger share of her resources
to upgrading the consumption ofgoods and services in the home market, there-
by reducing her reliance on exports for continued growth. But during the time
needed to accomplish this shift, Japan would have to rely on greater access to
markets outside the US, and the speaker hoped that Europe would be increas-
ingly hospitable to goods from Japan as well as from other Asian countries.
The outlook for Japanese trade patterns was the subject of several interven-
tions. An American participant said that, while Japan would certainly like to
develop her relations with China and with other Communist states, projections
indicated that her primary economic interests into the next decade would
62
continue to be with the West, and with Australia, New Zealand and South
Africa. The percentage of her export trade with the "planned economy bloc"
in 1980 would be about g per cent, compared with 5 per cent today. (A German
intervention pointed out that there was little prospect of the Soviet Union
buying consumer goods from Japan with hard currency.) Japan was prepared
to invest more at home for social services and to take a modest cut in her
growth rate, but that would still leave her with substantial annual growth.
An International speaker remarked that a reasonable level of prosperity
would have to be assured for Japan in the interest ofworld stability, but that she
would be called upon to make certain sacrifices for political reasons, in the same
liberal spirit that the US had shown in opening up its market to permitJapah
to return to a normal democratic role in the world.
It was right that Europe should buy more Japanese products, ac'cording to a
Belgian participant. One already found her steel, automobiles, textiles and
electronic goods on the market. The quantities would increase and Japan was
even free to put up plants in Europe. What was not right was the absence of
reciprocity in Japan. Direct investment was limited to a minority share, and
licensing fees were artificially low owing to the lack of effective competition.
The speaker was all in favor ofexpandingJapanese-European economic rela-
tions, if it could be done in a fair and systematic way, but there was no reason
for Europe to make unilateral concessions to a lower wage country which seem-
ed to have little concern for the domestic well being of its people. This was a
subject which the European Commission might study for the autumn summit
meeting. A Dutch participant lent his support to the notion of Europe taking a
greater share of Japanese products if there could be some sort of "negotiated
restraint" on the rate of growth of this trade.
A German speaker reported that two or three countries in the European
Community had safeguard clauses and one had a system of quotas, but that
very little use had been made of these devices in the past, or was likely to be in
the future. There were no longer any obstacles in Germany, which had become
Japan's biggest European customer, accounting for half of her exports to the
EEC. Even so, Germany took less than 3 %ofJapan's total exports.
This was not because Japanese goods had heen discriminated against, but
because a major Japanese trade offensive had not yet been launched on the
European market. If it were, he thought the Europeans would be ready to
import more, to take some of the weight off the US, but what Europe could not
do under the GATT rules was to give the Japanese a preferential agreement.
In any case, the Americans would not welcome a special commercial association
between the EC and Japan. The speaker noted, incidentally, that Japan's
exports amounted to only about JO% of her GNP, which did not seem so dis-
63
proportionate as to require a major revision of her investment structure.
An American participant, who received support from a Swiss speaker, took
issue with some implications in preceding interventions that we ought to seek a
bilateral balancing ofJapan's trade with Europe and/or the US. The kind of
multilateral trading and payments system that we all seem.eel to advocat.e in
principle - and which had recently been shored up by the exchange rate re-
alignment - was aimed at giving each country an opportunity to achieve a
viable balance with the rest of the world as a whole. It was contradictory to be
concerned about the effects of the directional flow ofJapan's trade with one or
the other of us.
The speaker happened to agree that it would be in Japan's interest to change
the structure of her investment, but in the end that was for her to decide. Ifshe
wanted to continue to export large quantities of manufactured goods as the
leading edge of her economic growth, there should be no objection so long as
she avoided disrupting the international trading and monetary system. That
would mean increasing her imports proportionately (including manufactured
goods) and/or revaluing her exchange rate so as to change the pattern of
capital movements as well as the trade in goods and services. At the same time,
this participant urged the Europeans "to raise their sights a bit" in looking for
ways to help bring Japan actively into the task of restructuring the world
trading and monetary system.
An American intervention suggested that it was a mistake to analyze J apa-
nese trade in terms of quantitative measures of dollar value. The problem
presented to the US by Japanese imports had not been so much their total
volume, which was relatively modest, as the fact that they tended to be concen-
trated in very narrow sectors, impairing price structures with practices that
sometimes bordered on dumping and disrupting the whole market. The Japa-
nese had to be educated in "good manners ... in new patterns of conducting
their commerce'', a task in which Europe; could help the US.
The VVest in turn rieeded some educating about Japan, the speaker claimed.
It was completely outmoded to think ofher as a low-wage, Far Eastern country
engaged in cheap mass production. She was now the world's third greatest in-
dustrial power, endowed with a high degree of sophistication, and it made
little difference whether she was located in the Pacific or the Mediterranean.
Japan was experiencing the same problems as other industrialized countries -
environment, social infrastructure, quality oflife - about which there should be
a great measure ofconsultation.
Building a sensible kind of world economic community required a serious
joint effort by the US, Japan and Europe. The US could not do the job alone,
and if it tried there would be troublesome distortions, with America turning
64
...._
more protectionist and Japanese surpluses dislocating world markets.
The need for a strong European side to this triangle was endorsed by an Inter-
national speaker, who said that it would have political as well as economic
value, serving to counteract]apan's cultural pull in the direction of China.
On the other hand, an Italian speaker expressed reservations about the
prospects for an effective triangular c6operation between Europe, Japan and
the US. While some of the arguments advanced in favor of such cooperation
were based on pure mercantilism, others were more valid. And yet the reaction
of many Europeans was hesitant, if not negative. There was a feeling that
Europe was preoccupied with its own problems, and that ifit could not expect
to make its weight felt in the Pacific it should not spend its time and effort in
vain.
But Europe did share with Japan and the US the distinction of being one of
the three global power blocs (assuming the USSR was still defined as a con-
tinental power), and an effort ought to be made to make the interests of these
three blocs more convergent, or at least less divergent.
The speaker's recent discussions with .Japanese leaders had convinced him
that they were now "available" for discussions, particularly on the subject of
how they could concentrate on those exports which would be less disruptive of
the economics of importing countries. As one could not be sure how long this
mood of "availability" would last, no time should be lost. The OECD was
probably the most appropriate forum for these discussions.
The practical difficulties of effectively enlisting the cooperation of the J apa-
nese to solve common problems was mentioned in several interventions. A
British participant with business interests in Asia sensed that the "Nixon
shocks" had engendered a mood of distrust and uncertainty there, but that the
Japanese were determined to overcome the effects of trade restrictions and the
revaluation of the yen.
This speaker was joined by a number of others in expressing bafflement and
frustration at Japanese ways: their thought processes, decision-making proce-
dures, and above all their behavior at conferences. They were often represented
by blocs of silent delegates who hesitated to participate in the frank and open
discussions required, preferring to caucus together before producing a formal
statement oftheir position. It would take time ahd patience to break down these
barriers to communication, but an attempt had to be made to bring the J apa-
nese more and more into international meetings and discussions.
An International speaker thought that the Japanese were not as far removed
from the rest of us as some of the interventions had suggested. The chairman of
the GATT committee investigating the consequences of British entry into Eu-
rope was Japanese, as was one of the most valuable members of the OECD
65
i'
p
1'
'i!
;. ~:
u
~
it
''!'
:: ;
i
11
"
[j
·Ii
11
h
1!1
p
1·1l
ii
,I
~
~~
111
,ii
Ii
ll
~i
I:
"
"
~
!'
high-level group. There were many other instances of active Japanese coopera-
tion.
Another participant reported on' the valuable contribution made by the
Japanese to the International organization which he was involved in admin-
istering. Granted, their large delegations had only one spokesman. This was
due not only to their tradition, but to their shortage of "exportable" high
officials with languages and experience. Most of the delegates were there to
observe and learn.
In the speaker's' ·experience, the Japanese, more than any other people,
"attach a tremendous importance to being with the Western nations in daily
cooperation, to learn what is happening elsewhere, and to use what is told to
them ... They are very polite and appreciative, and generally use the organi-
zation most actively ... Not every member country reacts always in that way".
Underlying this attitude was the Japanese feeling that they should grow out of
their bilateral link with the US into a broader economic relationship with Eu-
rope, Australia and New Zealand as well.
Two other speakers - one Australian and the other American - cited ex-
amples of productive conferences they had attended with the Japanese on busi-
ness, intellectual and cultural topics. There were now many more influential
Japanese who were able and willing to converse with people from abroad, and
the time was ripe to take advantage of this evolution.
An American participant observed that much of the foregoing discussion had
seemed to assume deliberate Japanese policies in these matters. In truth, J apa-
nese responses in external relations were often simply a reflection of the coun-
try's internal political culture, with its tradition ofstrict hierarchy, an elaborate
superior/inferior order, and close interaction between business and government.
TheJapanese found it difficuh to conceive of equal partnerships, which made it
all the more important for Europe and the US to work patiently to build a
sustained relationship with Japan to bridge that gap.
European perspective$
Several interventions having referred to the difficulty of effectively coordi-
nating economic, monetary, political and security elements, a Belgian partici-
pant spoke of the importance of having the enlarged European Community
able to act as an interlocuteur valable in all these areas. To do this, there had to be
a will to create a united Europe, which in turn meant that the younger genera-
tion had to be politically inspired by a European ideal.
In the opinion of a Swiss speaker, though, youth could no longer be rallied to
economic or military security goals. They would only respond to such political
66
objectives as an improvement in the quality of life. Both effective institutions
and dedicated men were essential to the strength of the West, but the defect of
European Community institutions was that collaboration was largely on a
governmental basis, which implied decisions based on power. More emphasis
should be put on collaboration between parliaments, "where the good argu-
ment has a much better chance to get through".
An International participant said that one lesson to be learned from recent
European experience was that no economic progress was achieved without a
political understanding. The Common 1\farket had its origins in a political de-
termination to prevent future wars by forging links of interdependence. This
had led to a second motive, an economic one, but success in that field had un-
fortunately deprived public opinion of a sense of urgency about moving on
ahead, as there seemed to be few barriers left to surmount. Perhaps we had all
expected too much too soon from this rapprochement of states; it was disap-
pointing to see how slow the process of integration was.
New political incentives now had to be found to infuse Europe with a feeling
ofsolidarity. In the meantime, we were passing through a stage of "intermediate
regionalism" in Europe and other parts of the world, notably Latin America
and Africa. The speaker hoped that we could avoid hostility between regional
economic groupings, as well as a competitive proliferation of them.
Another International participant counseled against an "all-or-nothing" ap-
proach to regional developments. It had always been the viewpoint of the
European Community (which, incidentally, was far from constituting a "gigan-
tic trading bloc" with much of Africa) that close regional cooperation, even
political integration, was compatible with the acceptance of broad interna-
tional rules such as those on which GATT and IMF were based. As to the
slowness of EC decision-making procedures, it should be borne in mind that the
Community was trying to work out common policies in an increasing number
of areas, that it was succeeding relatively frequently now, and that there was
probably no other instance of a gro.up of free countries cooperating out of their
own free will in this way. It was significant that the governments ofthe member
states found it necessary to try to coordinate their foreign policies, whether
they always succeeded or not.
The speaker went on to say that one of the major tasks of Europe, which
would become even more evident at the summit meeting, was "to define its
personality in the world". An important facet of this was its role in the trading
system, and he was not convinced that Europe saw its responsibility in this area
in terms of the US-Europe-Japan triangle that had been mentioned. One could
not envisage the creation of a sort of economic "security council" of these three
partners, and moreover one needed the collaboration of Australia, New Zea-
67
f
land, Canada, Switzerland, S~eden, and the other European countries who
would not, in the foreseeable future, be members of the EC.
The Community was therefore inclined to regard the composition of OECD
as being better suited to the tasks at hand, and it was looking for ways to define
in that body - for execution through GATT- the reforms needed to cope with
such issues as transnational investment, the crisis ofgrowth, regional groupings,
monetary-trade links, and development assistance (for which Europe had a
special responsibility). Europe was convinced that it was in the interest of all to
maintain "the rules offree trade", and to do this multilaterally. This was not to
say that the US would not continue to warrant the top place among Europe's
partners, although there would not always be a convergence ofinterests.
The urgent need for an improvement in the Community's decision-making
procedures was the subject of two Belgian interventions. As of late. last year,
there were 352 proposals "in the pipeline" from the Commission to the Council
of Ministers for decision, and nearly half of these files had not yet been dealt
with. As a result of such delays, Europe's objecti\·es, intentions and reactions
did not emerge clearly. This problem was on the summit agenda, and it was to
be hoped that the enlarged membership of the Community would facilitate the
shaping of global European policies, which had been politically impossible
when only the Six were involved.
An International participant pointed out that the formulation of US policy
was likewise hampered internally by imperfect coordination between the ad-
ministration and the Congress. An American speaker agreed, but was worried
that the Community would either be inhibited from making any decisions at all,
or would make them so slowly and imperfectly that its relations with the rest of
the world would be damaged. A fellow American regretted the irresolution of
his own government, as well as the absence so far of a single voice to speak for
Europe, but he found that crises somehow produced concerted and effective
action anyway, as the work of the Group of Ten had demonstrated in recent
months.
Looking ahead, a German participant wondered whether the Americans,
who had always favored closer European unification, would not view with
mixed feelings the fact that they were now to be left out of political consulta-
tions, which would henceforth take place in the Davignon Committee instead of
within NATO.
A Turkish speaker observed that his fellow participants tended to think of
Europe in terms limited to the Ten. He deplored this, as it presupposed that
Europe could expand only from an economic and technological base, neglecting·
its ancient civilization of common moral and political characteristics. His own
country was not among the Ten, yet it did not regard itself as part of the
68
"Third World" either. He could not speak for other nations, but they probably
shared this feeling. He was not without hope, however. Not long ago Turkey
and Greece had been complete outsiders to the Community; then they had be-
come associates; and now there was even a possibility of their being invited to
attend the summit meeting.
The intervention of a Swiss participant carried a similar theme. The enlarge-
ment of the EC only toward the north held worrisome implications for the
political evolution of the Mediterranean basin. Within the Community itself,
Italy was giving cause for concern1
with outbreaks of violence reminiscent of
scenes half a century ago. As for other nations around the Mediterranean, the
US and Western Europe were willing to maintain military bases in them but
otherwise they were "excommunicated" because their regimes were not demo-
cratic.
This attitude showed a misunderstanding of the social, spiritual and cultural
mores in these countries. The people of Spain and Portugal valued liberty as
much as anyone, but the realities of their existence did not produce the ideal
homo democraticus. We could not condone the methods used in Greece, but
it was vain on the other hand to talk of "restoring democracy" where one
had not really existed before - at least not of our brand. The Turks were strug-
gling to maintain a rightist regime, which also perhaps merited some criticism.
Yugoslavia after Tito would be a question mark.
These were all peoples with strong nationalistic pride, and our refusal to help
them in tl1eir development, our placing them "in quarantine" because of our
prejudices, risked creating a "culturally unbalanced, marginal Europe".
Support for the preceding intervention was expressed by an Italian speaker,
who advocated shifting the strategy of the Community from an ideology largely
dominated by industry and French agricultural interests to one focused on the
needs of Europe's developing regions. This could be called a "southern strate•
gy", ifone were to include Yugoslavia, toward whom the Community's policy
had always been shortsighted in the speaker's estimation. It flattered the Euro-
peans to be told by the Americans that a grand destiny awaited them in Asia,
but they had first to face problems nearer home. A Europe turned mainly to
the Atlantic, and "looking into just one small corner of the Mediterranean",
would be weak and vulnerable, especially when confronted with the "southern
strategy" of the Soviet Union.
Relations with the Third World
A Norwegian participant said that the possibility of believing in the future
had to be given back to the younger generation, who had lost it. If his own
69
children had been listening to this conference, their reaction might well have
been this: "Of course, it is very good to establish an acceptable currency
system, and so on . . . But you have been discussing agricultural policies in
terms of shipping products from one overfed part of the world to the other, not
taking into consideration the need to feed the two-thirds of the world who are
not in a position to get the necessary number of calories." This disparity be-
tween rich and poor, and the rapid destruction of our natural resources, were
the essential problems of today and tomorrow.
A Canadian speaker stated that events of the last few years, particularly the
Vietnam war, had convinced his countrymen that military responses did not
necessarily provide the best solution to changed circumstances. Accordingly, as
Canada's defense budget was reduced each year in real terms, its foreign aid
budget was increased. Similarly, a Netherlands participant foresaw his coun-
try's carrying a bigger burden of development assistance to the smaller Asian
nations, although a military role there was out of the question.
At the same time, public pressures for a reduction in foreign aid were building
up in the US and Europe, according to a British participant. In Britain today,
it was difficult to interest the man in the street in the concept of a united
Europe, much less in aid to underdeveloped countries. Yet it was important for
Europe not to be left behind in this field, in which the US and Russia had been
active for so long.
By the middle of the next decade, the developed third of the world should be
able to put its standard ofliving at any level it wished. What use would it make
of this economic power? Should it turn inward, to improve its environment, its
social services, its quality of life? Or should it - as the younger generation
believed - raise to affluence the remaining poor two-thirds of the world?
Ideally, both these goals could be accomplished.
An International speaker felt that Europe had a very special responsibility to
the less-developed world, and he believed this could be the characteristic pur-
pose of the European Community in its foreign policy in the years ahead.
Europe would need to be selective in terms ofinstruments and of areas, but this
did not mean concentrating solely on Africa and the Mediterranean. In fact,
the developing nations of east Asia and the Iiidian subcontinent were now
directing an exaggerated amount of expectation at western Europe, as a nega-
tive result of apprehension about the spheres of influence of the US, Japan,
China and the USSR. Many Asians felt that by establishing close ties with the
free countries of Europe they could strengthen their economic and political
cause without any strings attached.
Of all the major partners in world economic - and perhaps political - affairs,
the European Community seemed best fitted to contribute to the promotion of
70
regional cooperation and economic development in Asia, and in so doing it
might gradually become a global power.
A Belgian participant also referred to Europe's desire to aid in the economic
development ofthe Mediterranean and Africa, where it had certain primordial
ties. Unfortunately, however, her efforts in this direction encountered the op-
position of the US, which felt that such a relationship was detrimental to its
own interests.
To this remark, an American speaker responded that, while the US wel-
comed both Western aid to Africa and new manifestations of European unity,
it simply did not believe that a reciprocal preferential association between
Europe and Africa was the best way to organize North-South relations.
"Slicing the world up like an apple" would inevitably increase pressure on the
US to take a similar role toward Latin America. What would be done then for
countries, such as India and Pakistan, which were not located immediately
south ofthe great industrial regions? The speaker answered that a global, multi-
lateral approach was much to be preferred.
A British participant mentioned that US aid programs in southeast Asia had
helped immensely to raise living standards there over the past 25 years. It
looked now as if this aid was decreasing, but he was heartened to see it being
replaced by investments of American companies. "Nothing but good can come
of this." But much of Asia was worried about what it sensed to be a growing
mood of isolationism in the enlarged EC, and the speaker was encouraged to
hear othe.r participants affirm Europe's intention to actively support regional
Asian development groupings.
An American participant, noting that a substantial part of the US capital
outflow had gone to the Third World, said thatJapan, with some $17 billion in
reserves, was now well equipped to devote more ofits resources to development
financing.
The creation of a "bank of technology and know-how'', on which less-devel-
oped countries could draw to increase productive employment, was proposed
by a Swiss participant. The fruits ofresearch were intellectual property, which
had to be protected through patents and licenses to insure progress; at the same
time, the developed nations wanted to assist the growth of the Third World.
One way of accomplishing this would be for industrial companies to deposit
their technology with a "bank" which would arrange for it to be licensed on a
long-term basis, on easy terms, to developing countries. Such a bank, which
might be an agency of an existing international organization, would be staffed
with consulting engineers to supervise the start-up of new plants until they
could be turned over to local management. Governments of the licensee coun-
tries might intervene in the payment of royalties. The use of such a bank for
71
the transfer of technology would have the advantage of being multilateral as
well as nonpolitical.
An American participant observed that the Western world could not hope
for internal cohesion or for a role of global leadership until it rid itself of the
beliefin its ow;.. ethnic superiority. There were not many of us who still regard-
ed the color of a man's skin. as important, but a lot of other people thought we
did and there were unfortunately times when we lent credence to that notion.
This was a particularly galling matter to the Third World.
Economic dealings with Communist countries
A German participant disagreed with the author of the American working
paper, who had deplored the decreased coordination of economic policies
toward the Communist world. The speaker felt that the situation had been
worse in the 1950s, even under the pressure of the cold war, with much discord
beneath the surface of cooperation. The debate then about strategic goods
limitations had been dangerous for the Western community; the COCOM list
now was so restricted that it presented no obstacle to trade with the East.
Credit policy was now well coordinated, with an agreed maximum of eight
years, compared with some cases of 15-year maturities a decade ago. Further-
more, each trade agreement was the subject of consultation in Brussels, and
the common foreign trade policy was scheduled for inauguration early in 1974·
In short, Europe had achieved more common policies and responses to the
Eastern countries than ever before, even without military pressure from NATO.
The Soviet Union had recently approached European and Japanese groups
to discuss a joint venture for exploiting the resources of Siberia, such as copper,
nickel, cobalt and iron ore. The Russians had concluded that theJapanese were
inclined to shy away from long-term investments that did not promise a quick
commercial advantage, but the speaker was convinced that if the Russians
really sought international cooperation in Siberia they should invite Japanese
as well as European partners to form a consortium. This would test the serious-
ness ofrecentJapanese promises about investing abroad.
Two participants who were industrialists saw little likelihood of such a con-
sortium coming into being. A Finnish speaker predicted that it would be diffi-
cult to get the Russians to undertake serious negotiations with an international
consortium. They calculated that it was to their advantage to deal separately
with each nationality. From the point of view of the potential partners, a
German speaker pointed out that large European users of critical raw materi-
als, such as iron ore, generally preferred for their own security to have a share in
the producing mines on which they depended. However, they were typically
72
I
i
I
:t
committed to take only a marginal share of the production of each property,
not a voluminous one. This system suggested some inherent limitations in a
Siberian consortium.
An Australian participant sensed that Europeans wer~ overly preoccupied
with safeguarding themselves from Russia. On the dairyman's theory that "the
closer you get to the cow, the less the kick hurts", he advocated closer economic
ties between the non-Communist industrial countries and the Soviet Union.
The speaker had visited dozens of Soviet factories himself and talked with
many industrial managers there. He found the Russians eager to do business,
with the West, especially to acquire our technology, on the basis of multilateral
rather than bilateral exchanges. But it was particularly difficult for them to
adjust their system - which was quantitative, having started from a generalized
scarcity - to our qualitative system. The West should therefore take initiatives,
in GATT or elsewhere, to make institutional adjustments which would enable
each side to benefit from increased economic interchange.
Two other participants were less inclined to expect significant advances soon
in dealings with the Communist countries. An International participant
thought that Europe's trade with the Soviet Union might grow, but would be
less important than its relations with the Third World. Nor did he foresee much
commerce with China, regardless of China's attitude. A British speaker anti-
cipated that the Chinese would concentrate on trying to buy technology, and
would not allow their economy to be significantly affected by trade restrictions
which might be imposed by other countries.
Transnational investment issues
Several interventions touched on the role and behavior of the multinational
firm (MNF). An Australian speaker reported that among the MNFs active in
his country were both "good and bad corporate citizens". It was not a question
of black or white, but the world did need a code of behavior and responsibilities
applicable to MNFs and host countries alike.
A Canadian participant said that MNFs gave a promise of progress, but that
no means had yet been found to make them subject to political authority. The
widespread US control of industry in his country presented a unique problem
which could not be analyzed simply in terms of textbook principles of mobility
of capital and fixed exchange rates. While America's balance of payments had
been in the red year after year, its direct long-term investments abroad had
doubled in the 196os. This "new mercantilism" had caused feelings of exasper-
ated dependency in Canada, and the government was formulating a general
policy on the subject to safeguard national interests.
73
A compatriot, on the other hand, felt that the phenomenon of MNFs in gen-
eral gave no cause for alarm, as their activities were, in the end, subject to the
laws of host countries. He could see that their operations abroad might detract
from employment and exports at home, but' he was not sure that there were
serious economic disadvantages to the host countries.
The author of the American working paper replied that he had not meant to
suggest that the growth ofthe MNF was an ominous or dangerous development.
It was, however, a potential irritant in international relations. Perhaps more
European and Japanese firms would have to join the ranks of the MNFs before
we would recognize the need for a general framework of conduct.
The speaker went on to take issue with the contention that capital exports
were a new form ofmercantilism. His philosophy was that a logical corollary of
the free movement of goods was the free movement of capital. He added that
recent US experience did not de.monstrate the use of a balance of payments
deficit to buy up foreign industry. During the last five years, US income from
foreign investments was twice the amount pfcapital outflow.
A fellow American pointed out that the level of new US direct investment
had been declining in relation to the stock of existing investment. The outflow
in 1971 on direct investment account amounted to around $4 billion; about
half of this went to western Europe and there was virtually no net outflow to
Canada. These figures suggested the interesting question of how countries with
a large stock of US direct investments would manage to transfer the income on
it without a corresponding new inflow across their exchanges.
Another American participant addressed himself to a previous Canadian in-
tervention which had suggested that changes in the capital account should bear
a portion of the burden of balance of payments adjustment. In the speaker's
view that suggestion had indicated two erroneous assumptions:
(a) That the burden ofthe recent adjustment was infact being borne wholly by the trade
account. In truth, lastautumi:i's exchange rate changes would have major effects
on international capital movements as well as on the trade account. Foreign
direct investment by US firms would be less than it would otherwise have been,
and direct investment in the US by foreign firms would be greater.
(b) That at{justment via the trade account tended to export unemployment, whereas
changes in the capital account did not. International shifts in employment were ef-
fected through changes in capital movements, as well as through changes in the
trade balance. Ifthe US, for example, faced the alternatives ofan increase in its
trade surplus or a reduction in capital outflows, it was not clear at the outset
which would have a greater effect in exporting unemployment. The AFL-CIO
74
in the US was more opposed to foreign investment by US firms than to imports
from abroad, on the grounds that it exported jobs. The TUC was taking a
similar position in the UK. In the speaker's view, many foreign investments did
not export jobs, but some of them did. The implication that a reduction in
foreign investment could be accomplished without shifting jobs, whereas an in-
crease in the trade surplus necessarily changed jobs internationally, was wrong
and could lead to erroneous policy implications.
International monetary reform
An American participant said that the reconstruction of the world economic
system would have to take account of a fundamental change in US objectives
and attitudes. Until last year, the US had followed a policy of "benign neglect"
toward its balance ofpayments. Although this had not always been appreciated
abroad, it had provided an umbrella under which trade liberalization and
economic integration could flourish. Other nations were enabled to run massive
trade surpluses and increase their reserves. The US had now "joined the mer-
cantilist race''. It wanted to play by the same rules of the game as the others,
which would greatly complicate the coordination of international economic
policies.
The recent breakdown of the monetary system had not occurred for the
reasons that Professor Triffin had been warning about for the past 15 years -
that the build-up of dollar holdings around the world would "come home to
roost", thus forcing the US off the fixed convertibility of the dollar. It had re-
sulted instead from this US decision to stop financing its payments deficit and
to assert the sovereign right of initiating changes in its exchange rate to make
the necessary adjustment. As the international role of the dollar and the in-
flexibility of the Bretton Woods rules made it seemingly impossible for the US
to achieve this adjustment unilaterally, as most other countries could, the
American administration was constrained to take the measures of August 15,
which the speaker personally deplored.
In his judgment, whatever new adjustment process was devised should
permit the US to take initiatives to change its exchange rate, for two reasons:
(a) The exchange rate was the on{y effective means whereby the US could adjust its
balance ofpayments. Foreign trade was too small a part of its economy to allow a
correction in the external payments position through an adjustment in the
internal level ofdemand. In some situations, the reduction ofexcessive inflation
for domestic reasons would incidentally help the balance of payments position,
but there were times, such as the present, when the high unemployment level
75
ruled out deflationary policies sufficient to affect the balance of payments. The
other alternative, control over external transactions, had proved relatively in-
effective.
(b) The US could change its excha12ge rate more easi(J' tha12 could other cou12tries. As
the external sector in the US was relatively small, compared for instance with
Canada, Germany or Benelux, a change in the exchange rate had less domestic
economic impact and was thus less difficult politically.
For these reasons, it appeared desirable to look to US-initiated exchange rate
changes to provide sorne of the stabilizing element that had been supplied in
the past by the role of the dollar and the financing of US deficits.
In response to comments by a Netherlands and a French participant, who
had praised the wisdom of the founding fathers of the IMF, the American
speaker made it clear that he was not advocating floatirig rates, but more fre-
quent use of rate changes. This greater flexibility would indeed require inten-
sified international cooperation to avoid competitive devaluations.
The Netherlands participant reminded the meeting that in a world offloating
rates, which required no reserves, the IMF and Special Drawing Rights would
be superfluous - a point which was sometimes overlooked in monetary argu-
ments. He favored the Bretton Woods principle of tying a change in parities to
the concept offunclamental disequilibrium. Ifsomewhat greater flexibility were
now required, we should proceed very carefully in applying it, to avoid the
"beggar-my-neighbor" policies of the 1930s.
The speaker said that "a system which is at first sight one of fixed parities,
but allows so much scope for a change in parities that it is for practical purposes
almost a system of floating rates, is the worst possible solution, because it's no
system. It's between the one and the other, which could only create confusion".
A British participant feared that those, like himself, who believed that fixed
exchange rates were essential to a multilateral trading system, were rather
against the trend ofthe times. Many politicians with an insufficient understand-
ing of the subject were quick to blame our past difficulties on "the old-fashioned
rigidity of those who were not prepared to devalue when.ever it was conve-
nient". They did not appreciate that a question of central political principle
was involved, and they needed to be made aware that the convenience of uni-
lateralism in monetary arrangements bore a heavy price in political and trade
terms.
An argument for a system of fluctuating exchange rates was offered by a
Canadian participant. He recalled that the immediate postwar period had
been marked by generous American spending abroad for reconstruction. This
selfless mood had gradually evolved into one of "neo-mercantilism", culmi-
76
nating in the American measures ofAugust 1971, which were inevitable but ex-
cessive. The US, still in a strong net creditor position in the world, was aiming
nevertheless at a $7 billion trade surplus so as to be .able to continue to export
capital and build up assets abroad. ·
Undoubtedly the Bretton Woods system of fixed rates had assured convert-
ibility, encouraged trade, and promoted the growth of competitive, productive
enterprises on a global scale. The trouble was, we were all pursuing other ob-
jectives as well. Fixed rates favored external over internal equilibrium and, as
in any regime where prices are fixed, required that adjustments be made quan-
titatively. This system had thus stimulated trade as well as capital movements,
both short and long-term. Interdependence between countries had grown much
faster than it would have under floating rates, and the recent monetary crisis
was one result.
The Bretton Woods system had favored capital movements as an adjustment
mechanism, but they had taken on an unexpected importance and now present-
ed a series of problems. The speaker recommended going to the root of the
matter and considering the advantages of a system of fluctuating exchange
rates. The widening of bands was a step in the right direction, but we had to go
even further.
A Belgian participant remarked that the recently-devised "snake in the
tunnel" arrangement, while admittedly rather fragile, was a pragmatic transi-
tory solution. It provided the necessary stability for intra-European trade,
while permitting a wider margin of flexibility against the dollar. The latter
aspect was particularly important, as it was not healthy for Europe to be so
subject to all the influences which domestic US political and economic events
exerted on the dollar market.
This was not meant to imply a European lack of confidence in the funda-
mental strength of the dolla,r. On the contrary, the recent devaluation should
give the Americans an enormous advantage in the next two to three years,
since the present wage cost per unit of production, compared to a 1963 base,
was 107 for the US and 130 for Europe.
In another context, this speaker referred to the depressive, effect on' European
industrial growth that any reduction in military security would produce. The
young might welcome troop withdrawals, but the reaction of more mature in-
vestors might be to liquidate their Continental investments. The resulting capi-
tal shortage would force governments toward a more socialistic economic model,
which would bring us in the end nearer to the Soviet system.
With reference to the forthcoming negotiations for monetary reform, an Ame-
rican participant said that there was a great deal ofsentiment in his country for
a forum broader than the Group of Ten, to give a voice to the developing coun-
77
tries as well as some of the smaller industrial nations. He favored the proposal
for some kind ofgrouping within the IMF.
The agenda of these negotiations should distinguish between short and long
range perspectives. As for the near-term outlook for the US balance of pay-
ments, the immediate adverse effects of the exchange rate alignment on US
imports were obvious, but it appeared that the positive effects would evolve at
roughly the rate envisaged at the time of the Smithsonian Agreement. Shortri,m
capital flows had not been reversed as briskly as anticipated, but there had been
some return of funds to the US.
The short-run convertibility problem was essentially a technical one of
getting the IMF operating again, and discussions were underway on that. In
the longer run, convertibility was really a question of liquidity, and hinged on
the composition of international reserves and the procedure for converting
them. In the speaker's view, US reserve assets would not support an early
return to traditional convertibility, and an expanded role should be considered
for SDRs and similar instruments, all within the context of the IMF.
The Smithsonian Agreement had been a vote in favor of fixed exchange
rates, but to make that system work we would probably have to count on con-
tinued capital controls, as well as a more flexible rate adjustment mechanism.
A system of fixed rates among large trading blocs differed markedly from one
among a number ofsmaller units, so that European monetary integration would
eventually add another dimension to the picture.
A Belgian speaker commented that it was inconceivable that we could go
along indefinitely without some sort of international monetary agreement, in-
cluding resumption ofconvertibility. He hoped that his American friends eould
soon give some indication of when the IMF would be functioning again,
An International participant said that it would be a great mistake to base
permanent monetary reforms on the temporary situation of one country, even
ifthat country happened to be the most important one in the world. Everyone
was appreciative ofAmerica's postwar contributions to the Western communi-
ty, and recognized the special reasons for her balance of payments difficulties.
They were even prepared to exempt her from the embarrassing task, which had
fallen to so many other countries with payments problems, ofhaving to give the
IMF a letter indicating what domestic policies she intended to pursue to extri-
cate herself from her difficulties. But care should be taken not to let the short-
term concerns of one nation dominate the shaping of a long-term monetary
regime which would be applicable to all.
The remodeling of the economic and monetary system should not fail to take
account of the momentous changes facing the oil industry, according to a US
participant. Until the commercial advent of nuclear power in the I 99os, the 12
78
states represented by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
would control the world's major source of energy. In view of their present
demands, it looked as if the annual cost of US oil imports would jump from $3
billion last year to $20-25 billion in 1980. The Arab nations would then be the
great possessors of the reserves and the wealth.
Working together: institutions and attitudes
An International participant drew a distinction between two questions: (a)
To what extent were new institutional arrangements required generally for our
international cooperation? and (b) what kind of special institutional arrange-
ments were needed for the forthcoming negotiations on monetary reform and
trade liberalization?
The latter question was perhaps the more controversial one. There was some
sentiment, especially on the American side, for bringing the monetary and
trade talks together in a special forum, on the theory that sound monetary ar-
rangements had to be based on an appropriate trade policy and a strong US
balance of payments position. Most European countries and Japan, on the
other hand, feared that progress on monetary reform might be frustrated if it
were tied to concrete trade negotiations. However, they saw another way of
putting these two subjects into a single framework: by insisting on a restoration
of convertibility as a precondition of trade discussions. This was in line with
their conviction that trade liberalization depended on more interdependence,
greater international cooperation in creating equilibrium, and a stronger disci-
pline in turn in the monetary field.
In any case, there was likely to be general agreement on the need for some
degree of parallelism in these negotiations. In the speaker's opinion, existing
institutions, such as the IMF, OECD and the Group of Ten, could adequately
handle the various components of the trade and monetary issues. However, in
order to bring the developing countries also into the negotiations, the governors
of the IMF should perhaps come together to form a Group of Twenty. The
OECD could then provide the umbrella under which the components of the
trade and monetary negotiations could finally be merged in an agreed economic
policy.
On the question of more permanent arrangements, the speaker again be-
lieved that existing institutions were sufficient, although more attention would
have to be paid to the interaction of issues, as distinguished from national eco-
nomies. International commerce, for example, was affected not only by trade
policies as such (tariffs and quotas), but by a wide range ofother economic and
social policies (balance of payments, comparative inflation rates, exchange
79
rates, taxes, regional industrial programs, consumer and environmental poli-
cies, etc.). To avoid distortions oftrade, these sectoral policies had to be harmo-
nized, and the OECD was increasingly involved in this work of "horizontal-
izing" policies which had heretofore been dealt with mainly in a "vertical"
way.
The need for institutional continuity was stressed by another International
speaker, who believed that we should work from within the IMF and the
GATT to improve them. He was also looking to the OECD high-level group to
produce some imaginative proposals.
A German speaker said that the GATT ought to be preserved, in spite of its
defects. Reform of its activities could be progressive, starting perhaps with non-
tariff barriers, which held an interest for both industrialized and underdevel-
oped countries. The advisability of keeping existing specialized institutions was
endorsed by an Australian participant, who recommended, though, that coor-
dination among them be improved.
Reform ofthe IMF was supported by a Belgian intervention, which mention-
ed the possibility of creating a global central bank through the expanded use of
SDRs.
A German participant advocated the establishment of permanent institu-
tions through which a continuing dialogue could be maintained between the
US, Canada and Europe. Without that, the transatlantic coordination ofmone-
tary and economic policy would be impossible; it had proved difficult enough
just within the European Community. This proposal was seconded by a Swiss
speaker, provided that multilateral relations were not sacrificed. He went on to
express his concern with the emphasis on institutional reform, which tended to
sidetrack discussions from substantive to procedural questions: Existing institu-
tions such as the GATT would be able to deal with a wider range of problems,
such as agriculture and nontariff barriers, and OECD was the normal forum
for linking commercial and monetary matters.
The American author of the working paper reiterated that institutional
reform was necessary, but said that it would be stillborn if it were not backed
up by the resolution of member governments to make use of the institutions. If
there was no political will to act, "it will just mean more meetings and more
travel for the already badly harassed civil servants and ministers."
This speaker went on to record his reservations about "ad-hocery." This had
in fact been practiced to a significant degree in international economic relations
in the last 25 years; many of us had learned that it was a mark of wisdom and
maturity to get along by making compromises. But there was a fine line between .
pragmatism and opportunism, and the danger was in elevating "ad-hocery" to
the level ofa principle of action. It was still indispensable to have a common set
Bo
of objectives on which we could all move. This reaction was echoed by a
Netherlands participant, who regarded "ad-hocery" as a dangerous concept.
The 193os had furnished an example of the results of generalized "ad-hocery".
The post-war change to rules and institutions had been a notable advance.
The International author of the working paper sensed a basic division among
the participants about the value of "ad-hocery", and he felt that his defense .of
it ran counter to the mood of the majority, who were seeking more precise, con-
crete guideposts. But the speaker was convinced that we were entering a period
of great uncertainty. "We won't have free trade," he predicted, "and we won't
be protectionist; we will have "fair trade". We're not going to be dependent,
and we're not going to be independent; we're going to be interdependent.
We're not going to float, we're not going to have fixed rates; ifanything, we're
going to have a dirty float. We're going to internalize external costs. The
pillar of our thinking - GNP - is on the way to being obsolete. We don't know
any longer what are oui: domestic policies and what are our foreign policies. We
live in a world where everything has to be organized: fresh air is the result .of
organization. But at the same time we live in a world which, much more than
IO years ago, hates organization. We are going to be forced to live in larger and
larger units, but at the same time we are going through a period in which more
and more emphasis is put on local authority."
As long as we lacked a common set of coherent goals, it was better to stay
with "ad-hocery". The speaker recalled Lord Bryce's observation that the
greatness of Massachusetts lay in its exceptionally well-drafted constitution
and the rejoinder of another Briton, writing at about the same time, that "the
men of Massachusetts could make any constitution work."
Hopefully we would one day again have _better rules to guide us, but now
seemed to be a time in European-American relations when we would have to
look for "the men of Massachusetts," so to speak, instead of the constitution.
* *
*
An American participant, tying together a number of threads of the discus-
sion, said that he had been much taken by the notion of elevating "ad-hocery"
to the level ofprinciple. He understood the International author ofthe working
paper to have been warning against theoretical overprecision in a very practical
world - against what the poet had called "dreaming of systems so perfect that
none of us would have to be good". The speaker had been reminded too of
Churchill's description of the formulation of British policy: "When we draw a
line, we blur it."
With the measures taken last August 15, the US had "thrown all its chips
81
into the game". It had ended the temporizing and patchings of the present and
previous administrations, and it must now feel that results commensurate with
an initiative of this scope were essential. This would explain why the US was
unwilling to rush into negotiations on the reform of the monetary system until
the whole range of related issues had been laid on the table. Criticism of this
attitude, at home and abroad, was not altogether well founded.
The Smithsonian Agreement had been a very considerable one, with the
removal of the ro per cent US import surcharge, but concern had been ex-
pressed that more had not happened since then. The speaker did not feel,
though, that the follow-up had fallen behind schedule. A "clean" US gold bill
had been passed, and certain trade matters had been adjusted. There had been
a reaffirmation of the viability of the Smithsonian parities, which had helped to
stabilize the foreign exchanges. There was no evidence of an "engineered
delay" on the part of the US in proceeding to the negotiating table.
These were some of the "strategic" issues to be thought about before nego-
tiations began:
I. What did Europe want to become? How essential to the existence of the
EC was the Common Agricultural Policy in its present, very expensive, form?
What were the implications for the Eurodollar and Eurobond markets of the
narrow band of exchange rate fluctuations? What kind of capital controls
would be needed to "keep the snake from getting stuck in the tunnel"?
Recent amendments to British regulations permitted UK companies con-
trolled by EC nationals to raise in the UK all the finance required for their
operations there. Would this kind of discrimination against non-EC-controlled
companies raise the specter of retaliation? Would the EC monetary design be
clear at the summit in October, or earlier? This had some bearing on when
negotiations could usefully start. With how many voices would Europe speak?
2. What were the implications of the fact that the US was no longer the
only free world power? Did this mean that the asymmetrical postwar world, in
which the US had played a unique role as "buffer, provider and absorber", was
passe? Diel America's friends now accept that there was a more symmetrical
relationship, which allowed her to pursue her interests in the same way that
others could pursue theirs?
3. What was the national view about the priority of domestic as opposed to
international objectives in monetary matters? If the dominance of domestic
priorities was clear, we should have a floating exchange rate system, clean and
free. But this was obviously rejected by the Smithsonian Agreement.
The speaker did not believe that Ricardo was dead or that his law ofcompar-
ative costs had been repealed. It had perhaps been defied and submerged·
temporarily, but the world was still not rich enough to forget efficiency, unat-
82
tractive as that word might be. No one would be eager to buy stock, in his own
or any other country, that needed government intervention to protect it from
the law of comparative costs.
V\'e had to adhere to a system which would provide an external spur to
national governments to pursue policies that would keep their own money
"straight". This would mean that, where domestic priorities were regarded as
predominating, the measures to effect them had to take into account the inter-
national repercussions. For example, there was the trade-off between inflation
and unemployment. The US did not intend to tolerate an unemployment level
of six, five, or maybe even 4.5 per cent. But there were different ways to ap-
proach this which had greater or less impact on America's international ac-
counts. The US might have to resort to such devices as public service jobs to
bring down unemployment the last one-half or three-quarters per cent to an
acceptable level. The same approach was applicable to agriculture.
4. There was now wide agreement about the need for parallel or contempo-
raneous negotiations on related matters. The time schedule for trade and mone-
tary negotiations might be different, but they required coordinated direction.
Once we had developed some clear views about these "strategic" issues,
negotiations could proceed fairly directly on what one could call "tactical"
matters: amendment of the IMF articles on parity changes; the "dollar over-
hang"; sanctions to be applied to surplus as well as deficit countries, etc. Such a
prospective schedule - getting to the conference table later this year - did not
pose any great threat to the unravelling of the parities established last Decem-
ber, although there might occasionally be waves of uncertainty.
Bernard Shaw had once observed that man was wise, not in proportion to his
experience, but in proportion to his capacity for experience. The speaker was
convinced that the Bilderberg Meetings had over the years helped its partici-
pants enlarge that capacity in addressing the future. All ofus who were engaged
in getting the world's work done, whether in the private or the public sector,
had to seek to do it better, and more humanely, with more responsiveness to the
wishes of the people in our different societies. Thereby the constraints of need
would be lifted from more and more people, and the vista opened to a fuller,
more rewarding life in a world community made safer and more secure. In so
doing, we should have met the most demanding standards that we could set for
ourselves.
* *
*
83
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
The new geometry efAsian relations
An American participant offered the following generalizations in his reaction
to the working papers:
1. A loosely-knit multipolarism was making its appareance on the global
scene, with special consequences in Asia. It made more sense to conceive of this
as a modified alliance system than as "equidistant multipolarism" (which was
unrealistic and therefore dangerous).
2. The credibility ofSoviet power was at an all-time high in east Asia, despite
the partial demise of bipolarism. But this power now had to be concentrated in
Asia largely on the containment of China. "Having been the staunchest critics
ofJohn Foster Dulles during his lifetime, the Russians were proving themselves
to be his most apt pupils."
3. The uncertainties surrounding China's future role in Asia related at least
as much to domestic Chinese trends as to foreign policy decisions. Internal
political instability was likely to continue in the years immediately ahead.
Could it be contained at elitist levels, or would it seep down into the broader
reaches of society? China's present policy seemed to be to resist Soviet contain-
ment while seeking a dialogue with the US, so as to increase its flexibility; to
weaken the non-Communist alliance structure in Asia; and to contain Japan
politically and militarily, if not economically. China had also given notice
that she intended to be a nuclear power and to play a special role in Asia.
4. The credibility of the US was currently in doubt in many quarters in Asia.
The transition from an American-centered east Asia to a multipolar Asia had
been a traumatic experience for many Asian states and leaders. Paradoxically,
the Asians tlid not question America's military power, but its will; and not its
economic strength but the capacity of the US government and private sector
to bring the economy into shape. Despite these uncertainties about American
policy, the US was still the only omnipresent force in Asia, and the only one
with maximum flexibility.
America stood at the apex ofthe two Asian triangles: the Russian/American/-
Chinese triangle, important to the issues of peaceful coexistence and weapons
control; and the Japanese/American/West European triangle, vital to the eco-
nomic health of both advanced and developing nations. By virtue of these two
triangles, it was essential that western Europe be connected with Asia to insure
a peaceful Japan oriented towards the West.
Whether the broader strategy of a political-military equilibrium would work
for Asia hinged upon an acceptance by all the major powers of the basic rules of
that game and America's willingness to play a role in it. Asia presented several
differences from Europe: the status quo was less firmly established, the risk of
local war much greater, the range of ideological and power cleavages wider.
Political instability among some of the key actors was a critical and unpredict-
able variable. The China/USSR relationship would be conditioned by internal
developments in each of those countries, and Japan was moving into a stage of
indecisiveness. Equilibrium in Asia depended considerably on having strong US
and western European sides to the second triangle.
A French participant had found the working papers useful in explaining how
political and economic factors were taking their place alongside military power
in determining the balance in the Far East. His own judgment was that Japan,
although primarily involved with her economic and social development, could
not afford to neglect security considerations, being confronted with two con-
tinental nations - China and the USSR - who now seemed aimed at building
their power in Asia on military rather than economic foundations. At the same
time, Japan was not at ease in the traditional game ofbalance ofpower politics.
The speaker did not agree that the Russians were treading warily in Asia.
Not only were they very active, but they were often imprudent, as with their
interference in the ludo-Pakistan war. In Vietnam, it seemed possible that the
Russians, who had done so much to fuel the Communist offensive, might now
prefer a victory of sorts for Saigon, which would permit further Soviet maneu-
vering against China. Anticipation of this might be a factor in China's desire
for rapprochement with the US. A combination ofJapan, China and the US
against the Soviet Union was in a way more plausible than a combination
against China by the other three. In any case, China wanted to draw as far as
possible away form Russia, her principal adversary.
The speaker agreed in principle that the non-Communist nations should
make use of frequent multilateral consultations in seeking an equilibrium in
Asia, but he was sceptical about getting rising powers such as Japan and the
European Community to put their own interests in second place in cooperating
on this. We were already asking Japan to pay special attention to the Third
World, to southeast Asia, to her links with the US- all ofwhich was perhaps too
much to expect of a single country. It might be necessary to wait for the estab-
lishment of a firmer status quo before expecting such generosity.
A German participant pointed out that the pattern of the old European
balance of power had always been three states united to contain the ambitions
of a fourth. In Asia today there were four main powers, but it seemed unlikely
that there would be a consensus for very long between even two. We could
therefore not expect stability, but the instability of changing combinations. If
Japan agreed today to cooperate with Russia in developing Siberia, she would
84 85
"""
feel obliged tomorrow to make a conciliatory gesture towards China. While
making such a forecast, however, the speaker recalled that nearly every forecast
of the past 25 years about Asia had proved wrong. We had felt that interna-
tional Communism was bound to be strengthened by the Communist take-over
of China in 1949, but in fact it had thereby been weakened more than by all the
efforts ofAmerica and Europe combined.
A Turkish intervention alluded to the conclusion of the British working
paper that Asia was likely to see a modified version of the status quo, with the
notion of spheres of primary interst replacing that of spheres of influence. The
speaker felt that this would produce a most unstable equilibrium, which would
bring us back before long to the old balance of power based on the central role
of the US (as the only global power) combined with that ofJapan.
According to a Swiss participant, the concept of a balance of power was not
suited to today's realities. In the nuclear age, power could not be measured ob-
jectively. It lay in the credibility of a nation's willingness to take great risks,
and the balance could thus easily be tipped by the leaders ofone country. More-
over, the balance ofpower was essentially a status quo system, which frustrated
the efforts ofnations to move towards a closer community. The speaker believed
that we should concentrate on finding a system which would allow cooperation
among all states - even the Soviet Union and China.
For the present, though, the overwhelming Chinese emotion was fear of, and
hostility toward, Russia. This was the observation of a British participant who
had recently visited parts of western China that had heretofore been inacces-
sible to Westerners. The Chinese looked upon their road-building collaboration
with Pakistan there as a means of preventing the build-up of Soviet power in
the area. This explained why the Russians were taking such an active interest in
India's repossessing enough of Kashmir to allow them an entry into India by
another route, bypassing Afghanistan.
The speaker's Chinese friends had told him that they had not gone to the aid
ofthe Pakistanis, as they had promised to do, because they had been threatened
with a preemptive nuclear strike. Whether the Russians would in fact have
carried this out was immaterial; the point was that the Chinese believed there
was sufficient risk ofit to hold them back at a moment when their troops were
actually in a position to invade. The speaker had concluded that the geometric
balance of power in Asia - which was unlikely to be a neat arrangement of
three or four sides - was going to be shaped above all by this overriding Sino-
Soviet hostility, with China looking for all the allies she could possibly find. He
saw little probability, though, of a Russian-Japanese combination directed
against the other powers.
A Portuguese participant agreed that the Chinese feared the Soviet first-
86
strike capability to demolish their nuclear installations more than they feared a
remilitarized Japan. They might in fact be led to believe that, ifJapan became
a nuclear power, the 'Russians would hesitate to strike China for fear ofarousing
Japan. The American economic measures oflast August, and President Nixon's
trip to Peking, had marked the end of the postwar period of ideology and lofty
principles. The world had embarked on a practical course where only national
interests and the realities of power counted. There was more promise now of a
accommodation through negotiation, of a peaceful balance of power through a
fair distribution of spheres of influence. But it would be difficult for a long time
for any of the Western nations besides the US to play a significant part in the
Far East, and the US would not find it easy to choose the right allies or partners.
An Australian speaker wondered whether it was valid to think ofa balance in
the Far East based almost solely on the roles and policies of the major powers,
assigning a virtually passive role to the lesser powers and developing nations in
the region. The author of American working paper "D" had concluded that
China's power (i.e., her capacity to influence) was derived not from her eco-
nomic strength but mainly from her sheer mass of Boo million people, which
entitled her to one of the sides of the quadrilateral. But in the center of that
quadrilateral lived l,ooo million other people. Ifwe were concerned militarily
and politically with the "doughnut", we could not overlook the "hole", and the
forces at work there representing the will of those people.
The speaker was not convinced that the Russians or the Chinese would
accept the notion of spheres of influence in Asia, but if one presupposed the
creation of a nice balance around the edges, there might be some interesting
"ecological changes" in the center. The concept of the Indochinese states
fighting for their ideals, for instance, would acquire a new reality, as would the
efforts of Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore in
connection with their own development. India, although lacking the industrial
strength of Japan and the ideological strength of China, was an important
power and should not be regarded as committed to the USSR.
A fellow Australian agreed that it would be a mistake, in articulating a
sensible Far Eastern policy, to overlook the forces at work in Southeast Asia,
and he cited four recent developments there:
1. The creation ofthe Association ofSoutheast Asian Nations (ASEAN), composed
of Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, the Philippines and Thailand. Started as a
regional economic and cultural organization, it had recently put more emphasis
on political and security matters, although it was nowhere near being a defense
alliance.
87
2. The proposalfor the neutrali;;ation efSoutheast Asia, put forward by Malaysia,
had been accepted in varying degree by the other members of ASEAN. The
leader of the Malaysian delegation to a recent ASEAN ministerial meeting had
declared that "this policy is meant to be a proclamation that this region of
ours is no longer to be regarded as an area to be divided into spheres of in-
fluence by the big powers".
3. Ceylon's proposalfor the neutrali;;ation of the Indian Ocean, originally adopted
by the Lusaka conference of nonaligned nations in 1970, had been forcefully
defended at the recent Commonwealth heads of government conference in
Singapore. Although not yet widely accepted outside the region, this proposal
was important to those countries who feared that the Indian Ocean was in
danger of becoming a "big power playground".
4. The recent declarations by Malaysia and Indonesia that the Straits efAfalacca were
territorial waters. This had thrown these countries into conflict with Japan,
whose oil tankers passed through the Straits and who therefore wanted them
classified as international waters.
Such developments as these indicated that an allocation of Asian spheres of
influence among the great powers might not be workable.
An American participant said that a balance of power did not need to imply
spheres of influence, and she suggested that a more appropriate concept for
some areas of the world, including Southeast Asia, was what Elliot Richardson
had called "spheres of restraint". This was a useful corollary to the expansion
of regional action described by preceding speakers, and would be even more
relevant after the Vietnam war.
Apropos of Vietnam, a Swiss participant wondered what effect the future
political organization of that country would have on the various power rela-
tionships under discussion. He also questioned the value ofmilitary alliances in
preserving equilibrium in Asia.
The author of the British working paper commented on several of the pre-
ceding interventions. The intended thrust of his paper had been to say that no
set of power relationships in Asia would work if the major actors sought exclu-
sive spheres ofinfluence (as the Soviets did in eastern Europe), which should be
distinguished from areas of primary interest, based on historic or commercial
reasons. The "spheres ofrestraint" concept was an even better way ofputting it,
but this question of restraint was going to apply to Japan as well as the other
countries.
He did not mean to underestimate countries like Indonesia, but he still be-
lieved that the Indian subcontinent was more likely to be an object than a
88
subject ofpolicy. Regional groupings such as ASEAN were tremendously signi-
ficant, and the European powers could play a great part in helping to underpin
them, both individually as nations and as collectivities. Australia was to be
commended for the work she was already doing in this respect.
If, as suggested by a British participant, one forecast a protracted Sino-
Soviet conflict (not necessarily military), that would produce a 2-1-1 relation-
ship, which would be more stable than a r-1-1-1 relationship, and the unstable
changing combinations predicted by a German speaker would be less likely.
In such a situation, the US would have greater freedom of action than any of
the other three partners, but the management of the Asian relationships would
require a great deal ofprofessional diplomatic skill; it could not be clone by "ad
hoc little teams in the White House".
The author of American working paper "D" was in agreement about the
stability of a balance of four powers, but he thought that much depended on
Japan's future relations with the West. An alienated, strongly nationalistic
Japan could be the power that shifted back and forth, that no one could quite
count on, and that would produce a very unstable balance indeed.
Ingredients efthe Japanese situation
The special ingredients ofJapan's situation were analyzed in several inter-
ventions.
A US participant expressed general agreement with the introductory remarks
of the author of American working paper "D'', but said he would disagree on
one or two points. Like England, Japan was an island country lying off the
coast ofa great continent, and the historical dilemma of the Japanese had been
continental involvement versus isolation. Over the years, Japan had varied in
her choice: at times intimately involved with the continent, at times quite
separate from it. A related dilemma had been whether to have alliances close at
hand and an intense regionalism or alliances with separate and far distant areas.
Jn modern times, Japan had generally formed alliances out of Asia to support
her policies in Asia, notably with the British early in this century and with the
Americans since the last war. These dilemmas were not over. Various psycho-
logical and immediate political pressures were pushing Japan back toward in-
volvement with the continent, hopefully not on the basis of the r93os but in a
new way.
Projections indicated that Japan's economic relations would be predominate-
ly with the advanced West until at least well into the next decade. The success
of these trade relations would determine to a large degree whether we could
work out a strategy for a broad balance of power encompassing Asia and the
89
industrialized West. In the political sphere, instability might grow inJapanjust
as it was inevitable in China. Japan had no consensus on foreign policy, but the
speaker believed that a majority of conservatives and a number of moderates
preferred a modified alliance with the US. Public opinion figures, however,
showed a trend favoring neutralism and a broad accommodation with China in
both the economic and political spheres. Conservatives would ideally like to
transfer their China policy from recognition of Taipei to recognition of Peking,
but with continued economic ties with Taiwan. Pressures were strong, though,
for a "total Peking solution".
In the military sphere, the speaker did not think that present trends were
toward remilitarization. In his view, Japan would keep her military options
open, and the answers to these two questions would influence her ultimate
decision:
I. Would a substantial external threat be perceived, from China or elsewhere? At the
moment, no such threat was felt, so public and elitist opinion was far from
agreed on accelerated military development, let alone nuclearization.
2. Could some degree ofcredibility in the American military commitment be maintained?
In sum, this participant expected Japan for the time being to be occupied with
a minimal role in Asia, not a maximal one, and to be handicapped at home
with confusion and indecision in her policy making. This would make it difficult
to achieve a viable military-political equilibrium in Asia.
The author of American working paper "D" intervened to say that he had
not meant to suggest that Japan would become a nuclear power in the near
future. What he anticipated, though, was thatJapan would try to normalize her
relations with China, to reestablish her Asian ties and roots; that neutrality
would eventually give way to Sino-Japanese rivalry; and that forces would
then build up leading Japan to rearm and to develop a nuclear capability. The
speaker recognized that this would entail an agonizing change in the Japanese
constitutional systen1, but he suspected that their ability to further stretch their
constitution was considerable.
The references in the preceding speaker's working paper to China's interest
in seeing the US denied use ofJapanese bases for the defense of Taiwan and
Korea elicited an intervention from another American participant. He noted
that the Japanese had sometimes been compared rather simplistically to a
school of fish, who would rapidly turn course and dart off in another direction
ifa stone were thrown in front of them. While the Chinese undoubtedly wanted
further reductions in American forces in East Asia, one suspected that they
might prefer to have the US "move out very slowly indeed", for fear of what
go
the Russians might do in the event of a sudden vacuum. Thus the "Japanese
school of fish", deflected by China, might find themselves "swimming in be-
tween the American rock and the Chinese shoal, in a kind of tripartite arran-
gement, designed primarily to deal with the immediate concern that both the
US and the Communist Chinese have over the power of the Soviet Union."
An American participant who had recently spent a year in Japan and else-
where in the Far East commented on the implications of internal Japanese
political developments. Prime Minister Sato's expected successor, Mr. Tanaka,
was a much younger man representing an altogether new generation. To sense
what this change would mean to Japanese-American relations, an analogy to
German politics was useful. In terms of orientation, Mr. Sato was comparable
to Dr. Adenauer, Mr. Ohira, the foreign minister, to Dr. Erhard, and Mr.
Tanaka to Mr. Barze! or Mr. Strauss, "without Chancellor Brandt in between".
Thus we would experience, as it were, an abrupt transition "from Adenauer to
Barzel/Strauss without the intervening decade".
This important change would coincide with a period of social and political
fragmentation within Japan, in which the ruling LDP party was losing support
and would be less able to govern effectively. For this reason, the speaker was not
inclined to agree with the forecast in the preceding intervention about Japan's
"going nuclear", which would require more political cohesion. In his view, the
danger in the intermediate longer run was not that Japan would become a
major negative force in international affairs, but that she would fail to be a
constructive force.
Another significant current development had to do with the return this year
of Okinawa from t 1e o Japan. Part of that island chain had recently been
identified as potentially ric ·n oil, a matter of tremendous importance to the
Japanese. However, both Chinas were claiming sovereignty over these islands,
and there was a clanger that either of them might try to plant' its flag there in
the near future. The US was adopting a neutral position in the matter, which
infuriated the Japanese body politic.
Thus, for the first time in 25 years, the Japanese would be left alone to assert
one of their national rights without assistance from the US, which would have
a negative effect on Japanese-American relations. This issue illustrated the in-
security ofJapan, which was the most isolated of all the world powers. It now
had no intimate association with any major foreign government, and no natural
geographical role to play. China had mainland Asia, Indonesia was becoming
the dominant offshore southeast Asian power, and India was asserting itself as
an important regional power. But Japan had no point of reference. She was no
longer an Asian power in terms ofeconomic development, and was not satisfied
to be a junior partner in an increasingly unpredictable relationship with the
91
'!
iO
US. After World War II, the project of a united Europe had given a sense of
direction to Germany, but Japan had no equivalent. This made it all the more
important for the West as a whole, not just the US, to try to create a wider
framework for Japanese involvement, designed to give the Japanese a sense of
political direction.
The suggestion ofa wider framework for Japanese participation was endorsed
by the author of the British working paper, who felt that it behooved the inter-
national community to treat Japan with as much magnanimity and respect as
possible. As soon as Europe was organized to speak with one voice, he would
be happy to see one of its two seats on the UN Security Council given to the
Japanese.
A Turkish speaker suggested that NATO might be a convenient place in
which to discuss ways of bringingjapan into a closer association with the West.
He added that there was no reason to expect that Japan would continue in-
definitely to be an exception to the modern rule that the effective deployment
ofeconomic and political power depended on a strong military infrastructure.
An American participant with important diplomatic experience in Japan
was optimistic about the prospects of her remaining oriented toward the West.
Given her desire to enhance her position in the world community, where else
could she turn but to the US and Europe? The speaker would have liked to see
President Nixon give the Japanese at least 48 hours' advance notice of his
Peking trip announcement, but that was apparently impossible in view of
secrecy requirements. It should be borne in mind, though, that the Japanese
had sent dozens ofmissions to Peking over the years. In any case, there remain-
ed a reservoir of friendship and good will toward the Americans in Japan
dating from their postwar reconstruction work.
A view sharply in contrast to several of the preceding interventions was of-
fered by a Portuguese participant. He predicted that it would be impossible to
draw Japan away from China and to lead her to cooperate with the West in
any stable and prolonged way. The Japanese would accept Western help to
the extent needed to regain their empire (economically speaking), but they
could not afford to watch the Chinese developing separately and indepencJently.
The risk for them was that the Chinese would gradually oust Japanese com-
merce from Eastern and other markets in the same way that the Japanese had
ousted American, British and other European enterprise from those markets.
The speaker compared Japan's present situation to that at the beginning of this
century, when she found it useful to have an alliance with Great Britain, then
the foremost global power. For similar reasons, it had been in her interest after
the last war to be allied to the US. Sooner or later - "and probably rather soon-
er than later" - Japan would rearm and go her own way again in the Far East.
92
I
L
A Swiss participant said that for Japan to cooperate effectively in a larger
community, it had first to "find its identity''. This was a task it had to accom-
plish alone, not by seeking help in the Western countries or elsewhere. In this
context, Japanese nationalism was not seen as a bad thing.
A Danish participant sought to explain Japan's insular mood by reference to
currents in her past. Although the Japanese had a warrior tradition, they had
not been an expansionist people during the larger part of their history. In the
first half of this century, they had copied Western methods of military and
colonial expansion with tragic efficiency. The dismal outcome of these adven-
tures had left a deep mark on the national character. A senior official in the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs, recently returned from duty abroad in important
Western capitals, had remarked to the speaker: "Those were eight years torn
out of my Japanese life". A people as inner-directed as the Japanese - including
the younger generation - would be rather slow in changing from their present
attitude of foreign noninvolvement, of "faceless friendliness to all". This policy
had served Japan well in the past, and presumably could still do so in a period
of changing power relationships in east Asia.
Fundamentals qf the East-West relationship
A number ofspeakers addressed themselves to the question ofthe assessment of
East-West relations contained in the Netherlands/International working paper.
As viewed by an American observer, Soviet policy towards Europe, while re-
flecting certain continuing objectives as defined in the working paper, was
operating in a vastly different international context, which itself was changing
the character of that Soviet policy. For much of the cold war, Soviet foreign
policy had been essentially regional, with Europe as the focal point. Today its
European policy was one important aspect of a Eurasian policy covering a
series of interrelated objectives pertaining to that continent as a whole. It was
essentially defensive in the Far East, particularly with respect to China. The
recent diplomatic maneuvers toward Japan had been designed to offset the new
American-Chinese dialogue. But Soviet policy tended to be politically more
offensive elsewhere - in the Middle East, in south Asia, and in the Mediter-
ranean (where it was combined with the defensive objective ofconsolidating the
Soviet position in eastern Europe).
In the context of this Eurasian policy, the USSR was aiming to neutralize
western Europe politically, dealing from a bloc approach but bilaterally with
individual European states. It was exploiting US fatigue, the new strategic
parity, and the absence of any cohesive Western concept of future East-West
relations.
93
Although the Soviet Union was perhaps doing reasonably well with this
policy, it was pursuing it in the face of some basic weaknesses which could
vitiate it in the long run. For one thing, Russian leadership was in the hands of
an aging political elite, which had not been changed in character for a decade.
It was cohesive in composition but divided in outlook, disagreeing over such
issues as the Ostpolitik and dealings with the US and with China. Once this
fragmentation became dominant, or key leaders passed from the scene, the very
cohesive character of the leadership would quickly force qualitative changes.
This would produce a "generational jump", with all its unforeseeable conse-
quences.
Secondly, the USSR was pursuing this policy from an inadequate economic/-
technological base, which it was seeking to improve by utilizing Western
cooperation. Thirdly, the problem of nationality tensions was increasingly
evident in the Soviet Union, and promised to intensify in the coming decade.
Finally, there were troubled relations in eastern Europe, with Rumania,
Yugoslavia, and even such a loyal associate as Hungary.
A Norwegian speaker suggested that higher standards of consumer consump-
tion in the Soviet Union and other Eastern countries, combined with the effect
of the new Communist center in China, were bound to produce political and
even strategic changes in the East. But one would have to be very far to the left
to deny that there were still dangers on the northern flank of NATO and else-
where in the world. One reason for Russia's opposition to the extension of the
EC was that a united Europe appealed to the younger generation and offered
them a possibility of remodeling their society.
An Italian participant agreed with the assumption of the two working papers
that the basic Russian strategy was unchanged, although tactics might have
been modified. Westerners who looked hopefully for a sudden Soviet change of
attitude did not understand the pace of life in the East, which was a very dif-
ferent world. There was a fundamental contradiction between the Soviet and,
say, the American way of reacting to domestic weaknesses. The former was to
take an expansive, outward-looking position in order to strengthen the rule at
home; the latter was to turn inward.
A French participant stated that the West had been mistaken in supposing,
in the early cold war days, that the Soviet Union intended generalized aggres-
sion against western Europe. Even in 1947-48, Stalin had not envisaged that.
But it was equally wrong now to attribute to the Russians the same open-
minded aspirations for goodwill and mutual understanding that we felt in the
West.
As others who were acquainted with the Soviet Union could confirm, this was
a totally secondary matter to them. They might not be planning aggression, but
94
neither were they seeking abstract equations such as a balance of power or
preservation of the status quo (except in those exceptional areas where the
status quo was satisfactory to them). They always tried simply to obtain what
they felt like having, and their objective was an expansion of the socialist
regime abroad. They needed international conflict and tension to induce their
people to submit to domestic restrictions. The West should therefore have no
illusions about the Russians agreeing to a detente, which would in turn unlock
the solutions to all our problems.
An Italian speaker said that the Russians, having achieved the rank of a
Eurasian continental power, would now concentrate on the steps needed to
become a global power (to which Europe, Japan and China could not aspire,
being pre-empted by Soviet-American competition). This involved carrying
out "the master plan of the czars", as Stalin had mentioned to Hitler: control
of the Dardanelles, the Suez Canal, and the fertile Mesopotamian crescent. The
Russians wanted to "work on the world chess board" and they had already
moved their pawns rather far. The crucial area now was the Middle East, the
turntable between the Atlantic and Pacific worlds, where the Soviet Union was
using the Arab-Israeli conflict to advance its own interests.
Continuing with the chess analogy, a Netherlands participant remarked that
the West was "playing with the black pieces", i.e., it presumably would never
attack. As so many arms could now be launched at zero hour, the advantage of
being able to take the initiative was greater than ever; therefore, the player
with the black pieces should have more pieces than his opponent. Yet the
Soviets, with 160 divisions and 9,800 combat aircraft, were adding to their
military capability by building up a powerful navy. Their maritime presence
was now global and they had more submarines on the high seas than the
Germans did during the last war. They were continuing to increase their forces
in Europe, where they already outnumbered NATO two to one in most con-
ventional fields. Diel all of this indicate a real desire for cletente? Obviously
Soviet policy was shaped by complex and inarticulate factors, but what was
going on in the "think tanks" in Moscow? A Norwegian participant was
thinking along the same lines. As we watched the overwhelming Russian forces
being strengthened every clay, was it not prudent to assume that the Soviet
leaders had not abandoned their ambition to dominate Europe?
A Portuguese speaker conceded that a drastic change in the situation of the
Soviet Union was not impossible. It could be brought about by new leadership,
by the secession of the Baltic states, the Ukraine or other Soviet republics, or by
Chinese domination of Siberia. For the foreseeable future, though, Russia
would be the principal adversary of the West. So long as that was the case, one
could not rule out the possibility of a general and global war. Technology
95
changed a great deal, but not human nature. In the speaker's words, "wars are
an outcome of the existence of unprotected wealth, and that is precisely what
we mean when we speak about responsibility and leadership - the protection
of that wealth. As long as wealth exists in the world, there are bound to be wars,
and if we believe otherwise we are bound to suffer many disillusions".
According to an American participant, more and more people over the past
decade had become willing to risk such disillusionment, believing that the risks
involved in containment and confrontation were now escalating, while those of
detente were not.
In the view ofan American participant, the present Soviet aim was clearly to
achieve strategic superiority, recognizing that there was a stabilization in the
center of the European :flank. Their objective was to increase their stability on
the Chinese border, and to erode the flanks on the north by the use ofsea power
in frequent exercises and demonstrations of force. Stated simply, they hoped in
time "to see Finland become a Latvia, Sweden become a Finland, Norway be-
come a Sweden, and to see Iceland eroded."
In the south, by a combination of sea power and the presence of military
forces, they were again aspiring to erode our flanks. Their efforts to open the
Suez Canal would undoubtedly be handled in a way to keep that sore open; the
last thing they wanted to see was an Israeli-Arab settlement. In the Pacific,
they sought to cow Japan and to continue their encirclement of the People's
Republic of China. One explanation of their activity in the Indian Ocean, as
offered by the author of working paper "C", was that they had perhaps been
reading a heavy diet of Admiral Mahan. Another, which the speaker was in-
clined to believe, was that they were seeking to compete with US influence, and
to encircle China. They might also be seeking to protect Soviet sea-based deter-
rent systems there, or to deny the US the opportunity of stationing its own
forces there. Above all, though, they were mindful ofthe fact that the oil of that
area was the jugular vein of the whole free world, and that a naval presence
gave them the capability to do something about it.
It was always dangerous to try to correlate naval presence and foreign policy
success, but the speaker believed that there was in fact a close correlation when
maritime power was married to an aggressive foreign policy. During the past
10-12 years, the Soviet presence in the Mediterranean had grown from zero to
r8,ooo ship/days a year, while the presence of the US Sixth Fleet had deterio-
rated from about 18,000 to 14,000 ship/days. The Russians had acquired access
to airfields in Syria and Egypt, and were constructing a naval base just east of
the Libyan border.
In the Indian Ocean, the US presence had remained relatively constant at
ahout 2,000 ship/days a year, while the Soviets' had grown from zero to about
96
4-5,000. With their achievements in Somalia and Yemen, the Russians could
control the Red Sea. They had acquired oceanographic and air landing rights
on the island of Mauritius, were attempting joint oceanographic efforts with the
Indians, and were prepared to begin using ship repair facilities in Singapore.
Perhaps they had not fully decided how they would use these new naval ad-
vantages, but merely sensed that they could "get the best possible deal from
strength." (Concern about the implications of this extensive Soviet naval
build-up, particularly in the Indian Ocean, was also expressed by an Australian
and a Swiss participant.)
The American speaker observed that the Russians had embarked upon
detente, but perhaps only "to permit them to further weaken our collective
resolve in order that they can continue with this rather peaceful reordering of
the world in their image." The American strategy - and hopefully that of the
free world - was to compete in the strategic field, at great expense on the part
of the US. It had been suggested that in the center the US should do less and
expect Europe to do more. In any case, there was .recognition that the US had
to do more on the .flanks to demonstrate its power and to try to settle the open
sore of the Suez Canal, to reduce the conflict in the Moslem world.
The speaker believed that the Nixon administration's efforts with regard to
detente were forcing the Soviet Union to do more with regard to the border
with Communist China. The American doctrine was clearly to reduce its land
forces in Asia and to convince Japan to do more, while temporarily holding in
the Indian Ocean. The US effort was based partly on the hope that in time the
Soviets would come to support detente for its own sake, and not for their own
venal purposes. Under the Nixon Doctrine, the US had reinforced the Mediter-
ranean during the Jordanian crisis, and the President had taken the politically
courageous decision to go into Cambodia, which had produced a tremendous
setback to Communist efforts there. He had again taken the courageous decision
to deploy a task force to the Indian Ocean, and he had now risked doing what
President Johnson had done, out of similar courage: losing domestic popular
support by endeavoring to deal with the recent massive form of conventional
invasion of South Vietnam.
These actions of the US administration embodied an attempt to give an ally
a capability to handle his problem with indigenous forces, while continuing to
provide "capital intensive" naval and air support. America's European allies
had reason to be considerably reassured by the success of these efforts.
Another American participant remarked that, if indeed the Nixon Doctrine
had been exemplified by the US invasion of Cambodia, the dispatch of a task
force to South Asian waters and the unilateral bombing of North Vietnam, then
possibly we should get rid of that Doctrine. It had, after all, been designed to
97
I
~
~
ii
~
I
~
t
l'l·I·
'
"
d
~
r
~
u
1.11
~
!'..'
~
r
,I
emphasize indigenous responsibilities, but in practice it was an ambiguous
"half-way house" which defied public debate and clarification.
Although the speaker had no nostalgia for the old kind of bipolar world, he
saw in these recent examples of American intervention a foretaste of the kinds
of problems the West would have to face in a multipolar world. The emphasis
on balance, realjlolitik, flexibility, unexpectedness and surprise as attributes of
leadership would serve to further separate the perception ofpolicy by the public
and the execution of policy by governments. It would tend to accentuate
"gamesmanship" (which was increasingly out of favor with a growing segment
of Western culture), and to release all of the competitive and frustrating im-
pulses that led to fragmentation of policy. Moreover, it threatened to obscure
the elan, the life force, of democratic societies which we had been striving to
uncover in many of these discussions.
The author of working paper "C" found distasteful some of the formulations
of the Nixon Doctrine which suggested that a five-power world had somehow
been brought into existence by a deliberate act of American policy. On the
contrary, it was something that had emerged and whose rules we had yet to
learn. An enormous part of world politics, including the whole field ofstrategic
relationships, was still governed by the bipolar relationship of the US and the
USSR. Nevertheless, there were five centers which had different degrees of
autonomy at quite different levels of power. If it could be preserved with
peace, this autonomy was not a bad objective. Coupled with diplomatic skill
and leadership, it offered an opportunity for identifying youth with its society.
It would be a great mistake to aim at a balance-of-power world as our ultimate
objective, especially in a world which generated as much power as ours did.
The American author of working paper "A" pointed out that much of the
discussion at the Conference had apparently proceeded from the premise that
the Soviet Union was indeed "the enemy". The speaker did not necessarily
disbelieve this assumption, but neither did he regard it as an article of faith, as
members of a somewhat older generation often did. For many, now in their
thirties and forties, who had been still quite young at the time of the Marshall
Plan, of Korea, of the Berlin blockade, the basic assumptions learned in the
immediate postwar and cold war period were not so deeply engrained.
This middle generation, while frequently impatient with the impracticalities
of the under-30 generation, was at the same time tempted to examine some of
those unquestioned premises on which much of our policy-making had been
based for more than 20 years. What if, for example, the basic assumption of
continuing Russian hostility were untrue? What if the actions of the Soviet
Union as we perceived them were based on the same misinterpretation of the,
future, tied to the thinking processes of the past? What if they were reacting to
98
us only because we reacted to them in the same way? Given the changes in
technology, in communications, in weaponry, in economic standards of living,
in the aspirations of our young people, should we not ask whether that single
principle which had had to guide our actions over the last 20 years was neces-
sarily the right one for the future? Admittedly there were lots of evil men in the
history books, but there were also many tragic cases ofmisunderstandings about
basic intentions.
A Turkish speaker asked whether, and how, the outlook of the West would
be any different if we assumed that Russia was in fact not our enemy. The re-
sponse of an American participant was that, to begin with, we could not
measure the degree of Russian hostility without knowning the extent of change
within the Soviet Union. But we should not act so as to make our assumptions
self-fulfilling prophecies. In reacting to the Soviet Union, we should leave open
the option for change within that country, and this latent possibility of change
was a compelling reason for promoting a "detente which is impregnated with
political content''.
Another US speaker observed that one's assessment of Soviet aims depended
more on one's experience than his age. He recalled the high hopes held by many
of his generation in 1944-45 that the West would be able to continue working
with our wartime Russian allies, and the abrasive shocks and gathering disil-
lusionment of the succeeding years. It was not until the Korean war, though,
that the American administration had been able to persuade the Congress to
approve the expenditures and the changes necessary to restructure the country's
security posture. Many, like the speaker, had thus come to their assessment of
the Russian menace "the hard way", and it was understandable that they had
read subsequent events in the light of that experience.
Those who had had the responsibility of dealing with policy matters in those
days talked to younger men today across a gap of experience, which was often
translated into a "generation gap". But it should not be forgotten that members
of an even older age group, such as Henry Wallace in the US, had held a view
very similar to that held by many young people today.
It was essential that we understand and debate the question of these under-
lying assumptions, and their significance for the future of that part of the world
that Bilderberg concerned itself with.
The American author of working paper "D" commented that the practical
conduct of foreign relations required at least some basic assumptions, which of
course had to be frequently reexamined. An assumption that the Soviet Union
was not aggressive or expansionary was unfortunately a dangerous one, though,
in view of the evidence to the contrary. The Soviet system was one which most
Westerners found abhorrent, yet the Soviet leaders believed it would prevail
99
and constantly said so. It was a closed society, both intellectually and physi-
cally. Moreover, the Soviet Union seemed engaged in an unremitting effort to
expand its territorial dominion. It had become a Mediterranean power and had
recently concluded with India a bargain whose import was not yet entirely
clear. A change in our assumptions did not seem warranted in these circum-
stances, and might involve us in very great difficulties.
An International participant reminded the conference that it had not been
mistrust by the West of Soviet intentions, but good faith bordering on fatal
naivete, that had led to Russian dominion over the states of East Europe. And
that had occurred at a time when the US, with its monopoly ofatomic weapons,
could have imposed its will on the globe. The West had given the Russians the
benefit of every doubt, and was apparently still inclined to do so. But the lessons
of the recent past did not justify our postulating "a peaceful Soviet Union,
misunderstood and afraid of aggression by the West, pining to establish a world
free from fear and based on the rule of law. Although many of our youngsters,
inspired by partially well-meaning but arrogant intellectuals, seem to follow
that dangerous line of thought, human nature has not suddenly changed for the
better; the same facts, circumstances and motivations which made for crisis and
war in the past are still there".
The speaker went on to point out that the proceedings of the Soviet Com-
munist Party congress had made clear that detente was designed to facilitate
Russia's expansionary moves. In addition, there were the facts of the Soviet
military build-up. During the last five years, Russian arms spending had in-
creased 15-20 per cent, whereas NATO during the same period had decreased
its expenditures by 3.6 per cent, while the GNP of the NATO countries had in-
creased by 26 per cent. All of this should serve to open the eyes ofcitizens of the
Western alliance.
A Norwegian speaker suggested that participants with differing views about
the extent of the Soviet menace might agree nevertheless on this proposition:
"Let's negotiate with the Russians; let's not look upon them as enemies. But
let's negotiate from strength. That's what it's all about."
The evolution qf Western public opinion
Alongside this problem of assessing Soviet intentions, there was the separate
but related question of the place of mutual security considerations in general as
an organizing principle of the Western community. The discussion on this
subject, to which a number ofparticipants contributed, touched at many points
on the current evolution of Western public opinion, particularly the attitudes of
the younger segments of it.
100
An American speaker thought that the West had been moving away from
opposition to the Soviet Union as a single organizing principle. In her view, it
was important to introduce more consciously a different organizing principle,
constructed along community-building or problem-solving lines. Where pos-
sible, one could try to bring the eastern European nations, the Soviet Union and
China into this problem-solving world, but as we would obviously make more
progress working with countries which shared our economic and cultural sys-
tems, we should not seek a universal approach in all cases. This problem-solving
approach was supported by a Canadian participant, who pointed out that
many problems which we used to think of as being national in scope were now
seen to be local manifestations of global problems.
An American speaker described the erosion in his own country ofthe political
will to respond to threats to our mutual security interests. Until very recent
years, sustaining a foreign policy in the Western industrial democracies had
been a relatively simple thing. The pressures of Soviet mobilization had been
felt by all, and the stakes in terms of economic, political and security interests
had been evident. The situation today was much more complex. Within the
last 20 years, the world had changed more in many ways than it had in all
previous recorded history. Unprecedented material prosperity had been match-
ed by severe social dislocation. Within its own borders, America now had an
"underdeveloped country" of some 30 million poor people, and the mood of
the entire nation had been altered by the long and costly Vietnam war. Cross-
currents in the daily news perplexed the man in the street. At the very moment
that the Vietnam conflict was being escalated to new heights, US Congres-
sional leaders were talking to Chou-en-lai, demonstrations were flaring up on
college campuses, the SALT talks were underway in Helsinki, and American
businessmen were welcomed in Moscow.
Against such a background, American political leadership today had an
extremely difficult job to evoke the continuing domestic political support on
which international commitments had to depend. Opinion polls had indicated
that the vast majority of the American public was no longer in favor of sending
US troops to the aid offoreign friends whose frontiers had been violated. It was
no good replying that these people had not learned their history lessons, and
that they did not appreciate the "grand design" that would have to be con-
structed even without their support. No Western democratic society could
pursue for long a foreign policy that did not have the backing of a substantial
body of public opinion. It was therefore incumbent on enlightened Western
leaders to try to repair this communication breakdown, to give new life to a
public understanding of our mutual security interests.
According to an International participant, the rapid but uneven rhythm of
IOI
change in many sectors of our life had made it increasingly difficult for the
public to understand the issues and to follow political leadership. It did no
good, though, simply to deplore this fact.
A Frenchman said that leaders should not be discmfragcd by contrary public
opinion but should surmount it to carry through the programs which they
reasoned were needed. A characteristic of contemporary society, as contrasted
with that of the early postwar period, was a general dissatisfaction with the
models of civilization in which we lived. We saw this expressed in various forms
of contestation in the West, but the phenomenon was even more accentuated in
the Eastern countries, where the intellectual elite had so little hope that they
gave up all interest in general or political problems. In both cases, the result
tended to be a blocking of the system.
An Icelandic participant spoke of the discipline needed in the West to meet
the challenge confronting us. Visitors to Russia saw monuments everywhere to
the heroes of World War II, which served to remind the people constantly of
the sacrifices needed to insure the defense of the homeland against invaders.
This was in sharp contrast with the VVest, where individuals went their own
way in pursuit of happiness, and the emphasis was on a wide range ofconsumer
goods to contribute to a higher standard of living. We certainly did not want
the Eastern system, but to preserve our free society the voters and taxpayers
would have to sacrifice some oftheir material goods. To convince them to do so,
political leaders had to communicate their ideals and their vision.
The need of a wider vision was also mentioned by a US speaker, who was
worried that isolated but powerful segments of American public opinion were
actively opposing many of the symbols and institutions ofinternational cooper-
ation that had been built up since the war. One way to help counter this trend
would be to include in such conferences as this more of the young people who
were on the threshold of responsibility for the conduct of foreign affairs. The
era of Marshall Plan cooperation had forged invaluable transatlantic acquain-
tanceships, and it would be useful ifthe same sort ofworking relationships could
be established among members of another generation.
A Netherlands participant criticized the responsible leaders in the West -
government officials, parliamentarians, university professors, trade union
leaders - for "retiring behind intellectual walls, saying to each other that it is
too difficult to explain to the man in the street" the advantages and the weak
points of the capitalist system. People were troubled by the dehumanization of
personal relations in our society; by the maldistribution ofour great wealth; by
the mistreatment of minority groups; by the job insecurity of industrial labor;
and by the inequality of educational opportunity. They did not understand
why large sums of money had to be spent for defense against the presumed
102
aggression ofa country that few had ever seen, while the aggression ofa friendly
nation was to be seen on television every day. Western society was not being
questioned because its political, economic or social systems were fundamentally
wrong, or because the critics had all turned Communist, but because people did
not feel that the society was any longer theirs, and could not understand why
they had to live as they did. An immense effort was required to promote edu-
cation, the quality of life and international solidarity. This would involve "an
enormous redistribution ofwealth and power, and a lot ofimagination".
A Portuguese speaker said that he did not know of a government anywhere
in the world that did not want to improve conditions, to make life better for
everybody, young and old alike. The issue was how to go about it, what meth-
ods to use to secure a common goal. Devising policies to control the use of re-
sources, to improve the quality of life, and so on, involved political decisions:
choosing the neighbors and friends who were able and willing to cooperate
with one. This brought us to the notion of spheres of influence, or spheres of
restraint, which were two sides of the same thing. The political life of the world
was thus organized through a sort ofseries of"solar systems", and the point was
to select the system to which it was in one's interest to belong.
The speaker suggested that many in the younger generation did not want to
concern themselves with such practical political matters. This was perhaps a
legacy ofthe cold war years, during which the youth of every country had been
subjected to an intense and bewildering variety of propaganda. It was now up
to experienced and responsible older people to elucidate their knowledge and
their values for the younger citizens.
A German participant did not see an end to the ideological contest con-
fronting the young. In Germany it might even intensify with the closer contacts
produced by detente. In the Federal Republic, for example, housing was scarce
and rents were high; in the German Democratic Republic housing was also a
problem but rents were low. In the GDR, primary education in many areas
was superior from a technical, pedagogical viewpoint to that in the Federal
Republic. From such comparisons, a new ideology was likely to emerge, not
only in Germany but elsewhere. The younger generation would no longer be
satisfied with answers which referred to permanent Soviet aims, to power
trapezoids and the like. The only way to appeal to them would be to propound
better alternatives within our own system. An appropriate slogan might be
"Detente begins at home."
According to another German participant, the ignorance of history and
weakened loyalty to the state which were characteristic of much of German
youth today were traceable to the discontinuity caused by the memories of the
National Socialist regime. Progress toward European unification had not
103
moved fast enough to give the younger generation an opportunity to orient
itselfin a new direction, which would have bridged this gulf.
An American participant observed that the young people coming out of the
universities today were not interested, by and large, in working through ex-
isting institutions and mechanisms, which they felt were wrong and needed
cha1iging. Yet the people we needed in government and other institutions were
precisely those who sought progress through change. Ifwe recruited only those
who thought like the older generation, we would perpetuate a difficult situation.
This problem had to be solved ifthe estrangement ofthe generations was not to
worsen.
Another US speaker, who was continuously in touch with young people in
his professional work, said that the attitudes of youth today, while far from
homogenous, differed in two significant respects from the attitudes of the older
generation. One had to do with the fundamental perception of the nature of
the world. The elders were inclined, in light of their education and experience,
to think in international and power terms. The young, on the other hand,
tended to. think in global terms and to be concerned with planetary problems,
which led to different emphases and evaluations. (An intervention from an
American speaker, who claimed to be the youngest participant, disagreed with
this. He was distressed to see that most of his contemporaries and sub-contem-
poraries failed to look at world problems in global terms, but took instead a
narrowly nationalistic view.)
A second contrast was between the fundamental optimism of established
society - despite the strains of our times - and the wave of cultural pessimism
which seemed to engulfmany ofthe young. Their fascination with such subjects
as the end of natural resources, zero growth, and the nature of modern society
reflected this cultural discontinuity.
There was no doubt that the young ought to be included and involved in the
discussions and decisions of the international community, but the question was
How? They should not be included just because they were young or because
they had different points ofview. Nor would it contribute to a creative dialogue
to invite them simply to criticize the foreign policies or values ofthe older gene-
ration. The speaker felt that a more constructive approach would be to enlist
the cooperation of younger people in devising solutions to specific complex
problems of an economic or political nature.
The reaction of a Canadian speaker to that suggestion was that the function
of youth was more to point alarm signals than to solve problems. A fellow
countryman alluded to the heavy impact which direct action by young people.
could nonetheless have on political life. One quarter ofthe Canadian electorate
at the next general election would be between the ages of 18 and 23, and it was
104
idle to pretend that this would not have an important effect on national policy.
A British parliamentarian was not at all sure that there was a correlation be-
tween political leaning and age, or even experience, for that matter. Different
people simply thought about things in different ways. Two recent examples
belied the assumption that youth was predominantly pacifist and left wing. The
first British election to include 18-year old voters had produced an emphatic
Conservative victory. In a recent Gallup Poll in Norway, the strongest support
for NATO and continued watchful defense had come from the under-25s. And
the speaker's own experience in dealing with groups of voters had been that
views on international affairs as well as other issues were not horizontally strati-
fied according to age, but cut vertically through different generations. This
participant went on to condemn the practice, often encountered in political
debate, ofseeking to bolster some unorthodox or "nonestablishment" suggestion
by "calling on hidden battalions of youth" (or women, or some other broad
segment ofthe population that happened not to be well represented on the spot
to speak for themselves). A US participant, whose work took him frequently to
college campuses, agreed that it was an unwarranted simplification to presume
to characterize the views of "youth". As with China, there were very few
"experts" on the subject.
Interventions by two other Americans emphasized the fault of the older
generation for the breakdown of communication and understanding with
youth. One speaker, who had pursued a military career, said that in his ex-
perience the morale of young people today was generally very high. Although
they wanted to adhere to life styles that they considered relevant, "when we
communicate, when we make them understand, we get intelligent obedience of
even unpopular orders." The other participant, an educator, was convinced
that "the problems of youth arise out of a reflection of the disabilities of the
adult world."
In the view of a Swiss participant, Western society was passing through a new
age ofrationalism, "with all the consequences that rationalism had in the 17th
and 18th centuries." Every assumption was being questioned, and much of the
contemporary social unrest and conflict was due to the inability or unwilling-
ness of those in authority to rationally defend their assumptions.
A Netherlands participant thought that the following quotation was apposite
to the discussion: "If teachers tremble for their pupils, and rather curry favors
than lead them with a firm hand in the right direction, with the result that the
pupils ignore such teachers; if it has gone so far that youth feels equal to the
elders, and indeed opposes them in word and deed; if the elders, on the other
hand, mingle among the youth and try to speak their language, ignoring their
foolishness and ill manners; if indeed the elders participate, afraid to make the
105
""""
impression of being spoilsports or dominating; if, as a result of that, youth is
getting gradually rebellious and feels easily hurt if anyone dares to tell them
off; ifit has gone so far that they are ignoring the law to show that they have no
one in authority above them; then the freedom of democracy, so abused, will
lead direct to the slavedom of tyranny."
The speaker identified the author as Plato.
Implications for European securi!Ji
This evolution in the mood of public opinion within the Western community
held serious implications for European security arrangements: force levels, the
European effort, the negotiating posture of the alliance, and notably the
American commitment.
A number of interventions dealt with the paradoxical situation described in
the Netherlands/International working paper: the divergent European and
American estimations of (a) the credibility of the US nuclear commitment to
Western Europe, and (b) the necessity ofa sizable American conventional pres-
ence on the Continent. (The discussion on this issue prompted an Italian partic-
ipant to suggest that it might come to be referred to as "the Knokke Paradox".
It was, in his view, an anxiety-creating situation, which called for urgent
study.) A Canadian speaker remarked that the indefinite continuation of the
pre,ence ofAm~rican troops in Europe was another of those basic assumptions
which needed to Le questioned.
A US participant agreed with the working paper that the American nuclear
commitment to NATO was "totally unquestioned" in his country, but that the
necessity or desirability of maintaining American troops in Europe at present
force levels was being "very strongly questioned." The US would ultimately
have to face the budgetary problem represented by this sizable component of
defense expenditures, but it was the balance of payments cost that was already
producing grave political repercussions in Congress. !fa way could be found to
reduce substantially the payments impact, "we would gain a considerable lease
on life for present troop levels in Europe." In addition, though, the US was
looking increasingly for what was euphemistically referred to as "progress in
Europe," which phrase covered not only burden sharing (beyond simple offSet)
but also greater political cohesion within Europe, to produce a more effective
overall military effort.
If conditions did not change materially along these lines, the speaker pre-
dicted that the US Senate would sooner or later pass the Mansfield Resolution,
providing for a unilateral reduction of American troop levels in Europe. The
speaker did not favor this resolution, but he felt that some alternative plan for
I06
f
I
I
I
I
I
!
l
the future ought to be laid out. He proposed setting a time limit ofperhaps three
years, during which period the status quo would be maintained and members
of the alliance could have serious discussions about what they wanted to do.
The gradual reduction of American force levels - perhaps to the 150,000
figure - that would probably take place after that would thus be the result of
multilateral consultation and not of the unilateral action of a single chamber
of the US Congress. American opinion would welcome a common European
foreign and defense policy, and the conversion of the roughly l,ooo Anglo-
French nuclear weapons into an effective force, but, paradoxically, "it would
be bad news ifit happened too fast."
The alleged predominance of balance of payments considerations was chal-
lenged by another US participant, who pointed out that the payments impact
amounted to around $1 billion. In his view, a more fundamental philosophical
question was involved: Why, more than 25 years after the war, was the pre-
sence of 300,000 American combat troops necessary in Europe to maintain the
peace and the balance of power with the USSR? The Mansfield Resolution
was supported by over half the US senators, most of whom had served in the
armed forces and known the horrors ofwar at first hand.
The author of the British working paper was not so sure that Europeans
doubted the credibility of the American nuclear guarantee, but they clearly
were concerned about the likelihood of a substantial reduction of forces on the
Continent in the seventies. This would be done partly for balance of payments
reasons, but much more because of America's changeover to volunteer forces
and the greater emphasis on its naval capability around the world.
The speaker did uot anticipate a general American withdrawal, however.
For one thing, the US would need a minimum of 150,000 men to man the high
level of tactical nuclear weapons on the Continent and to fulfill its obligations
to Berlin. But the essence offlexible response had to be maintained as a strategy,
and there was a lot of dangerous talk about the early use of tactical nuclear
weapons in a crisis. At the same time, it did not look as if a gradual reduction in
deployed American manpower could be replaced from European sources.
A Netherlands participant agreed that "US troops are an integral part of the
defense of Europe, because they cannot be replaced by troops of the same
quality in the foreseeable future." IfAmerica withdrew troops, it was not clear
where else she would place them outside the US. As for the balance of pay-
ments impact, the speaker believed that the Federal Republic of Germany was
making up for the greater part of that, which was perhaps not generally known.
An American speaker described what he perceived to be the thinking on
military matters in the US. In recognition of some of the domestic factors
mentioned previously in the discussion, President Nixon had stated that a
107
,!,,,
i!.
continuing American military presence in Europe would have to be justified by
a more equitable sharing of responsibility. The Congress in turn had shown its
concern by reducing the administration's defense budget by $2 billion in fiscal
year 1971 and $3 billion in 1972.
There was widespread recognition that the strategic field represented a non-
zero sum situation, and that a successful SALT agreement would be to the
benefit of all. The Soviets would try to use their two or three advantages in the
strategic field for psychological gain. The task of the US military was to con-
tinue strategic programs which would serve either to modernize the deterrent
force under a successful SALT agreement, or to serve as the base for further
additions if the race unfortunately continued. In either case, large sums of
money would have to be spent in the strategic field. There was no reason to
doubt America's intention to retain the capability so to damage in a· second
strike that a first strike should not occur, which was important for the security
of Western Europe.
American conventional forces, on the other hand, would have to be main-
tained with what was left in the budget, as it were, given the pressure ofpolitical
and economic factors. Although the military chiefs would seek to postpone it as
long as possible, a reduction in US force levels in Europe appeared inevitable,
in view of American obligations elsewhere in the world. The actual clanger of
war in the center of NATO had subsided, thanks to the continued linkage of
America's strategic commitment to its conventional presence. On the northern
and southern flanks, though, continuing Soviet pressure required US naval
forces to be on guard.
At the same time, the US was aware of its responsibilities in the Pacific and
Indian Oceans. During the last few years, America's Asian allies had increased
their armed forces from one million to two million, while 500,000 US troops
had been withdrawn from southeast Asia and 60,000 from elsewhere. Yet,
pursuant to the Nixon Doctrine, the US was demonstrating its willingness and
capability to reinforce with naval air and other air power in a crisis situation,
such as in Jordan. This was contributing directly to European security by
protecting essential supply lines for oil and other resources.
This rapid reinforcement capability depended on control of the seas through
adequate sea and air power, and America's permanent presence in the Mediter-
ranean and occasional presence in the North could only be maintained if her
allies showed themselves willing to do more. This implied a greater sharing of
research and development costs, improved procurement procedures, and a
coordination of the linkage between military sales and commercial sales. Amer-
ica's contribution to European security involved not only the direct support of
NATO, but the support as well of areas that were vital to Europe, such as the
108
Middle East and the Indian Ocean. To enable it to carry out this mission,
America hoped for greater help by its European allies in the solution of its
financial problems.
In response to a question by a Norwegian speaker, three other American
participants stated their belief that, in spite of the domestic pressures and
demands on its resources, the US would act to honor its NATO commitments
whenever necessary.
An Italian speaker thought that the position of the US now was analogous to
that of the British when they withdrew their last troops from Calais. After
having felt for three or four centuries that they had to have their forces on the
Continent at any price, they acquired a new freedom to act in the rest of the
world. In a similar way, the US now had a strong intermediary position with
Peking and Moscow, who would talk with Washington but not with each other.
In the judgment of an International participant, a precipitous or panicked
withdrawal ofAmerican troops from Europe would have negative psychological
effects. On the other hand, it was not healthy to have the whole European
defense system depend indefinitely on the credibility of their continued pre-
sence, so that it would be prudent to plan for an alternative balance offorces.
Another International speaker alluded to his recent conversation with. a
prominent American legislator, who had expressed his impatience with Eu·
rope's continued dependence on American defense assistance. The speaker had
replied that neither foreign policy nor military policy were matters of philan~.
thropy. If the American people and government had concluded that Europe
was not necessary for the defense of the US, they should "clear out today,
rather than tomorrow."
A French participant felt that the discussion was unfortunately moving onto
a rather narrow Cartesian framework, which could be outlined as follows:~(a)
There had been no change in Russia's aims, which could only be contained ·by
(b) a nuclear deterrent, which was only credible if supported by (c) 300,000
American troops in Europe, which could only be maintained if the US received
(d) economic help from her allies. The logic ofthis could be pursued to the con~
clusion that the fate of \'Vestern civilization depended, in the last analysis, on
some quantitative economic measure, such as the annual export of x million
American chickens. Such an equation omitted the aspect of human reactions
and public opinion.
The speaker suggested an inverse logic: (a) To maintain its defense establish-
ment, America was asking its allies for (b) financial help, which it needed as the
result ofits (c) internal problems - "international politics being only the residue
of problems which one has not been able to solve at home" - such as unemploy-
ment, export difficulties, the disaffection of youth and the aftermath of Viet-
109
nam. (d) If these problems could not be solved in the US, they could not be
solved in any society. (e) If the Americans had lost faith in the US, could they
be surprised that Europe was reluctant to help by taking up the dollar?
On the subject of Mutual and Balanced Force Reductions, the author of the
British working paper saw little future in them unless they were conducted on
a purely bilateral Soviet-American basis, which would do enormous damage
to the cohesion of the alliance. A Netherlands participant said that MBFR,
while originally a worthwhile initiative, had been pursued with insufficient
preparation and promised very few results which would not really weaken
NATO.
An Italian speaker noted that the American eagnerness to begin MBFR
negotiations - which was understandable in light of US domestic pressures -
had not been reciprocated by the Russians, who were noncommittal on the sub-
ject. This coolness was likely designed to enhance their bargaining position.
The USSR would probably respond in the end with a proposal for the reduction
or partial withdrawal of station troops (on the Western side, principally Ame-
rican units with nuclear elements), and only later of national troops (mainly
the Bundeswehr). By thus drawing a distinction between the troops of the
various Western nations, the Soviets would have driven a wedge into the
alliance.
The speaker was equally dubious about the proposed Conference on Securiry
and Cooperation in Eurape (ESC). Here, it was the Americans who had been
reserved, with the Europeans yielding to pressures from the East. The Russian
strategy for the ESC was founded on their realization that, while they were well
entrenched in East Europe, their influence in the West was diminishing, as the
national Communist parties moved further away from Moscow's orbit. The
ESC was designed to give the USSR adroit de regard in Western Europe, and the
risk was that the conferenre would produce limit,•tions on Western Europe's
control over its own political and military develop.·11ent, such as the right of a
Soviet veto of the coordination of nuclear armamer •.s or other defense systems.
That would prove disastrous for Western Europe, especially with the increased
need of a coordinated ,actical nuclear force resulting from strategic arms limi-
tations. As with the MBFR, it would be well in the case of the ESC to keep in
mind "the golden rule of French diplomacy," which was always to ask Q,ui est
demandeur?
An International participant also expressed concern that the ESC might
result in a freezing of the status quo, which would tie Western Europe's hands
as far as future unity on defense.
The author of the British working paper had little faith in the benefits to be
derived from an ESC, which was "one of the most fantastic diplomatic opera-
!IO
tions ever conceived." It would have 32 participating nations, compared with
26 at the Congress of Vienna, which had had trouble enough coming up with
any solutions. If the first major East-West conference in Europe in 40 years
resulted in a shambles, a degringolade, it would be a very great pity, and would
increase tensions in Europe. However, ifit were broken down into subcommis-
sions, it might do some useful work in the field ofcrisis management.
A Norwegian speaker, who said he was not at all opposed in principle to
rajiprochement or to a security conference, felt nevertheless that for the West to
participate in an ESC in its present state of disunity would be to "play the
cards right into the hands of the Soviets." The picture he drew was of "an
untidy and unravelled West against the solid and disciplined Eastern side, with
a few canaries singing their little independent songs as a showpiece under the
paw of the bear." Neither the US Congress nor European parliaments seemed
willing to face the fact that we were up against overwhelming Soviet forces. We
needed courage from the political leaders on both sides of the Atlantic to tell
the public the truth and to vote for the necessary remedies without looking for
political popularity.
This view was not shared by a compatriot, who felt that to emphasize the
possible negative results of the ESC would make it even harder in the future
"to sell Western policies in the same way and with the same success as many of
those who are now selling the policies of the East." According to the speaker,
"one of our main problems in recent years has been the losses in the fight for
public opinion." The West needed "to strike back in a progressive way, orien-
tated towards the future."
A Belgian and an Italian participant viewed the preparations for an ESC
as another step in the European Community's process ofdefining its own identi-
ty. An International speaker said that the conference would have to be "care-
fully and prudently prepared, without too many illusions." The maintenance
of Western cohesion and a strong defense posture was imperative if a detente
policy were to succeed.
A Portuguese speaker predicted that China, even though not a participant,
would try to exert its influence on an ESC. The Chinese hoped for a reunified
Germany, which would put a large and powerful nation on the other side of the
Soviet Union, and they could be expected to try to drive a wedge between the
Western powers by offering concessions to those who would support German
reunification.
An American participant admitted that he shared many of the concerns and
reservations about ESC, but "given the nature of Western public opinion,
particularly the attitudes of the younger generation, a negative response at this
stage would be extremely counter-productive. It would simply play into the
III
Soviet hands." It would make it easier for the Soviet Union to pursue its bilat-
eral policy toward the West, designed to divide it. While the speaker was
sympathetic to much of the substance of the Ostpolitik, for example, this was a
case of a policy pursued essentially on a partisan basis within a nation, and on
a purely national basis within the alliance. In the past, German policy had
sought maximum objectives, such as reunification and membership in NATO,
at minimum cost. Today, it seemed aimed at minimum objectives at maximum
cost, namely a tenuous status quo in return for Germany's legitimization of its
own division. The West needed to define the positive constructive content of a
detente, so that it could be seen as a means to an objective, and not as an end in
itself.
Interventions from four German participants responded to the foregoing
remarks about the Ostpolitik. One speaker said that he, too, regretted that the
Ostpolitik had become a matter of partisan politics in Germany, but unfortu-
nately "that was just one ofthose things that happen." But as for the Ostpolitik
being pursued as a national policy, the speaker believed that, with the ratifica-
tion of the treaties with Moscow and Warsaw, this phase would be concluded
and German activity would be part of the common Western approach. A
compatriot concurred in this prediction that the Ostpolitik would be completely
multilateralized, but he added that the policy had never been pursued on a
purely national basis, as the negotiations with Russia and Poland had been
closely related to the Berlin talks and coordinated with the allies from the be-
ginning. Furthermore, West Germany had had clearly in mind the short-term
objectives of ending the cold war situation with the East and assuring the
security of Berlin.
Another German speaker reminded the meeting of the very thin majority
available to the government for the historic vote on the Eastern treaties, to
which a fourth speaker added that, in this special case, the German parliament
was not really representative of German public opinion. A Netherlands partici-
pant remarked that the ratification of the treaties was immensely important for
Western unity as well as for East-West relations. The German Ostpolitik com-
manded wide support among various political parties in other European coun-
tries, many of whom were prepared to push for recognition of the German
Democratic Republic in case the treaties were not ratified.
Referring to the efforts of responsible people on both sides of the Atlantic to
discourage any sizable American withdrawal from Europe, a Norwegian
speaker said that the same motives were behind efforts to strengthen the Euro-
pean contribution to the mutual defense. Unfortunately, it did not look as if the
European political leaders of today had the will or the ability to withstand the
same sort of pressures as were being brought to bear in the US Congress. The
112
speaker did not believe that the Europeans could realistically say to their
American allies that the prospects were bright for increasing Europe's own
military strength.
A Belgian participant saw a double role for Europe's defense effort. Not only
was it the second pillar of the NATO alliance, but it was important for the
future development of the European Community itself. The achievement of an
integrated defense effort would require the same degree of political will as that
involved in the creation of the Community. If this seemed unrealistic, well so
did many aspects of political life.
A Portuguese speaker agreed that Europe's ability to contribute to the de-
fense of Western civilization would be undermined if she allowed herself to be
divided by minor local differences. An International participant said that the
most welcome help which Europe could give to the US in its monetary difficul-
ties would be to assume a greater share of the common defense burden.
Another Portuguese speaker commented that America's inability to be
present everywhere in the world provided an opportunity for Europe to play an
important role in the defense of the Indian Ocean area, not only because of the
oil supply routes, but because of the increased Chinese and Russian infiltration
into East Africa.
A very different mood was reflected in the remarks ofa Canadian participant.
He said that the attitude of his countrymen had been profoundly affected by
the Vietnam war, and he suggested that there was little enthusiasm in Canada
for "making trade and monetary concessions so as to help permit the deploy-
ment ofAmerican forces in the Middle East and the Indian Ocean, as well as in
Europe." It was not a question of control of such forces, but of a different per-
ception ofwhat was in the interest of the Western community and ofits individ-
ual nations. In somewhat the same vein, a Netherlands speaker said that, after
the Vietnam war, it was unthinkable that "the European nations would be
very ready to go into Asia together with the US, as a kind ofjunior partner."
The author of American working paper "D" responded that the question of
sending European troops to Asia was not really at issue. The point was that
Europe and the US had made a cooperative effort for many years to build an
adequate defense against the expansion of Soviet power in Europe. But now, as
had been pointed out by another speaker, the Soviet Union had become a
Eurasian continental power that fronted on two oceans, and the Western re-
sponse therefore had to be a continental one which recognized the interrelation
of the Atlantic and Pacific worlds. We could no longer talk about strategy in
regional terms; unless it was approached in a global fashion, there would be a
great deal ofwasted effort. The problem in Western Europe was not at bottom
a military one, as there was a stand-off there. It was a problem ofpolitical will:
113
whether the Soviet Union was to be confronted with a fragmented or a unified
Europe. And one of the points of building an effective Europe was presumably
so that it could play a responsible role not merely in one region, but in the
world.
Two interventions dealt with the problem of how the European states could
get better value for the $25 billion they spent annually on defense. The author
of the British working paper thought that the question of a European nuclear
force was irrelevant for the present, but that much more attention should be
paid to manpower systems. A number of these had become very old-fashioned
for their purpose. Either they were conscript systems, in which the period of
training was too short to produce an effective soldier, or they were selective
service systems, like Germany's, which were more and more unpopular with
the young. All systems involved very high overheads. The speaker wondered
whether the trend should not be toward a mixture of regular forces with terri-
torial or militia forces, which was being actively studied in Germany. It was not
a popular concept with the military, as it involved difficult problems of com-
mand and c~ntrol, and would require re-thinking a great deal of NATO
strategy.
But the Europeans had to go very much further in reordering their defense
establishments, not only to convince the Americans, but to convince them-
selves. Should the Eurogroup of NATO defeme ministers be regularized and
given a secretariat and a function of its own, or should one accept the logic of
the European Community and go for something more ambitious, that included
France? There was clearly a fork in the road ahead on that question.
The speaker's own prefrr:·nce for a next step in defense cooperation would be
a European defense imtitme, a sort of RAND, where the differences of concep-
tion, organization and tactical doctrines that existed among the European
powers could be hammered out and presented to governments as a unified
position. Any major overhaul of European military systems would require a
considerable step forward in political institutions, so the overriding question
was whether the political will power, inventiveness and energy existed to see
this through.
A Netherlands participant discussed the effect of technology and inflation on
the cost of defense. In 25 years, the price of a marine reconnaissance aircraft
had risen from $300,000 to $8 million. Much of such increases related to equip-
ment refinements, but recent annual wage inflation rates of between IO and 16
per cent in many Western countries meant that defense expenses were in-
f'reasing faster than the income of governments. In addition, there was "an
<1pp,1lling inefficiency and duplication in the West" in the research and devel-
oprnc11t ~ncl production of arms. If NATO were empowered to make R & D
114
decisions as speedily as it could make purely military decisions, this problem
would not exist, but "the national state is a tough animal."
The speaker favored starting right away on short-term procurement problems
with arrangements between two or three countries. "A more multilateral ar-
rangement generally results in the creation of a sheep with five legs." A break-
through for the long-term, such as for the production of one kind of tank in the
eighties, had to be prepared for. It required a mental breakthrough first, but
this would be easier now that it was generally realized that no one nation,
except the US, could carry the burden of research in all arms systems.
The Euro-group within NATO should never be institutionalized, but the
European partners should be able to profit fully from the research of all the
NATO powers. The speaker had the impression that France unfortunately
would not return to integrated NATO military commitments in the near
future. He was reminded of the story of the automobile driver, responsible for a
serious road accident, who had told the judge, "I thought somebody else was
driving."
Peace was the final product of a complicated process of foreign policy, of
defense policy, and of all the other data that had their impact on international
relations. Peace could be compared with health: someone who had not been ill
for 27 years did not think much about doctors. When they got a slight case of
'flu, they complained about the cost of medical care; when a really serious ill-
ness came along, the cost ofmedical care was irrelevant. One ofthe foundations
of an effective defense was an informed an understanding public opinion. There
was little difference now in this respect between the US and Europe. We all
wanted to find an optimistic explanation for the acceleration of the Soviet arms
build-up. "We'd like to think they just possess the arms to exhibit them like a
stamp collector does. In the old days, it was not very difficult to tell the young-
sters what they were doing when they were soldiers, and why. At the moment it
seems rather difficult."
The speaker was convinced that there was not enough awareness in NATO
of the importance of adequate public understanding. Action had to be taken to
explain why there was an urgent need to improve the quality of our defenses.
More information ought to be released on the activities and equipment of both
NATO and the Warsaw Pact forces. In the speaker's view, "NATO so far has
conducted its affairs in an atmosphere of too much spurious secrecy. The need
for security in vital matters should not be allowed to go so far as to isolate the
organization from the public."
* * *
Il5
In summarizing the discussion, a US participant observed that there appear-
ed to be some general agreement that a certain psychological and political
malaise preoccupied many of our societies. In part, this was a product of the
rather precipitous decline in optimism that had marked the latter part of the
19th and early part of the 20th centuries in the Western world, combined with
the disappearance of any credible cosmic theory. Much had been said about
the encl of ideology, particularly in the so-called advanced world. Yet we faced
societies, many of them highly mobilized, which still did have an ideology,
although in some cases it was more official than operative.
The problem before us warranted two approaches: First, to try consistently
to get at the realities, even if they did not create in and of themselves an
ideology. Throughout much of the world today a giant paradox was evident.
One could talk about the second nationalist revolution, even as one was striving
by word and deed to move toward internationalism. Both of these forces were
present in very powerful form, and in some respects they were interactive.
Nationalism today was by no means confined to the so-called late-developing
countries, or the non-Western world, and perhaps one should reconsider why
nationalism was again on the rise after having been recently proclaimed passe.
In part, this was a product of the frustrations of seeking identity in a larger
community. Nation-building was far from complete in most ofour societies and
was an enormously difficult process. Thus to try to establish identities on an
ever broader, more heterogenous scale, was bound to be emotionally tiring and
politically difficult.
At the same time, we had witnessed the new ideals that identity ought to be
more particularly with the smaller rather than the larger community, and one
saw this in many of the drives to find identification at the subnational unit in a
new intensified form. Moreover, many ofus were close to what we called "post-
modernism".
The speaker suggested that the participants at this Conference represented
the truly revolutionary societies of today. He had spent half his life in the Afro-
Asian world, and while the word "revolution" was powerful there, the fantastic
changes that were affecting our values, our relationships with each other, our
sense of units, were occurring much more in the so-called advanced world. The
tempo of change was so extraordinary in our world that we were faced with a
climactic revolution that had been going on for decades and affected every
generational group. These matters were related as well to the nature of our
negotiation process for the seventies. We could set aside the question ofwhether
the Russians or the Communist bloc were our enemies or potential allies if we
would look at the process of negotiation with the Russians and others in a dif-
ferent light: not in a lineal fashion - up, across and down - but in the task of
116
moving circles, from circles of disagreement to circles of partial agreement. The
whole process ofthe seventies was going to be that oftrying to enlarge the arenas
of agreement and to diminish or contain the areas ofdisagreement. And this did
not require any totalistic concepts of enmity or friendship.
Secondly, in the matter of negotiations, one of our great problems was going
to be the inequality of the internal pressures composing the societies who were
negotiatory. The major pressures that could be mounted upon the open soci-
eties were internal, and they would affect the timing of negotiations as well as
the extent of concessions. We did not have a similar set of internal pressures in
the less open societies. Perhaps a dynamic regionalism on the part of small
nations and non-involved major powers, could help the process of global pres-
sures upon the less open societies and make the negotiatory process more
viable.
In many of the subjects that had been discussed, probably the central
problem was how, in the midst of the most intense revolution that has ever oc-
cupied mankind, our societies, which were in the vanguard of this revolution,
could also accept international responsibilities and keep always open this ques-
tion of changing priorities: how to balance revolution (and we were the revolu-
tionaries) with international commitments, how to make intellectualism and
rationality acceptable when we no longer had a cosmic theory.
* * *
During the Conference, a dinner for the participants was graciously offered
by the Belgian government, at which the Prime Minister, Monsieur Eyskens,
addressed the guests.
In closing the meeting, His Royal Highness expressed his gratitude to various
persons who had worked· particularly hard to insure the success of the Con-
ference: notably the authors of the working papers, the interpreters, the secre-
tariat, and all the members of the Belgian and Netherlands staff who had han-
dled the arrangements for the meeting.
On behalf of all the participants, an American spokesman thanked The
Prince for having organized and directed this most interesting Conference.
I I7
