r-;OT FOR QUOTATIO:\
11111111111111111
3 2044 057 149 098
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
TORQUAY
CONFERENCE
22-24 April 1977
HARVARD
i LAW 4
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
,(
' TORQUAY
CONFERENCE
22-24 April 1977
V"'~"l
l'
.......__,
t ~~
-.
"') ~,
~
-1
r·..,
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS .
INTRODUCTION .
I. THE FUTURE OF THE MIXED ECONOMIES
IN THE WESTERN DEMOCRACIES
American Working Paper
German Working Paper .
Discussion
1. Introductory Comments .
2. The Recent Historical Background
3. Rescuing Lame Ducks .
4. The Multinational Corporation and the Mixed Economy
5. The Position of U.S. Trade Unions .
6. Combatting Inflation in the Mixed Economy
7. Guideposts for the Future .
II. THE THIRD WORLD'S DEMANDS OF RESTRUCTURING
THE WORLD ORDER
French Working Paper
American Working Paper
I 3 -~ '·I 5
5
9
11
26
39
39
42
44
45
47
47
49
53
62
Discussion
1. The Philosophic Basis of Resource Transfers .
2. The Importance of Agricultural and Commodity Arrangements
3. Financial Considerations
4. Trading with the Third World .
III. CURRENT PROBLEMS IN EUROPEAN-AMERICAN
RELATIONS .
75
75
78
79
80
82
LIST OF PA RTI CIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
LORD HOME OF THE HIRSEL, K. T.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VANDER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
WILLIAM P. BUNDY
HONORARY TREASURER:
C. FRITS KARSTEN
AARON, DAVID
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ANDROSCH, HANNES
ANSELMI, TIMA
BALL, GEORGE W.
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BENNETT, JACK F.
BERTHOIN, GEORGES
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
BIRGI, M. NURI
BRATTELI, TRYGVE
CARLI, GUIDO
CITTADINI CESI, IL MARCHESE
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
COOPER, RICHARD N.
CoT, JEAN PIERRE
DAHRENDORF, RALF
DAVIGNON, VICOMTE ETIENNE
DOHNANYI, KLAUS VON
DUCCI, ROBERTO
DUISENBERG, WILLEM F.
UNITED STATES
ITALY
AUSTRIA
ITALY
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
TURKEY
TURKEY
NORWAY
ITALY
ITALY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
INTERNATIONAL
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
ITALY
THE NETHERLANDS
d
5
ELTON, LORD UNITED KINGDOM N0RLUND, NIELS DENMARK
FINLEY, MURRAY H. UNITED STATES NoTT, JoHN UNITED KINGDOM
FINNEY, PAUL B. UNITED STATES 0ETKER, AREND FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FITZGERALD, GARRET IRELAND ORR, DAVID A. UNITED KINGDOM
FORTE, SIR CHARLES UNITED KINGDOM ORTOLI, FRAN<;OIS X . INTERNATIONAL
FRAGA IRIBARNE, MANUEL SPAIN PENNOCK, RAYMOND W . UNITED KINGDOM
GLISENTI, MARCELLA ITALY REGAN, G. A. CANADA
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G.S. CANADA ROBERTS, SIR FRANK K. UNITED KINGDOM
GUICHARD, OLIVIER FRANCE RocKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
HAGER, WOLFGANG H. FED. REP . OF GERMANY ROLL, SIR ERIC UNITED KINGDOM
HALBERSTADT, VICTOR THE NETHERLANDS Rossi, REINO FINLAND
HALL, SIR ARNOLD UNITED KINGDOM RoTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE FRANCE
HALLGRIMSSON, GEIR IcELAND SALMON, PIERRE FRANCE
HEINZ, HENRY J. II UNITED STATES SARTORI, CARLO ITALY
HENDERSO]'l, R. UNITED KINGDOM SCHMIDT, HELMUT FED. REP. OF GERMANY
IGLER, HANS AUSTRIA SHACKLETON, LORD UNITED KINGDOM
JANSSEN, D ANIEL-E . BELGIUM SICKINGHE, JONKHEER F EYO 0. J. THE NETHERLANDS
JOHNSON, JOSEPH E . UNITED STATES SIMONET, HENRI BELGIUM
JOSEPH, SIR KEITH UNITED KINGDOM SNOY ET D'0PPUERS, BARON BELGIUM
KIEP, WALTHER L. FED. REP. OF GERMANY SOMMER, THEO FED. REP. OF GERMANY
KIRKLAND, JOSEPH L. UNITED STATES S0RENSEN, SVENDO. DENMARK
KISSINGER, HENRY A. UNITED STATES STAVROPOULOS, CONSTANTIN A. GREECE
KNIGHT, SIR ARTHUR UNITED KINGDOM STEEL, DAVID E.C. UNITED KINGDOM
KOHNSTAMM, MAX INTERNATIONAL TAYl OR, ARTHUR UNITED STATES
LALONDE, MARC CANADA TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
LAMBERT, BARON BELGIUM THUROW, LESTER C . UNITED STATES
LENNEP, JONKHEER EMILE VAN INTERNATIONAL TIDEMAND, OTTO G. NORWAY
LEVER, HAROLD UNITED KINGDOM TREICHL, HEINRICH AUSTRIA
LINDER, WILLY SWITZERLAND UMBRICHT, VICTOR H . SWITZERLAND
LroTARD-VOGT, PIERRE SWITZERLAND WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
LUNDVALL, BJORN SWEDEN W ARBURG, SIR SIEGMUND UNITED KINGDOM
LUNS, JOSEPH M . A. H . INTERNATIONAL WICKMAN, KRISTER SWEDEN
M ACADAM, P ETER UNITED KINGDOM WILKINS, GRAHAM J . UNITED KINGDOM
MAciNTOSH, ROBERT M. CANADA WOLLF VON A MERONGEN, OTTO FED. REP. OF GERMANY
MACLAURY, BRUCE K. UNITED STATES
McDoNALD, ALoNzo L., JR. UNITED STATES
MEDEIROS FERREIRA, JOSE DE PORTUGAL OBSERVERS:
MILLER, JOSEPH IRWIN UNITED STATES
MONTBRIAL, THIERRY DE FRANCE BJARNASON, BJ0RN ICELAND
N IELSEN, SIVERT A. NORWAY T SOUNIS, P ANAYOTIS A . GREECE
6 7
IN ATTENDANCE:
GETCHELL, CHARLES W., JR.
PITTI-FERRANDI, ROBERT
8
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-fifth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Imperial Hotel, Torquay,
England, on 22, 23 and 24 April 1977, under the chairmanship of Lord Home of
the Hirsel, K. T.
There were 99 participants, drawn from a variety of fields: government and
politics, diplomacy, industry, trade unions, banking, transport, journalism, educa-
tion and foundation administration. They came from eighteen Western European
countries, the United States, Canada and various international organizations.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke in a
purely personal capacity, without in any way committing whatever government or
organization to which they might belong. To enable participants to speak frankly,
the discussions were confidential with no reporters being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
North American and Western European attitudes towards:
(a) the future of the mixed economies in the Western democracies;
(b) the Third World's demands for restructuring the world order.
and the political implications of those attitudes.
In addition to the above formal agenda, a half day's discussion was devoted to
current problems in European-American relations.
During the Conference, Lord Home, the Chairman, read messages which he had
exchanged with H.M. Queen Elizabeth on the occasion of this twenty-fifth Bilder-
berg Meeting, which happened to coincide with Her Majesty's Jubilee. Lord Home
also said that he had sent a private letter to H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands,
giving thanks for his many years of service to Bilderberg.
9
I. THE FUTURE OF THE MIXED ECONOMIES
IN T HE WESTERN DEMOCRACIES
American Working Paper:
"PROBLEMS IN THE MIXED ECONOMY"
While there are undoubtedly similarities among the problems faced by the U.S.
and the rest of the industrialized world, this paper is not an attempt to find or
analyze common problems. It focuses exclusively on the problems of the mixed
economy found in the United States. Some of these are common - the desire to
control inflation and unemployment- and some are peculiar to the U.S. - the low
relative incomes of large minority groups.
I. An Inability to Impose Economic Losses
The lament is often heard that the U.S. economy and political system have lost
their ability to get things done. Meaningful compromises cannot be made and the
politics of confrontation are upon us like the plague. Programs that would serve
the general welfare cannot be started because strong minorities oppose them. No
one has the ability to impose solutions and no solutions command universal assent.
The problem is real but it has not been properly diagnosed. One cannot lose an
ability that one never had. What is perceived as a lost ability to compromise is in
fact (1) a shift from international cold war problems to domestic problems, and (2)
a lost ability to impose economic losses.
As domestic problems rise in importance relative to international problems,
action becomes increasingly difficult. International confrontations can always be
portrayed as, and to some extent are, situations where everyone is fairly sharing
sacrifices to hold the foreign enemy in check. Since everyone benefits, an over-
whelming consensus and bipartisan approach can be achieved.
Domestic problems cannot be portrayed in this simple manner. They may not be
zero-sum games where every winner is matched with a loser, but there are inherently
winners and losers. Everyone cannot perceive himself as benefitting. A program to
raise the occupational position of women and minorities, for example, automati-
cally lowers the relative occupational position of adult white men. Every black or
female appointed to President Carter's cabinet is one less white male who can be
appointed.
11
People often ask why President Kennedy was so easily able to get the "Man on
the Moon" project underway, while both Presidents Nixon and Ford found it
impossible to get their "Project Independence" underway. There is a very simple
answer. Metaphorically, some American has to have his or her house torn down
to achieve energy independence, but no American lives between the earth and the
moon. Everyone is in favor of energy independence in general, but there are
vigorous objectors to every particular path to energy independence. In contrast,
once a consensus had been reached on going to the moon, the particular path could
be left to the technicians. In domestic problems the means are usually as contentious
as the ends themselves.
The problem of domestic economic losers has been magnified by a change in
the political structure. In the past political and economic power was distributed
in such a way that substantial economic losses could be imposed on parts of the
population if the "establishment" decided that it was in the general interest. These
parts of the population are no longer willing to accept losses or are able to raise
substantially the costs for those who wish to impose losses upon them.
There are a number of reasons for this change. Viet Nam and the subsequent
political scandals-clearly lessened the population's willingness to accept their nominal
leader's judgments that some project was in their general interest. With the civil
rights, poverty, black power, and women's liberation movements, many of the
groups that have in the past absorbed economic losses have become militant. They
are no longer willing to accept losses without a political fight. The success of their
militancy and civil disobedience set an example that spread to other groups such as
environmentalists, neighborhoods, and regions.
All minority groups have gone through a learning process. They have discovered
that it is relatively easy with our legal system and a little militancy to delay anything
for a very long period of time. To be able to delay a program is often to be able to
kill it. Legal and administrative costs rise, but the time delay and uncertainty costs
are even more important. When substantial time delays and uncertainties are added
to the conventional program or investment analysis, both government and private
industry find that it pays to cancel projects that would otherwise be profitable.
In one major environmental group, delays are such a major part of their
strategy that they have a name for it - analysis paralysis. Laws are to be passed so
that every project - public and private - must have environmental impact state-
ments, economic impact statements, sociological impact statements, etc. The idea is
not to learn more about the costs and benefits of projects, but to kill the projects.
To be useful in deciding whether projects should be done, impact statements would
have to be inexpensive and simple. Instead, they are to be expensive and complex
so that they are a deterrent to undertaking any project and so that they can be
legally challenged however they come out.
12
Consider the Interstate Highway System. Whatever one believes about the merits
of completing the remaining intracity pohion of the system, it is clear that it gives
the country an intercity transportation system that would be sorely missed if it had
not been built. Even those who argue against it do so on the grounds that if it had
not been built, some better (non-auto) system would have been built. Yet most
observers would agree that the Interstate Highway Systems could not have been
built if it had been proposed in the mid-1970's rather than in the mid-1950's.
Exactly the same factors which would prevent the initiation of an Interstate
Highway System would also prevent the initiation of any alternative transportation
system. A few years ago, when a high speed rail system was being considered for
the Boston-Washington corridor, a former governor of Connecticut announced that
he would veto any relocation of the Boston-to-New York line on the grounds that
it would be of prime benefit to those at either end of the line, but would tear up
Connecticut homes. The groups opposing an intercity rail network would be slightly
different than the groups opposing an intercity highway network, but they would
be no less effective in stopping the project. Any transportation system demands
that land be taken and homes torn down. At one time this was possible - at the
moment it is impossible.
The Balkanization of nations is a world-wide phenomenon that the U.S. has
not escaped. Regions and localities are less and less willing to incur costs that will
primarily help people in other parts of the same country. Consider the development
of the coal fields of Wyoming and Montana. There is no question that most of the
benefits will accrue to those living in urban areas in the rest of the country while
most of the costs will be imposed on those living in that region. As a result the local
population objects. More coal mining might be good for the U.S., but it will be bad
for them. Therefore they will impose as many time delays and uncertainties as
possible.
The same problem is visible in the siting of nuclear power plants. Whatever one
believes about the benefits of nuclear power, it is clear that lengthy siting delays
serve no purpose other than as a strategy for killing the projects. If the projects are
undertaken anyway, the consumer will have to suffer the same risks and pay the
higher costs associated with the delays. What is wanted is a quick yes or no answer,
but this is just what we find impossible to do. Siting also raises the Balkanization
issue. Whatever the probabilities of accidents, the consequence of such failures are
much less if the plants are sited in remote areas. But those who live in remote
areas do not want the plants, since they suffer all of the potential hazards and do
not get the benefits of the project. Everyone wants power, but no one wants power
plants next to his own home.
Basically we have created the world described in Robert Ardrey's The Territorial
Imperative. To beat an animal of the same species on his home turf, the invader
13
.j'
'\
must be twice as strong as the defender. But no majority is twice as strong as the
minority opposing it. Therefore we each veto the other's initiatives, but none of us
has the ability to create successful initiatives himself.
Given this stalemate, where do we go? One of the peculiarities of our mixed
economy is that we have poor to non-existent systems for compensating those who
legitimately lose when projects are undertaken in the general interest. There are a
number of reasons for this: (1) Sometimes compensation would have to be paid to
those who are already rich compared with the rest of the population. This seems
to fly in the face of our other general income distribution goals, since there wil be
cases where compensation is not paid to the poor. (2) To pay compensation is to
raise the cost or lower the profits of any project. Project developers (government or
private) are used to getting what they want without having to pay compensation.
(3) To pay compensation is to admit that the government or private firms have in-
come distribution responsibilities. Incomes do not go up and down because of the
impersonal forces of the market. (4) Since many factors cause incomes to go up and
down in a large economy, it is a difficult problem to decide when compensation
should or should not be paid. Not all losses can or should be compensated.
Existing compensation systems are living examples of the problem. Instead of
being run as if they were intended to be a generous compensation for losses actually
suffered, they are run as if the aim is to deprive the citizen of his income or capital.
Parsimony rather than generosity is the rule. In Urban Renewal, compensation is
pa.id for property and moving expenses, but a very narrow interpretation is taken
of what constituted a loss. No compensation is paid for disrupting lives or for the
loss of neighborhoods - friends, comfortable habits, etc. These losses are undoub-
tedly difficult to quantify, but they are nonetheless real. Not being willing or ab\e
to quantify them precisely, we act as if they are not losses at all. Administratively
the programs are often even less generous than they seem on paper. In Massachu-
setts, for example, if the state and the owner cannot agree on a price in eminent
domain proceedings the state takes the property for $ 1 and then both parties go
into court to find a fair price. For however long this takes, the owner is deprived
of his or her property.
The same approach is followed in the Trade Assistance Adjustment Act. Since
the benefits of free trade are general while the costs are usually localized, it would
seem fair to compensate the losers from the general gains. Yet until recently, ad-
justment assistance has been run as if the aim is not to spend any money or to find
any cases of valid disruptions and losses.
To conduct either public of private business, more adequate compensation sy-
stems are going to have to be developed in the future. Those who suffer the localized
costs that generate universal benefits are going to have to be compensated. But this
is also likely to make a change in the mixture of the mixed economy, since govern-
14
ment will undoubtedly be called upon to help decide what constitutes fair compensa-
tion and how the necessary revenue should be collected.
II. The Growth of Government: The Vanishing Disinterested Citizen
Many people think that the mixed economy has become unstable. One part of the
mixture- government - is threatening to swallow the rest of the mixture. In exami-
ning this argument, there are at least three ways one could measure the mix of the
mixed economy. (I) What proportion of national resources is spent by government?
(2) What proportion of national resources is transferred from one private individual
to another by government? (3) To what extent does government influence (regu-
late) private decisions?
If we look at the U.S. economy from the perspective of each of these three
measures, it is clear that the mixture has changed most in dimensions (2) and (3).
Government purchases of goods and services have only grown from 18.9 percent
of the GNP to 21.6 percent of the GNP from 1956 tot 1976. This is a relatively
small increase, but Federal purchases actually went down from 10.9 to 7.8 percent
of the GNP, while state and local purchases were going up from 8.1 to 13.8 percent.
In terms of purchases, there has been growth of government, but the growth of
38,000 independent tax-levying agencies is not the same as the growth of some
centrally-directed monolith. Just as there is not an integrated monolith called "the
private economy", so is there not an integrated monolith called "government".
Thirty-eight thousand governments are not going to swallow anything. Even within
the Federal Government, one can ask whether the different agencies are really inte-
grated and centrally-directed.
There has been an explosive growth of government in the second dimension. In
1956 only 4.1 percent of the GNP was transferred by government from one indivi- I,
dual to another, but by 1976 this percentage had risen to 10.9 ($ 184 billion). If we l i
added the cost of in-kind aid and business subsidies (maritime, etc.), the govern- 1 I
ment's income redistribution expenditures would be even larger. (Purchases would,
however, fall by a corresponding amount.) The ultimate spending decisions are still
private, but government plays a role in determining the distribution of spending
power within the private economy. The impact that this has on the mixed economy
will be examined in a later section.
Government regulation is the third dimension upon which the mix of the mixed
economy can change. While it is difficult to quantitatively measure changes in the
mix on this dimension, it is equally clear that there has been explosive growth
in regulation. But before examining the impact of growing regulation, we should
look at the mirror image problems caused by the growth of government. /
To be workable, a democracy assumes that public decisions are made in a frame-
15
-:.,...:,
1
. ~-.,··''" "!<b;/j';,4j~>~~i~
work where there is a substantial majority of concerned but disinterested citizens
who will prevent policies from being shaped by those with direct self-interests.
Decisions in the interests of the general welfare are supposed to be produced by
those concerned but disinterested citizens. They are to arbitrate and judge the dis·
putes of the interested parties. But as government grows, the number of such citi·
zens shrinks. Almost everyone now has a direct economic stake in what government
does.
The Watergate and associated corporate bribery scandals revealed the illegalside
of this problem, but the real problem is not so much illegal acts as it is the incentive
to use legal ones. With everyone's economic selfinterest at stake, we all form per·
fectly proper lobbying groups to bend decisions in our favor. But with the disinte-
rested citizen in a minority, how are decisions to reflect the general welfare? Who is
to arbitrate? Our natural inclination is to rely on the adversary process where
different self-interested groups present their case, but somewhere there has to be a
disinterested judge with the power to decide or tip a political decision in the right
way. The general welfare is not always on the side of ·those that can mobilize the
most economic and political power in their own behalf. If we really were to enforce
the rule that no one could vote on an issue if his or her income would go up or down
as a result of the action, we would end up with few or no voters on most issues. The
problem is to establish a modicum of disinterested decision-making capacity in a
political process where everyone has a direct self-interest.
III. Regulating the Private Economy: An Irreversible Process?
The growth of government regulations can be traced to a number of factors. In
the first burst of regulations at the turn of the century, anti-trust laws were to break
up man-made monopolies and government regulations were to control natural
monopolies. The second burst of regulations in the 1960s and 1970s focused on the
problem of correcting externalities. In cases like pollution, one individual can im-
pose costs (dirty air, etc.) on another individual without having to pay compen-
sation. The second individual's most natural recourse is to demand government
regulations stopping the first individual's acts, and this is exactly what has been
happening.
Non-market externalities have become much more important in the economy for
a number of reasons. In our technically more advanced and much more congested
society, one group's actions much more frequently impact upon another group -
e.g., airport noise. But our technology has also revealed long-standing externalities
that we previously did not recognize - e.g., the cancer danger of asbestos fibers.
The problem is real, but there are other solutions. Pollution externalities can, for
example, be turned into market problems with effluent charges. Individuals and
16
-
business can simply be charged for their polluting activities until these activities are
reduced to the desired level, until the funds raised from the charges are adequate
to clean up the environment or to compensate those who must suffer the effects of
the pollution. Similarly, many safety problems can be turned into market problems
with accident charges similar to effluent charges. These accident charges are raised
until they produce the desired level of safety or adequately compensate those being
hurt. There are undoubtedly areas where such market solutions would be difficult
to implement (cancer agents with long-time delays might be one), but they could
solve the problems in many of the areas where regulations are now rampant. Yet
despite our professed belief in the market, such solutions are resisted by everyone
involved.
Those who want to protect the environment or the employee believe that people
will simply pay rather than reduce pollution or accidents. Those who would have to
pay in the first instance (in the long-run the consumer pays for any and all solutions)
resist on the grounds that they do not want to pay for something that they have
always had free of charge. This resistance is only rational, however, if you believe
that the alternative - direct regulations - can be avoided or frustrated at a small
cost. I would suggest that whatever the original validity of this belief, it has been
proven wrong by history. Regulations will be adopted and substantial costs will be
imposed regardless of whether the regulations do or do not produce the desired
effects. Although it has resisted them in the past, the business community should
become the prime proponent of market solutions to the real problem of externalities.
But other factors have also contributed to the growth of regulation. For reasons
that are not altogether clear, society seems to be much more interested in protecting
individuals from their own mistakes and failures than it was in the past. "Let the
buyer beware" is not an aphorism that attracts much support anymore. This change
is strange since one can make a good logical argument that we should be more
willing to let individuals make their own decisions. Our citizens are now on the
average much better educated, and better educated citizens presumably make fewer
mistakes. Federal Housing Agency mortgage regulations act as if buyers are idiots,
less important. We can now afford our mistakes more easily.
But the reverse is in fact true. We are much less willing to Jet individuals make
mistakes. Federal Housing Agency morgage regulations act as if buyers are idiots,
who must be protected against making any decisions for themselves. Similarly,
consumer legislation acts as if the consumer is an idiot of the second degree, if not
of the first degree. It is popular to explain the growth of these regulations as if they
were forced upon society by some small extremely powerful minority that wants
to torment the current economic system. This is a mistake. The problem is to under-
stand why a majority of the voters want to be protected from their own mistakes.
In a similar vein the voter is no longer willing to tolerate substantial reductions
17
t/~
in his ?r her real income without resorting to regulation in an· effort to avoid th1 regulated over time. The failure of deregulation is also central to the process. To
reductions. The OPEC energy price increase and the food price increases of 1973· detail the failure of deregulation is to come right back to the lack of a disinterested
1974 were both met with overwhelming demands for government regulations tc majority and the problem of compensation for economic losses.
mitigate the real income losses. Energy became a regulated industry and expon Consider the Interstate Commerce Commission and its regulations. The ICC was
embargoes were imposed on grain. In neither case .could government regulation set up at the tum of the century when railroads were genuine natural monop~hes.
eliminate the price increase. At best all it could do was to spread the increases oul Since then, however, we have invented or perfected planes, autos, trucks, p1pel!~es,
over a longer period of time. But the regulations were adopted anyway. Perhap1 and a host of alternative transportation systems. An industry that was at one time
these demands are connected with the growth of large institutions. Income losse1 a natural monopoly has become one that could potentially be one of our most
are no longer seen to be the product of impersonal market forces, but are seen a1 competitive. But the regulations continue. .
the direct result of deliberate actions by some large economic actors. The reasons are clear. Regulations affect incomes - capital and labor - after
. Whil~ t.here were and are demands to have either horizontal or vertical divestiture they have been in place for any period of time. Conversely, dere~ulation always
m the 011 mdustry, part of the g:owth of regulatwn must be traced to perceived fail· poses large losses (capital or wage) on some of those m the affected m.d~stry: Often
ure of antl-trust laws. At one time It was thought that problems could be solved il the people who will suffer the losses are not those who make the ongmal mco:ne
market~ were.made more competitive. For a number of reasons this vision has faded gains from regulation. The latter are long dead or they long a~o sold out at. capital
from v1ew. First, to the extent that the problem really is externalities, competitive values which reflected the value of regulations. In transportations deregulatiOn, for
markets are no solution at all. A competitive firm will generate as much, or more, example, many trucking firms would probably suffer losses. As a result it is not sur-
smoke t~an a non-~ompetitive one.S econd: there is a suspicion that much of our prising that they and their employees resist deregulation. strenuously. The.rest of us
economic progress IS due to large firms. Without their research and planning, the may get cheaper transportation, but our economic self-mterest IS more diffuse and
economy would not operate as well as it does. Third, historical experience shows that not as intense. A similar reaction could be seen in response to proposals to deregu-
breaking one very large firm into two of three smaller firms does not make much dif· late the airline industry. Who objected in an article on the Op-Ed page of the New
terence in industrial behavior. Slightly increasing thenumberofoligopolistic firms just York Times? Not some fool who wants to regulate everything for t~e sake of regu-
is not worth the enormous effort it takes. Anti-trust laws have taken on a legal life of lating everything, but the President of American Airlines. Regulat!ons are held m
th~ir ~wn, but. from th.e perspective of economics t~ey h~ve little meaning and no place by economic self-interest. .
obJeCtives. With the mtellectual heartbeat dead m anti-trust action, regulation Here again we face the problem that we have been unable to recogmze the r.eal
remains as the only alternative. . economic losses that would be imposed and are unwilling to design co~pensatwn
But large size also forces government to take many actions which it would not systems that would at least mitigate the losses. To ~ompensate is to admi~ that. the
othe~w1se take. At the heart of competitive markets and capitalism lies the doctrine government has responsibilities when it suddenly Imposes large economic losses,
of failure. People are rewarded because they are willing to accept the risk of failure. but the facto this is an admission that we long ago made.
Yet no government can tolerate the failure of any large economic actor. Neither
Lockheed nor New York City can be allowed to fail since the disruption to our
integrated economy would be too large to tolerate. Yet this creates a double stand·
ard with respect to the local grocery store and the small town that undercuts the
whole rationale of the mixed economy. Individual economic actors are not on their
own. If necessary, large actors will be rescued and controlled, but this creates a
demand for rescuing small actors from their mistakes. If Lockheed can be rescued
from its mistakes, why can an individual consumer not be rescued from his mis·
takes? But to rescue is to control.
Detailing the reasons why government regulations have grown, however, does
not explain why the economy is becoming more regulated. If new regulations were
matched by the abolition of old regulations, the economy would not become more
18
IV. Inflation: No Solutions Without Severe Side Effects
For reasons that are not altogether clear, inflation seems to be endemic in the
modern mixed economy. Historically prices have always risen in boom periods but
they have fallen during recessions. What has changed is these periods of falling
prices. They no longer occur. Monetary and fiscal policies can still be used to con-
trol unemployment, but they only have a one-sided effect with respect to inflation.
They can make prices go up, but they cannot make prices go down. Given public
demands to achieve acceptable rates of unemployment and inflation, pressures
arise for the creation of new policy instruments to dealwith the problem of inflation.
19
!-c-.·~·.~·~
All of the suggested instruments will, however, make major changes in the struc run, there does not seem to be any way Fo alter the number of women and young
ture of the mixed economy. people looking for work even if you want~d to do so. Labor demands, however,. c.an
Direct price and wage controls need no comment since they obviously compte. only be altered by either direct pub~ic employment or wa~e s.ubsi.dies. Wa~e subsidies
tely alter the structure of the mixed economy. All or most of the basic economi<do not directly alter the public-pnvate m1x, but they w1ll mev1tably bnng govern-
decisions must be made by some central planning process. As in wartime it i! ment more directly into the firm hiring decisions of individual firms.
highly likely that any long-run use of price and wage controls would also r~quin Tax schemes have also been suggested for reducing i~1flation.. In these systems,
labor controls such as those which existed in World War 11. wage increases above some guideline level are not deductible busmess expenses and
"Social contract" solutions to the problem would also require major changes in price increases above some guideline level push firms or individuals i~to higher
the ec~nomy. If a.cceptable price and wage behavior is to be archieved by havinl rate brackets. When they are casually mentione.d, tl~ese sche.mes seem !Ike Imper-
th~ maJor groups 111 the economy sit down around a table and agree on acceptable sonal market mechanisms, but they are m practice Simply pnce and ':age controls
pnce and wage policies, then the economy must be structured so that most of the with an agreed upon set of financial fines for violations. Acceptable pnce and wage
po~ula~ion is represented at that table. Each group must also have the power to behavior must still be defined and violators must still be caught and fined.
pohce Its own members to enforce the agreed-upon arrangements. This means, for Another option is simply to Jearn to live with high rates of unemployment and/~r
example, that the 75 percent of the labor force that is not now unionized would inflation. Since the public does not accept high rates of either at the moment, 1t
have to be organized into what would be de facto unions. Similarly, small business would have to be convinced that neither is as important as it has been led to believe
and farmers would have to be organized into representative groups with decision· in the past. Arguments could be made that inflation is, after all, a zero-sum game
making and policing powers. where there are economic winners to match each economic loser. Analysis indicates
Because of the ratchet effect in industrial prices, large fluctuations in raw agricul- that the distribution of real incomes is little affected. On the other side, much of the
tural.prices are higly inflationary. When raw food prices go up, industrial prices go unemployment problem is a youth unemployment problem and all young people
u~ With them, but when raw food prices go down (as they will and have), industrial will eventually grow older.
pnces ?o not ~o.down with them. Agricultural price stabilization stockpiles can Alternatively, we could seek to reduce the public's resistance to unemployment
theoretically ehmrnate part of this instability, but they demand that government be and inflation by designing better compensation systems to reduce the welfare !mph-
a major buyer and seller of agricultural commodities at all points in time. This cations of either even further. Unemployment compensation could be made more
~reate.s obvious pressures from both farmers and consumers to manipulate prices generous and coverave ·could be extended to new workers. That part of the economy
m their favor rather than to stabilize prices. that is not now either de jure or de facto indexed could be indexed.
Bottleneck industries may also be part of the problem. Individual industries reach The problem with all universal indexing systems is that they cannot reduce the
capacity operations before the entire economy has even approached capacity. lnfla- rate of inflation and will in fact probably lead to an acceleration in the rate of in-
lion breaks out in these industries and spreads across the economy. If this is the flation. Living with high unemployment creates a human problem, since unem-
cause of inflation, the only solution is for government to develop policies for mani- ployment is very unevenly shared and creates gigantic losses in output. In the U.S.
pulat~ng .demand, in~ustry by industry, or for it to develop policies for affecting economy, operating at an eight percent unemployment rate :ather than a four per-
supphes mdustry by mdustry. In wartime both types of policies are used to avoid cent unemployment rate reduces the GNP by about $ 220 b!lhon a year.
bottlenecks that might stop military production. But either solution requires that All of these suggestions for fighting or living with inflation leave something to
g~vernm~n.t get m~ch more heavily involved in industry, as opposed to economy- be desired. They all have severe side effects that are going to impact upon the mixed
Wide, decisiOn makmg. economy. For many ofthe suggestions a good argument can be made that the cure
Similar problems exist if you work on bottlenecks in the labor market. From this is going to be worse than the disease.
perspective inflation occurs because of the structure of unemployment rates. Long
before national unemployment rates reach acceptable levels, shortages of key
~roups, primarily adult white males, occur. Wage inflation starts among the groups
~n short supply and then spreads across the entire economy. Here the only solution
IS to alter the demographic composition of labor demands. At least in the short-
20
V. Job Security: An Unmet Demand
One of the dimensions in which the U.S. mixed economy differs from its industri-
alized neighbors is the ease with which it is possible to fire labor in economic down-
21
~.
t
turns. The U.S: usually has and tolerates rates of unemployment that are much
'
higher than its industrialized neighbors. Both financial penalties and cultural or "
social mores against layoffs are much Jess restrictive. Yet at the same time surveys
show that job security is the number one interest of the labor force. When workers
are asked what they want in a job, pay usually ran~s somewhere between third
and sixth in desired characteristics.
The public opinion poll interest in job security is confirmed in a number of ways. .
Demands for seniority hiring and firing reflect a desire to confine job insecurity to a
limited class of workers - new workers. Restrictive w~rk rules are usually designed ~.
to guarantee job security. Businesses which look with envy at the lack of restrictive r
work rules in Japan would do well to remember that a price is paid for this freedom. !
Workers get tenure and are only fired as a very last resort. r
Today's system of pension plans also means that job security is directly tied up f
with income security during retirement. The individual with a succession of short- I
term jobs will end up with a much smaller pension than an individual with one life f
time job. One's occupational skills are also tied to job security. Professional workers t
'
see job changing as a road to higher pay or better jobs, but for most of the popu- f
lation a job change means a reduction in income and a worse job. Incomes go down, '·
not up. When skills are acquired on the job and when openings occur on a seniority
basis, to move from one employer to another is to go to the bottom of the skill
ladder and start all over again. "
The rational economic man will also place job security at or near the top of his
or her demands. Given that income is necessary to survive, most individuals are I
going to be averse to taking risks. They will be willing to trade a substantial amount
of expected but risky income for the guarantee of a certain income. Workers often
report that they would be willing to trade a lower rate of pay for more job security. I'
Yet this is exactly what the economy does not deliver.
To most successful managerial or professional workers, the demands for guaran-
teed employment seem strange. This is because they do not usually face the risks
of unemployment or the uncertaint); in future income streams. As of late 1976, the ~
average duration of unemployment was 16 weeks in the U.S. and 17 percent of the !
unemployed had been unemployed for more than 27 weeks. Given these probabili- '1·
ties, unemployment obviously looms as a major danger to be avoided. Businessmen .
are used to talking about the risks of business investments, but they forget the great ~
risks of human capital investments. Going to college raises average incomes, but ·
for white men there is a 60 percent chance that going to college will not lead to &
higher income than if they had simply remained a high school graduate. How many
businessmen would make investments where there was an expected rate of return
of about 10 percent but an expected failure rate of 60 percent?
Job security is sometimes opposed on the grounds that is retards mobility and
22
hence productivity, but this is an argument that is difficult to sustain. Countries with
much more job security have been outperforming us on a productivity basis for
several decades and have now reached productivity levels higher than ours. If a lack
of job security leads to restrictive work rules, job security may enhance rather than
retard productivity.
In much of the rest of the industrialized world the demand for job security has
focused·on the private economy. Individual businesses bear the responsibility for
providing job security. In the U.S., the demand has not focused on the private
economy, but is now focusing upon government. Guaranteed public employment
may not be an issue whose time has come, but it is certainly an issue whose time for
public debate and discussion has come.
Some of the demand undoubtedly springs from the current recessionary unemploy-
ment rates, but the demand is unlikely to go away. There is little likelihood that high
unemployment rates are going to disappear in the near future and the demand
would remain even if the unemployment rates were lower. Job security tops the
worker opinion polls even when unemployment rates are low.
If the government is to be the employer of last resort, however, then the govern-
ment must produce something, even if employment rather than output is the prime
objective. This creates a new mix in the mixed economy on two dimensions. First,
there are few things which public employment could produce that would not
compete with something that is already being produced by an existing private or
public agency. Second, guaranteed public employment will significantly alter the
nature of the labor market. The exact effects will depend upon the exact system
of public employment, but all systems will make fundamental changes in how
labor is hired and fired.
VI. Income Distribution Problems: A Problem That Won't Go Away
Income distribution problems occur in two fundamentally different dimensions.
First, there is the demand for less inequality. Reductions are to occur in the gap
between rich and poor. Second, there is the demand for parity among groups.
Blacks, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, and women are all demanding
parity with white men. The poverty programs of the 1960's, and the enormous
increase in income transfer payments of the 1970's, have been our response to the
first problem. Commissions against discrimination, manpower training, and affir-
mative action programs have been our response to the second. Often the two types
of demands are lumped together under the general rubric of a demand for income
redistribution, but they will in fact have very different effects on the mixed economy.
When it becomes clear that it was usually cheaper to lift someone out of poverty
with income transfer payments than it was to raise the earning capacities of those
23
in poverty, the emphasis of public policies shifted form skill-augmenting poverty
programs to income transfer payments. From 1968 tot 1976, income transfer pay-
ments rose by$ 127 billion. Yet the mirage of self-sufficiency has prevented us from
designing an efficient system of income transfer payments. Politicians who favor
welfare reform and an efficient welfare system can always be portrayed as being
in favor of welfare rather thans self-sufficiency. As a result they end up getting
defeated in the next election. But self-sufficiency is impossible so we keep adding
patches to the existing welfare system whenever problems arise. In the process it
gets more and more inefficient, unfair and complex. f
At the same time there is broad agreement on the general outline of what would f
constitute a fair and efficient income transfer payment system. Both President I
Nixon's family assistance plan and McGovern's "demo-grant" program were i
variants of the negative income tax. A national negative income tax could raise ;
everyone above the poverty line for less money than is now being spent, but politi- ·
cally there does not seem to be any way of moving from the current system to it. .
The current income transfer system has a number of negative effects on the mixed '
economy.The present system of complex, state-administered, but partially federally- !
funded, programs has enormous administrative costs per dollardelivered to the poor. ;
Deficiencies in the structure of cash income transfers lead to even more cumbersome t
in-kind aid. Demands for rent control, food price controls, of energy controls arise 5
whenever there is a sudden change in the prices of any of the basic necessities. Since !
l
we cannot adjust income transfer payments to cushion the income shocks on the :
poor of sudden changes in these prices, we are forced to institute partial systems
1
of price controls. The demand for guaranteed public employment also arises to
1
some extent because of the one major gap in the welfare system. Intact families I
with male heads less than 65 years of age are generally not eligible for any of the .
welfare programs. Yet such families constitute 47 percent of the population below
the poverty line. (Overall 12.3 percent of the population lives in families that have
incomes below the government's poverty llnes.)
While the demand for what is in essence a guanteed minimum family income
places strains on the mixed economy, the demand for parity is ultimately a much
tougher problem. The problem of poverty can potentially be solved with an income ;
transfer payment system that would not cost even as much as we are now spending, ·
but the demand for parity can only be solved by a wholesale reshuffling of work ,
opportunities. '
As of 1975 there were 23.8 million blacks with an average family income 62 per-
cent that of whites, 11.1 million Hispanic Americans with family incomes 67 per-
cent that of whites, and approximately one million American Indians with family
incomes somewhere between 30 and 50 percent of that of whites. In addition, the
44 million women who worked were asking why women who work fulltime year-
24
round should make only '56 per<;:ent as much as men who worked fulltime year-
round.
Parity is a very intractable problem. Economic differences cannot be removed
by eliminating discrimination except in the.very long run. If discrimination were to
cease now, it would take 45 tot 50 years for those who had been subject to discrimi-
nation and are already in the labor market to retire from the economy. If opportu-
nities and characteristics are transmitted from parents to children, a much longer
period of time would be required. The affeCted groups say that they are not willing
to wait.
The strategy of the 1960's was to increase the skill levels of the affected groups
in manpower training programs and to then let the individuals compete for higher
earnings position in the labor markets. This strategy was a failure for a number of
reasons: (1) Given the number of people involved, the costs would have been enor-
mous. Even without the VietNam War, it is doubtful that the public was willing to
pay the necessary bill. (2) When minority groups are aided, whites respond by in-
creasing their own skills to maintain their relative position. Reducing black high
school drop-outs increases the pressure for whites to go to college. (3) Since most
U.S. job skills are acquired on the job and not in formal education and training, it
simply was often impossible to give the necessary skills in government training
programs. In addition seniority advancement systems made it impossible to use the
skills even if they could be acquired.
But this leaves affirmative action as the only possible solution. Any program of
affirmative action is, however, in itself a major change in the mixed economy.
People must be advanced on some basis other than merit or productivity. Govern-
ment must write the rules as to how and when people can be promoted. In addition,
affirmative action requires that someone (usually a white man) must pay the costs
of eliminating discrimination that occurred in the past and was not perpetrated by
him. He did not cause blacks and women to have lower incomes, but his own job
prospects must suffer to eliminate the problem.
Affirmative action is the paradigm example of why domestic problems are so
difficult to deal with in the mixed economy. It is the ultimate zero-sum game where
there must be a loser for every winner. If blacks, Hispanic Americans, American
Indians, and women are to get a larger share of the high income positions of the
economy, then white men must get fewer of these positions than they now have.
*
* *
In introducing his paper, the author pointed out that recent American public
opinion polls had shown that a number of institutions - the Congress, the business
25
community, the medical profession, among others- had lost a large measure of the
people's confidence. ' ~-
There was a new phenomenon of self-centeredness in U.S. society, with a decline ·
in the willingness of individuals to make sacrifices for one another, including mem- :
bers of their own families. This mood did not augur well for programs calling for P
sacrifices, such as President Carter's energy plan (especially as some 70 percent of I
Americans apparently believed that the energy crisis was a fabrication of the oil r
companies). ~
The solution of problems such as inflation, the environment and job security was I
likely to involve more government regulation and interference in the economy, not t
less, so that the only hope for a net reduction in state intervention lay in the area of f
deregulation. To buy out opposition to such deregulation, new compensation sy-
stems would have to be devised. t
The German solution had been to leave the market economy relatively free while ~
at the same time effecting income transfers in aid of social welfare. Conversely, the ~
reaction of most Americans during periods of crisis - energy and food, for instance
- had been to call for government regulation rather thf!n simply to aim to cushion
the shock for poorer people by altering incomes through transfer payments.
In the author's view, the U.S. would be well advised to seek solutions to many i
. . ~
of its problems through income transfer payments instead of regulating prices in the ~·
private sector. As an illustration, he suggested that 1
the present food stamps be
changed to "necessity stamps", which could be exchanged not only for food but for ,
energy or other needs. ~·
* [
* * I
German Working Paper:
"THE MIXED ECONOMY:
SOME COMMENTS ON THE EUROPEAN EXPERIENCE"
The chairman of a British state-owned corporation recently delivered himself of ~·
a remarkable outburst. Sir Frank McFazdean, Chairman of British Airways, said
that government had been "playing God in the marketplace with disastrous conse-
quences" . It had become a "vast industrial conglomerate, piling one unhappy acqui-
sition on top of another, without purpose or direction, devoid over large areas of
any proper financial control". The preservation of democracy and even elementary
efficiency required a retrenchment of the arrogant interventionist urges of politi-
cians and civil servants. Mr. Roy Je1;1kins recently asked whether democracy could
26
survive when 60 percent of GNP was distributed over the government budget.
The growth of public expenditure in all Western countries raises issues, not all of
which shall concern us here. I intend to use the term "mixed economy" in the
narrow sense of state interventions at the micro-economic level through a manipula-
tion of the relative prices of the factors of production and of their allocation in the
market. Although a clear dividing line towards two other forms of state intervention
-regulation and the welfare state- cannot always be made, I see both these instru-
ments by the state to respond to public needs as essentially market-conform alterna-
tives to the mixed economy. The line becomes blurred when regulation involves,
e.g., fiscal incentives, or when welfare state objectives are pursued via state-run
services like education.
I hope to avoid these difficulties of definition by sticking largely to the industrial
sector. This limitation of the subject also helps to avoid some of the very large
questions familiar from the socialist-conservative debate about the essence of
freedom (freedom to choose or freedom from want and security). Rather I intend
to tell a rather tragic tale about a heroic attempt - to create wealth and to use it for
public purposes - which almost came off.
My principal assignment, if I see it correctly, is to communicate some of the more
exotic aspects of the contemporary European predicament by tempering criticism
with sympathy. While ignorance and greed played their part in creating the pro-
blems of the contemporary European political economy, so did bad luck. "He never
had a chance" is of course the starting point of many efforts, domestic and now also
international, which lead to the manipulation of economic forces. Yet I for one
would not wish to live in a society where this argument was considered irrelevant.
The postwar origins
The starting point of the story was the existence of serious deficiencies in the
economic and social systems of 20th century Europe, and the emergence of a value
system which refused to take these deficiencies for granted. The latter fact, a cul-
tural phenomenon, is all too often left out of account in abstract discussions on the
economic behavior of nations. Two things follow from it: One is that politicians
never had the option of benign neglect enjoyed by their American and Japanese
colleagues; the second is that the amount of state efforts to cope with deficiences
is determined, to a considerable part, by the gravity of the deficiencies themselves.
These vary among countries and over time.
Fascism and communism were, among other things, attempts to cope with these
deficiencies. While postwar Western Europe opted for less drastic policies, a strong
belief in the capacity of government persisted in most countries. In a sense, this is
less puzzling than the reassertion of anti-Elizabethan instincts in post-Roosevelt
27
America. Had not fascist, communist, and Western war economies moved moun·
tains?
Of coure, there were voices which warned against overtaxing democracy with
tasks requiring a more robust form of governance. Yet the reverse also played a
subtle role in shaping post-war behavior: democracy had to prove its legitimacy
through performing according to the high standards of expectation fostered by ideo·
logy and past experience with alternative systems.
What were the "deficiencies and rigidities" which governments had to overcome?
The case of the pacesetters of the postwar mixed economy, Italy and Prance, can
best be understood by seeing them, as they saw themselves, as developing countries.
Not only were they, by European standards, agrarian societies, they also shared a
non-entrepreneurial banking system which had deprived industry of risk capital for
decades. In addition, industrialization was very unevenly spread in the country. For
Italy, the problems of the Mezzogiorno touched the very basis of its national exist·
ence (as did later Ireland and Scotland for Britain).
Since these deficiencies had persisted for a very long time, it seemed reasonable
to assume that the spontaneous forces of the market would not relieve them in the
future. Both countries started the postwar period with a large nationalized banking
sector, as well as a number of nationalized companies. Italy, wisely, initially delega-
ted most of the tasks of modernization and regional development to such a com-
pany, IRI, with the nationalized banking sector playing a supportive role. France,
with a different tradition and with bureaucratic resources second to none, used the
state's command over credit as a tool for manipulating the private sector. It is im-
portant to note that both models proved so successful in the 1950's, that other
countries copied features of them in the 1960's.
In Northern Europe most people initially assumed that the task of postwar recon-
struction, and the maintenance of a fair distribution of scarce resources among a
disaffected citizenry would require very considerable state intervention for a long
time. When the resiliency of the economies became apparent, and Marshall Plan
aid promised to loosen the constraints of scarcity, a more or less conscious decision
to return to a free enterprise system was made. At the same time, largely without
impinging on the market economy itself, extensive welfare systems were developed.
This alternative to the mixed economy, the separation between market and welfare,
was nowhere as complete as in socialist Sweden and centrist-conservative Germany.
In Germany, however, it was formulated into a theory, the "Soziale Marktwirt-
schaft", which has since hardened into a secular religion, almost as important to
the basic polical consensus as the constitution itself.
This picture of the first decade of postwar normalcy would be even more grossly
simplified than it is if mention were not made of the matter-of-fact attitude of all
European countries towards the quasi-industrial service sectors: rail, electricity,
28
post and telecommunications, as infrastructure which had to be supplied by the
state (sometimes even coal and steel were seen in this light). Subsidization of these
sectors, in this initial phase;·.was often an act of deliberate policy, a way to subsidize
industry in general and to keep inflation under control. Only later did these sectors
develop into heavy burdens on all countries' budgets; not only because of inflexible
management, but also because governments saddled these handy instruments with
too many tasks of general economic policy (regional, manpower, procurement-
industrial, anti-inflation policy). These sectors were thus the precursors of later
failures of the mixed economy.
A number of generalizations can be made about the European experience of the
fifties which should prevent us from making easy judgments on the merits of the
mixed economy. The first point to make is that both the "liberal" and the more
"managed" countries were successful in promoting high growth, consistently more
successful than the United States. Andrew Shonfield sees a major explanation in the
ability of the European we,lfare state at that time to generate high savings, in spite
of the seemingly inherent. tendencies of such states to over-consume. While in
Latin Europe, venturesome state banking contributed towards this success, in
Northern Europe heavy cqrporate taxation which could be avoided by the reinvest-
ment of profits, and the,.establishment of obligatory social insurance systems,
helped to mobilize investment capital. A crucial feature of the success of the
fifties was, of course, the then prevalent reconstruction mentality of the trade
unions, which allowed these instruments of forced saving to work.
Free trade: Threat to free enterprise?
The comparatively modest involvement of the state in the economy of the fifties
took place under conditions of limited and managed external trade. Tariffs, quotas,
exchange controls, etc., were only dismantled to a limited (if crucially important)
degree through the OEEC, and then on a regional basis only. The founding of the
Common Market, and the restoration of currency convertibility in the late fifties,
which put into effect earlier and rather theoretical tariff concessions, ushered in a
new period of growth for state intervention into the economy.
To put this reaction into perspective, it is useful to remind ourselves that few
nations anywhere in the world have embarked on an experiment of this magnitude
and opened their economies to outsiders to this degree. Foreign trade now accounts
for almost a quarter of GNP on average in these countries, and in the crucial sector
of manufactures the proportion is about double this figure. The U.S. and Japan,
especially, if one considers the heavy raw material content of their imports, are not
even in the same league. The proximity and basic similarity of the major trading
partners (i.e., other Western Europeans) meant that trade could and did take place
29
over the entire range of production. Being squeezed between the high-technology
domination of the U.S. and the low-technology challenge_of the Third World added
to the pressures. -
Not surprisingly, therefore, most European governments swore their oath of
allegiance to a liberal world economy with their fingers crossed behind their backs.
Governments intervened, both in order to strenghten, prophylactically as it were,
weak sectors, and in order to take part in the race for the establishment of advanced
industries. As Romano Prodi has written, much of We~.tern Europe "passed from
tariff protectionism to financial protectionism", and by:the same token from what
one could call "macroeconomic", noninterventionist protectionism to microeco-
nomic, interventionist protectionism.
A second element of international liberalization pushe,
d governments in the same
direction: the freeing of capital movements, and hence the threat of foreign pur-
chasers taking control over key economic sectors. Together these two forms of
protectionism led to the policy of "national champions", the creation of strong
companies able to meet or thwart international competition. The instruments were
various:
expansion of nationalized industries into high technology sectors (IRI and
especially ENI in Italy; nuclear industry in France and Britain), with the aid of
financing through the public purse or state-owned banks, social insurance funds,
etc.
the induced merger of fragmented industries with the help of credit incentives,
often under specially set up "marriage bureaus" (e.g:, the IRC in Britain). The
French steel, aerospace, naval and computer industries are examples.
the encouragement of mergers through benevolent suspension of antitrust laws
(German steel).
privileged procurement relations between state and favored firms, which thereby
could be forced to merge (e.g., the nuclear and aerospace sectors).
very substantial R & D grants to favored firms (in France, 35 percent of all pri-
vate sector R & D).
If the term "champion" suggests a race horse, a quit"e different animal came in
time to profit from some of the same instruments: the lame duck. Increasingly, firms
which failed to keep up with international competition had to be rescued. Often the
creation of national champions and the bailing out of bankrupt firms occurred
simultaneously, as in the case of French steel in the mi,d-sixties, and of the British
motor industry in the early seventies. Sometimes the: rearing of a technological ,
leader changed into the support of a lame duck, without an intervening period of
commercial viability. The Concorde is a case in point•
Even Germany engaged in an extensive Strukturpolitik to render weak sectors
30
like textiles and shipbuilding "competitive", a term which falsely suggests an adher-
ence to market principles.
Trade may have contributed to the growing weakness of European industry in
ways more subtle than just by revealing losses of comparative advantage. One such
effect may have been the introduction of genuine competition to such a degree that
profit levels were depressed for all but the strongest. The various ways in which
the market economy saves itself from its worst excesses, i.e., through restrictive
business practices, informal oligopolies or formal cartels, did not disappear in this
period, but were less effective as entrants to the market multiplied. Low rates of
profit and hence investment led, of course, to a cumulative loss of technological
advantage. While governments are usually accused of contributing to low profits
through high taxes, in Italy and Britain they seem to have given almost as much as
they have taken. The principle of the "squeaking wheel", e.g., short-time employ-
ment considerations, has consistently assured that money flowed to the weakest
sectors starving the more successful ones of capital.
A further consequence of the liberalization of economic transactions which gave
a boost to the mixed economy in Europe was the failure of macroeconomic man-
agement which resulted from it.
The need to maintain growth, full employment, a tolerable rate of job mobility,
a reasonable income distribution between regions and classes is common to all
European governments. To the extent these aims could be realised through macro-
economic policies, the private sector remained free and the economy prospered.
The exception is Britain, which received such violent doses of macroeconomic man-
agement in the first two postwar decades (before giving up its liberal convictions
and being forced into microeconomic management) that private industry suffered
heavily.
With the exception of Italy, where belief in Keynesian macroeconomic policy
was always weak and where countercyclical investment programs by the public
sector are an established feature, the rest of Europe seemed, until the late sixties, to
pursue a steady path away from the microeconomic conjunctural (as opposed to
sectoral) intervention of the early postwar years. An example is France, where
Keynesian theory only came into its own in the sixties.
There are signs that the shift which occurred in the postwar decades from reliance
on micro- to macroeconomic tools of management is now being reversed. The
reason for this is of course the failure of macroeconomic policy in the seven-
ties. While there are many reasons for this failure, increased economic inter-
dependence is doubtlessly one of them. The liberalization of trade and capital
movements has produced a genuine world economy which has taken on a life of its
own. Fluctuations in total demand, both inflationary and recessionary (probably
amplified rather than dampened by international coordination of policy) have taken
31
on such a magnitude that national countercyclical tools are simply overwhelmed.
This has two consequences for the growth of the mixed economy. One is that
microeconomic intervention is brought in to supplement the blunt tools of macro-
economic management. Attempts at wage and/ or price control in Britain, France,
Italy and Sweden are one example of the suspension of market forces for demand
management purposes. Other examples are the growing importance of countercy-
clical investment grants and policies for public and private enterprises in all
European countries. During the slump of 1968 to 1971 public investment in Italy
rose from one-third to one-half of gross fixed capital formation, a process which
had a clearly countercyclical effect in the short term but may have contributed to a
(further) misallocation of resources in the medium term.
In Britain as in other European countries, the already heavy task of public enter-
prises and state-run incentive schemes to promote growth and full employment in
general, and within unfavored regions in particular, has merged imperceptibly with
the manipulation of investment flows for countercyclical purposes, coupled with
selective price controls familiar from the infrastructure sectors. Even Germany,
during the 1975 recession, adopted a sectoral investment incentive scheme (for
building) in addition to across the board anti-cyclical alleviations of corporate tax
burdens which are common to the Atlantic world as a whole.
At least as important as planned microeconomic countercyclical interventions,
are ad hoc rescue operations which become necessary to help firms and sectors
which are most seriously hit by the general failure of macroeconomic policy. In the
early seventies, state holding corporations were founded or strengthened in most
European countries to help routinize the acquisition, financing and managing of
lame ducks. Even free-enterprise-minded Sweden, which for decades had put. its
faith in a civilized form of labor mobility, founded its own lame duck organization,
AB StatsfOretag. In Italy, Gestioni e Partipazione Industriale (GEPI) was founded
to take care of lame ducks, so as to relieve IRI of the constant pressure to nation-
alize them completely. In France, the Industrial Development Institute (IDI), also
founded in 1970, similarly subscribes equity capital to ailing companies, on the
model of the British IRC (abolished by the Tories in 1970, but reborn as the Nation-
al Enterprise Board.
Space limitations (or rather the knowledge that lengthy conference papers tend
to remain unread) prevent my arguing in greater detail the thesis that trade leads
to adjustment burdens and a failure of macroeconomic policy which jointly push
most European countries towards increased "mixing" of their economies. The great
liberalization experiments initiated in the late fifties were planned, more or less
unconsciously, for a world economy serenely and effectively managed under the
Pax Americana. They were also based on the assumption, almost uncritically I
32
adopted from continent-sized America, that adjustment capacity was both infinite
and hence equal for all countries.
If nothing else, that powerful indicator of adjustment capacity, the rate of replace-
ment for capital investment, seems to be determined by a host of factors which
form something like a national-cultural characteristic: the rate of profit considered
legitimate, the entrepreneurial spirit of managers, the willingness of labor to adapt
to new machines, the amount of total national saving devoted to social infrastructure
investments (claims by the state on the capital markets), etc. One has only to look at
the extreme case of Japan to realize the socio-cultural determination of the rate of
capital replacement.
Having said this and, perhaps for the love of a paradox, related the decline of
domestic liberality to the increase in global liberalization, I would be inaccurate
to leave out of account the domestically-produced rigidities in European economic
and social systems which have reduced the capacity to deal with fluctuations at the
very time these were increasing.
Since we are here on very familiar ground they need only be stated briefly. One
cause for rigidity is the increased struggle over distribution in all countries as the
postwar reconstruction mentality faded and deferral of consumption in favor of in-
vestment became harder to justify. This not only applies to industrial wages but also
to demands by groups such'as civil servants or farmers, whose claims have to be met
via taxation. High wages and taxes combine to weaken companies and make them
ripe for state aid.
A high level of corporate taxation, moreover, has come to assume a symbolic
aspect in Europe, as the quasi-logical counterpart of wage restraints. Recently, a
tax cut considered necessary by the Dutch government to stimulate investment
activity could not be pushed through against political opposition, so that direct
grants to industries with employment problems were used instead. Similar tales can
be told in most other Western European countries. This is one way to speed up the
spread of the mixed economy.
While it is true that the recession brought calls for an equitable sharing of misery
as between labor and capital, it also brought a slight rehabilitation of profits as a
source, present and future, of job security. Of late, however, these gains of capitalist
rationality are again being lost as the evidence shows that reinvested profits in a
recession are used to rationalize production with a possible net loss in jobs.
The legitimacy of profits, and of the right of the owners of capital to allocate
the surplus created jointly with labor has of course become a live issue, usually
discussed under the heading of worker participation (in management and/ or owner-
ship). Although the state may get involved in legislating such a shift in power
(Mitbestimmung, Bullock), this problem does not fall strictly within the definition
of the mixed economy as used here. To do it justice would require another paper.
33
A further rigidity is reduced labor mobility. The traditional attachment of the
European to his home community has been reinforced by increased home-owner-
ship. The willingness to change skills, too, is reduced: by the rapidity of obsoles-
cence in spite of retraining schemes, and by the tendency of technology to degrade
the skill-level of many jobs. The revolt against the assembly line, whose clearest
symptom is absenteeism, further reduces the adjustment options open to industry.
A great many rigidities, however, stem from the mixed economy itself, i.e., they
are (again a paradox) the result of coping with earlier rigidities. There can be little
question that active participation by the state in the running of enterprises tends
to slow down their ability to respond to changed circumstances. Any multi-layered
decision-making structure does, but especially one composed of men with quite
different expertise and purposes, i.e., industrialists, civil ·servants and politicians.
(State ownership as such is theoretically a neutral device, as the cases of Renault or
German Salzgitter show; but such ownership lowers the :threshold for direct state
intervention.) ..
Not surprisingly there is a lively debate, especially in those countries hardest hit
by the pathologies of the mixed economy, on how to establish a measure of efficien-
cy into an increasingly messy situation. In Britain, the nationalized industries have
formed an association to achieve, among other things, a more arms-length relation-
ship towards their tutelary ministries. On the other hand, the existence of whole
sectors of private enterprise living on the public purse, 1
e.g., shipbuilding, have led
to demands for total nationalization as a more honest. alternative. In Italy, the
communist party argues in favor of denationalization d ·large parts of manufactu·
ring industry. (However, private industry has had access to considerable state aids,
and in some cases bent the purpose of politicians to their own ends, e.g., by buil-
ding high-technology industries in the Mezzogiorno with aids destined to raise
employment.)
Germany: on luck and virtue
i
The precarious situation of many other European economies serves to enhance
Germany's successes. While it would be correct to attribute much of this success to
the free-enterprise commitment of industrialists, civil servants and politicians alike,
the reverse causation may also be true: Germany's successes have saved it from the
necessity of applying second-best approaches to economic order. The example of
Germany as much as that of Italy supports the proposition that the mixed economy
is a function (and only later the cause)of systemic failures.
Germany's greatest asset is that, with Sweden, it has perhaps the most sophistica-
ted trade union movement in the world. This is due to luck (the British military
government supported industry-wide over craft unions) and to virtue (the compara·
34
tively open-minded attitude of employers, the willingness to defer consumption for
a long time after the war, the ability of union officials to read balance sheets and
national accounts, etc.). This attitude of the trade unions practically solved two
of the policy targets which are the despair of other governments: price stability
(wage increases in step with productivity increases) and balance-of-payments equi-
librium (high regard for the competitiveness of exports).
A second asset, largely under the heading of luck, is the comparatively even
distribution of high value-added industrial and service activities in the Federal
Republic. This has meant not only that fewer resources had to be made avaible
for regional policy, but also that they could be concentrated on a few localities
and cases and hence achieve lasting successes.
Another element of luck in the German starting position was the existence of
very large firms (by then prevailing standards) which could tackle the huge techno-
logical development tasks of the postwar period without government help. Again,
this freed resources for the few sectors where help was needed, like the nuclear
industry, or allowed generous state support for irretrievable lame ducks, like the
coal industry, without crippling the economy.
The small size of the problems confronting the economy also accounts for the
success of the small, but efficient, public investment bank, the Kreditanstalt fi.ir
Wiederaufbau which serves (on a modest scale) as a tool of public industrial
strategy. Another German peculiarity, in striking contrast to France and Italy, is the
special role of the three large private banks in serving as instruments of industrial
planning and rationalisation which in other conutries have to be taken care of by
public bodies. The German practice of transferring to banks shareholders' votes
(Despotstimmrecht) gives their representatives a powerful voice on the boards of
directors, reinforced through close creditor-debtor relationships. Being represented
on the boards of all major firms in a given sector, the banks gain a complete picture
of the situation and can proffer advice accordingly. The high technical competence
of these unofficial planners contrasts favorably with all but their French public
counterparts.
The argument so far has been to say that Germany had less need to take re-
course to elements of the mixed economy, either because its problems were smaller
or informal alternatives were available. We seem to be observing two processes in
Europe: a virtuous circle in Germany and a vicious one in some other European
countries, forced by weakness to deprive themselves of the basis of future strength,
i.e., by misallocating resources. The importance of misallocation rather than capital
shortage is brought out in the following table:
35
Investment and output, 1953-1973
Japan
Italy
Sweden
France
Manuf. investment
% of value added
manufacturing
24.2
19.5
16.0
15.6
West Germany 13.3
U.K. 13.1
u.s. 11.9
Japan
Increase in manuf. out-
put per increment of
capital expenditure
100 (ref.point)
West Germany 80
France 70
U.S. 70
Italy 65
Sweden 60
U.K. 40
Source: OECD National Accounts - Deutsches lnstitut fiir Wirtschaftsforschung.
But the story does not quite end here. One of the most fundamental acts of public
intervention in Germany has been to insure a consistently undervalued exchange
rate. This not only contributed to a much steadier conjunctural path of the economy
(wasteful deflationary periods could be avoided through an assured access to a
seemingly dependable world market), but it also frequently hampered the task of
the weaker European countries to cope with their balance-of-payments problems.
These countries were thus forced into sub-optimal growth paths (deflationary cor-
rection of their payments balances).
The high export specialization achieved under this strategy continued for a while
to facilitate economic policy making, even under floating exchange rates when
cheating seemed no longer possible. When the whole OECD world was plunged
into oil deficits, Germany's flexible industry could respond fastest to new opportuni-
ties when speed rather than price counted most. Nevertheless, Germany's successes,
whether due to luck or virtue, contribute to the failure of its partners.
The German government is waking up, if slowly, to the dangers of this situation.
In 1975, the recession of its European partners contributed to a fall in German
exports and hence in GNP. Worse, voices were raised, especially in Britain, calling
for a siege economy. The failure of some European countries to live with the world
economy threatens to push them - after the failure of both Keynesianism and the
mixed economy - towards more fundamental changes in regime.
In a sense, the German government is the prisoner of its past successes. The
German economy cannot survive if 50 to 60 percent of its export market (Western
Europe) suffers a decline of shuts itself off. A stimulation of internal demand would
36
help other countries, but cause inflationary uncertamttes (it is hard to remain
sympathetic to these anxieties in view of the stakes involved), and it would not nec-
essarily raise domestic employment very much. The exchange rate will not function
very well to redress the current account balance, and if it did, it would cause a
recession in the export sector.
The method used so far, a kind of national deficit financing (of exports) on a
huge scale, whether through central bank or private credits, is not sustainable even
in the medium run as a means to keep up demand in pace with productivity in-
creases.
It is hard to escape the conclusion that the government will need to take recourse
to the tools of the mixed economy to carry out the long overdue shift away from
export-oriented to domestically-oriented demand, without which both German and
European economic security are jeopardized. One straw in the wind is the $ 5 bil-
lion public investment program for infrastructure decided on in early 1977. But this.
scheme is purely employment-motivated. The suggestion that the German consumer
be allowed to enjoy the accummulated reserves (e.g., through a public "foreign"
procurement program, both civil and military) which would correct the payments
balances of our trade partners with sufficient speed, would be laughed out of court.
So would the suggestion that the Bundesbank buy bonds in the European Invest-
ment Bank on a large scale, rather than in low yielding U.S. Treasury bonds. Are
German virtues an obstacl~ to a timely response to a changed world? Will its luck
run out? ·
We started out with the proposition that the mixed economy is a response to
systemic failures in a context of shaky political legitimacy and high expectations.
In a sense, the growth of interdependence has destroyed the dividing line between
the healthy German and the troubled partner economies. There are no easy choices
left.
*
* *
In his introductory remarks, the German author mentioned a few of the important
themes about which he could have written, had space permitted: the relative limits
of the state and the market in solving economic problems; or, how to improve effi-
ciency in the service sector; or, the growth of the planning function, as exemplified
by the French Seventh Plan and the Congressional Budget Office in the U.S.
Instead, however, he had chosen to dwell on the role of international economic
interdependence in accelerating the trend towards the mixed economy. This was
not necessarily the most important factor in that trend, but it involved some recent
objective differences among European countries, and between Europe and America,
and would help to steer the discussion away from utopian abstractions.
37
He reckoned that the most controversial part of his paper would be his thesis that
free trade had, in effect, proved to be a threat to free enterprise. That is, the inter-
dependence achieved through the GATT and the EEC had reversed the trend to-
wards macroeconomic intervention which had seemed 'clearly established by the
late 1950's.
One way in which free trade had encouraged the miJ(ed economy was by repla-
cing tariff protectionism with financial protectionism. Th~~ we had seen the "prophy-
lactic" reorganization of key industrial sectors in anticipation - perhaps overesti-
mation - of the competition to come. "National champi.ons" had been created in
industries considered important for future trade competition. The state had sought
to rescue threatened industries through massive infusions of capital, and had as·
sumed the financial risks of new technological developments.
But this financial protectionism had often brought t)1e state to spend taxpayers'
money in second guessing fairly straightforward market opportunities. Had econo-
mic growth continued unabated, we might have been aple to say that the high cost
of misallocating resources had been worth it to keep ~the peace domestically. As
it was, though, we could only conclude charitably that governments had often been
under irresistible pressure to do something. Nurturing,"white elephants" such as
Western European shipbuilding or the export-oriented refinery industry of the
Mezzogiorno had been akin to using a presidential pat don to reprieve industries
condemned to death by the marketplace. The economic costs of assuring political
stability through such side payments might in the end endanger that very stability.
One was used to worrying about the loss of control ~ver economic policy caused
by the international integration of money markets, i.e., the blunting of the instru-
ments of the bank rate and the money supply. But in addition we now had the effect
on demand management of the very large trade shares in the GNP of the European
countries, coupled with the increased amplitude and synchronization of world busi-
ness cycles.
In those conditions, even a very restrictive domestic demand policy could not
escape the inflationary effect of foreign demand for exports or of rising commodity
prices for imports, and in a recession even the substantial deficit spending such as
practiced by Germany could not offset the shortfall ' of export demand during a
world slump.
Dumping a man in hot water and then pushing him out into the cold would
quickly establish a need for medical treatment. In the author's analogy, this was
what had happened to Europe in the 1970's and the mixed economy represented
the required medical facilities. Germany's virtuous success in the present world
economy was related to the weaknesses of its trading p~rtners in a sort of feedb~ck
loop which threatened, paradoxically, to undermine the German success.
*
38 * *
! i '
DISCUSSION
1. Introductory Comments
To lead off the discussion of this part of the agenda, an American and a Dutch
participant offered a brief analysis of the subject in light of the working papers.
The American speaker, referring to the problems outlined in his compatriot's
paper, said that it was important to try to see how they were related to the role of
government in the U.S. economy. He posed these questions:
(1) Had the expanding role of government caused or merely exacerbated the
problems?
(2) Was it the very nature of government intervention, as distinguished from its
extent, that presented the difficulty?
(3) Had the existence of the problems described in the working paper - or of
other problems - called forth more government interference, which we were now
complaining about?
(4) As the German paper suggested, was there a vicious circle at work here, in
which economic problems evoked responses from the state which only made matters
worse?
(5) Alternatively, were these problems which we were bound to face without
regard to the role of government?
In seeking answers to these questions, the speaker proposed the following line
of analysis:
(1) Was government's involvement in the U.S. economy increasing? He agreed
with the assessment of the American author that there had been little encroachment
on the private sector during the past 20 years. The rapid increase in the costs of
local government had been largely related to the enlargement of school systems to
accommodate the postwar "baby boom".
As measured by transfer payments, though, the role of the state in the economy
had grown substantially. But a larger part of this increase was due to the expansion
of existing programs (Social Security benefits and unemployment insurance) then
to new programs (Medicare, Medicaid, aid to families with dependent children,
food stamps, etc.)
In any case, the period of rapidly expanding transfer payments was behind us,
and the two major areas of unfinished business - welfare reform and health insu-
rance - would probably be approached with great fiscal caution.
On the other hand,.the government was getting into new areas of regulatory inter-
1 vention which would indeed prove costly: environmental enhancement, job safety,
pension reform, consumer protection, etc.
39
(2) What had led government to greater intervention in the U.S. economy?
Against the background of the depression, the Federal government had taken on
a moral commitment at the end of World War II to assure the economic well-being
of its citizens. At the outset, countercyclical macroeconomic policy had been the
only instrument envisioned. But more recently, and especially in the last decade,
the effort had been aimed more at providing minimum standards of living for indivi-
duals within our society, as distinguished from improving aggregate conditions and
equal economic opportunity for minority groups.
At the same time, problems such as increasing population density, potential
resource scarcity and growing technological sophistication had magnified our con-
cerns about the side effects (or "externalities") of the private-sector market deci-
sions. Government had become involved as the arbiter of these externalities, for
instance in the field of environmental protection.
(3) What were the consequences of this greater governmental involvement? First
of all, it meant that the state was caught up, almost unwillingly, in an unprecedented
range of responsibilities and promises, with which it was ill-equipped to deal. We
were no longer asking it just to build roads or deliver the mail, but to engage in
social engineering. If we had achieved greater social equality, it had been at the
expense of some economic efficiency. Moreover, we had reinforced the inflationary
bias of our economy through the expectations which accompanied government's
commitment to social welfare, and we had acquired a measure of rigidity in the
process.
(4) What were the alternatives? If we believed that the adverse consequences
of increased government involvement in our society outweighed the benefits, the
forthright course would be to renounce the new commitments which had brought
the state more and more into our personal and economic lives. But the speaker
rejected this as the best route for the future.
If one believed, on the other hand, that these commitments of government were
fundamentally justified, and that there was nothing inherently self-defeating about
any attempt by the state to alter the economic process, then the appropriate re-
sponse was to seek ways to improve the effectiveness of government intervention,
rather that to bemoan it.
For one thing, we could introduce greater consumer choice into government pro-
grams (e.g., student vouchers rather than aid to universities), and we could replace
or supplement regulation with market-like incentives (e.g., effluent charges, insur-
ance premiums related to job safety, etc.) We could also emphasize pilot projects
and experimentation in place of wholesale openended commitments to new social
programs.
40
(5) What were the prospects for government's role? As the American working
paper indicated, there was widespread disillusionment in the U.S. about govern-
ment's ability to deal effectively with social and economic problems. On balance,
though, Americans were not prepared to abandon the commitments taken on by
the state during the past decade. At the same time, it was improbable that they
would choose to strike out in new directions. They were therefore likely to be best
occupied in refining existing programs. In this context, it was significant that
President Carter had promised not only to balance the Federal budget by 1981, but
also to hold down Federal expenditures to the same proportion of the gross national
product as at present.
The major uncertainty in the future outlook had to do with the implications for
the mixed economy of our attempt to deal with the energy problem.
The Dutch participant appreciated the analytical aspects of the working papers
but did not share the apparent value judgments of their authors. He avowed that
he had no mixed feelings about the mixed economy. In his view, it was here to stay
and "we'd better try to get used to it and to understand it if we want the more
democratic part of our world to survive."
Discussion had to be based on a proper conceptual framework, and he found
that the working papers had not adequately defined the mixed economy. His own
search for a definition would start with these questions: Why is a public sector
needed if consumer preferences should rule and if there is a clear preference for
decentralized decision-making? Why not leave things to Adam Smith's "invisible
hand" of market forces instead of to government regulation?
Some would answer that .the role of the state reflected ideologies which had less
confidence in the wisdom of consumer choice, but this was only a partial reply. In
the speaker's view, a more complete response was that it had been demonstrated
that the market price mechanism alone was not capable of carrying out all the im-
portant economic functions, and that it had to be supplemented and protected by
government intervention. The mixed economy was thus seen as a basic characteris-
tic of any well-organized democracy, now or in the future.
One implication of this line of analysis was that the proper size of the public
sector was not an ideological but a technical matter. This was so for several reasons:
(1) The conventional wisdom that the market mechanism Jed to an efficient
allocation of resources was based on the unfulfilled condition of competitive factor
and product markets. But how was this condition to be fulfilled in fact without gov-
ernment intervention?
(2) Even if all the barriers to competition were removed, the production and
consumption characteristics of certain goods were increasingly such that they could
not be provided through the market. Problems of externalities arose which induced
market failure, requiring solution through state intervention or regulation.
41
(3) The rate of discount used in valuing future vs. present consumption differed
when seen from a public vs. a private viewpoint. In a democracy, the private sector
would vote for government policies which reflected the voters' evaluation of their
own lack of foresight. The speaker said that his argument that market deficiencies
called for public policy correction or compensation did not mean that any particular
policy measure undertaken would be bound in fact to improve the economic system.
Public policy, no less than private, could be mistaken and inefficient. But if a
democratic system worked well, and consultation with the private sector were
sufficiently intense, then it seemed probable that a highly mixed economy would
function better than one with a low mix.
The speaker concluded with what he described as the "harsh judgment" that
economics had failed both in diagnosing problems in our societies and in prescribing
ways to help politicians. In his opinion, we would be on the wrong track if we
assumed that the problems of the mixed economy ertcountered in America were
fundamentally different from those in Europe, even though the scale and the institu-
tional setting might be different. The key issues were the same: unemployment,
inflation, growth, the environment. And the final goal qf any economy had to be the
preservation of a democratic society in which we could continue to survive.
2. The Recent Historical Background
As a British participant observed, political leaders throughout history had been
led by motives of philanthropy or expediency to inter:vene in the workings of the
economy, and political demands for state intervention would doubtless always be
with us. A Canadian speaker said that some histori~ns might choose to call an
economy mixed where the role of the state had been limited virtually to defense, the
conduct of foreign affairs and the preservation of the established church. But the
passage from a private economy to a mixed one, in the sense of our present dis-
cussion, was generally thought of as occuring when government's share in economic
activity as a whole began to be perceptibly larger than in earlier times. Something
of the kind had taken place in Western society during the past quarter century, and
a number of participants described the experience of their own countries during
that period.
In postwar Italy, for example, the "mixed economy" had meant essentially a
state presence in the basic sectors, such as steel, to insure a steady flow of materials
and the absence of bottlenecks. Efficiency had been a primary consideration, and
state-sponsored companies had had to find their funds in the marketplace at only
marginally cheaper rates.
The orientation had begun to change by the early 1960's, with the state ex-
panding into such sectors as electronics and nuclear energy. When electricity was
42
;•;
X,-~!
nationalized in 1963, an Italian socialist leader had explained candidly: "There are
no objective motives which call for nationalization of the electricity industry in Italy
today. But we have to stick this pole in the wheels of the government's cart to keep
the neo-capitalists from solving - through their policy of prosperity - the problems
which constitute our raison d'etre."
In an effort to assure economic expansion and employment, the state had invested
in many weak companies, and efficiency had come to be replaced by loyalty as the
cardinal attribute of management in state-controlled firms.
In the face of staggering financial losses, though, Italian sentiment - even among
Communist leaders - now seemed to favor retrenchement of the state's role in
industry. One view attributed this development in part to the advent of greater
competition in Italian political life, the long dominance of the Christian Democrats
having had, it was argued, a corrupting influence on the mixed economy there.
A similar corrupting effect was seen to have occurred in the U.K. One British
participant said that the "soft option" approach at the heart of the mixed economy
had done a debilitating job in Britain and elsewhere, producing a "eat's cradle of
subsidies" under which more and more people were paying for other peoples'
failure to satisfy the market. A combination of trade unions, academicians and
pressure groups had created an avalanche of well-meant regulations, tax disincen-
tives and demands for equality of condition, which added up to a substantial bar-
rier to the spontaneous creation of jobs.
Another Briton alluded to the emergence in his country of a whole new "indus-
. try": governmental relations. With many salaries and dividends blocked - statu-
torily or voluntarily - management was spending an inordinate amount of time
talking to politicians and civil servants trying to keep abreast of what lay ahead for
industry. A pernicious side effect of the mixed economy was that people began to
believe it was the responsibility of government to solve all economic problems.
Opinions were divided about the French experience. One view was that the
nationalized sector was efficiently run and posed no threat to the country's sound
development. The French preferred to seek a "mix" in every sector rather than to
depend on direct regulation of the economy. Other French participants, while
conceding that state-owned industries could be dynamic and productive, felt a need
to infuse the public sector with greater entrepreneurial spirit and freedom to take
risks. This would require substantial decentralization (which itself would have to
be planned).
A French participant argued that "liberalism" in his country had produced a
,;greater degree of socialism than had the German of Swedish brand of social
"democracy. A German participant described the philosophy underlying the postwar
'experience in his country. Running a mixed economy in a democratic constitutional
society, he said, required a high degree of common basic understanding by both
43
labor and management about economic processes, about what were the prerequisites
and consequences of any proposed action.
The Germans had sought to achieve this in a number of ways: (1) by the election
of workers' councils; (2) by the nomination and election of employee representatives
to the supervisory boards of firms in the private sector; (3) by giving the workers
a strong feeling, not only of participation and decision-making, but of being treated
fairly; and (4) by providing, through a comprehensive social security system, a
sense of assurance about the future.
As a result of these measures, state regulation of markets in Germany had been
considerably less than in other countries, and there was little labor unrest. There
was more class struggle rhetoric than there was actual class struggle. The good day-
to-day working relationships among government, trade unions and industry seemed
to be the only "secret" behind Germany's superior economic performance during
the past decade.
The main problem facing all of our democracies today, the speaker said, was how
to restore full employment and maintain economic continuity while improving
political stability.
Although it was claimed that the issues presented by the mixed economy were
essentially the same on both sides of the Atlantic, several participants referred to
the absence of ideological pressures in the U.S. for greater government intervention
in the economy. Indeed, a number of industries there which had undergone a period
of state domination had been turned over to the private sector: nuclear energy,
aluminum, satellite communications. American trade unions preferred to work
with private employers, and one labor leader said that any significant enlarge-
ment of the public sector in the U.S. would come, not from ideological pressures
from the left, but from actions by conservative administrations to rescue troubled
companies, lest their failure have a depressing effect on business as a whole (e.g.,
Penn Central). Other American speakers countered that the principal proponents
of less government involvement in industry were businessmen.
3. Rescuing Lame Ducks
A common feature of our mixed economies in recent years had been state inter-
vention to aid distressed industries and firms. The role which government should
properly be expected to play in rescuing these "lame ducks" was discussed at length.
Several participants supported a German speaker who said that such intervention
should be discouraged, as it was bound to distract the state from its main task of
ensuring general economic stability within an overall framework. Others - including
Norwegian, Dutch and Belgian speakers - argued that considerations of employ-
ment, social tranquility or national security sometimes made intervention imperative
44
when important sectors (e.g., shipbuilding, steel, textiles) were imperiled by foreign
competition or a business recession.
In any case, there was general agreement that help for lame ducks should be
regarded as only a temporary expedient, since indefinite subsidies had no place
in a pluralistic, liberal society. Several speakers thought the aim should be to nurse
ailing companies back to competitive health and to restore them to the private
sector as soon as possible. But the author of the American working paper insisted
on a different emphasis. In his view, it was not companies, industries or institutions
that we ought to worry about making viable, but the workers themselves. Accom-
plishing this by Adam Smith's "invisible hand" was too slow and painful, though,
and more attention had to be given to state-sponsored compensation and retraining
schemes.
The very existence of the lame duck problem implied domestic or international
disequilibria, and the question just where the heaviest burden of adjustment should
lie was the subject of lively debate. It was recognized that politicians, business
management and labor couldall be subject to strong pressures, but opinion differed
about who was most in need of bracing up. A British participant observed that,
when politicians saw local industries being made redundant by foreign competition,
the natural and cheaper course was to try to keep them going for a while rather than
to concentrate on developing.new industries.
Several speakers said that politicians had to be exhorted to resist giving in to
special interest groups, and a French participant advocated greater use of consti-
tutional devices and statutory norms to enable government to resist such pressures.
On the other hand, an Italian speaker said that politicians should be prepared
to support management in the private sector, who might otherwise give up and cave
in to pressure from trade unions, some of whbse leaders did not even believe in the
mixed economy, much less the market economy.
A Canadian suggested that labor ought to be more mobile, but this prompted
the reply from two U.S. participants that this was often sociologically impossible (as
where the workers were women with families), and that one of our problems was
that there had been too mu<;h labor mobility during the past generation.
4. The Multinational Corporation and the Mixed Economy
This led into a discussion of the role of the multinational corporations (MNCs),
which were criticized by some speakers not only for "exporting jobs" but for seeking
to maximize profits in ways that were often at odds with governmental programs
and policies. The larger of the MNCs now had annual sales which surpassed the
GNP of all but a handful of nations, and it was alleged that this made for a system
which was qualitatively different from that of a generation ago.
45
In view of at least one American participant, the mixed economy of the future
would be marked by the ever-growing size and power of private companies, and we
would "be able to change governments more easily thai).:we could change the boards
of directors of multinational corporations". The occadional bankruptcy of a large
firm was not a sufficient corrective, and one had to be concerned about the respon-
siveness of large corporate bureaucracies to society's need to produce sufficient
goods and to distribute production equitably. It had to be remembered that an un-
employment rate of, say, seven per cent was only ail average, and that the rate
among young people and minority groups approached :30 to 40 per cent.
Another American speaker took issue with the notion of converting MNCs into
instruments of public policy by creating special advantages for them: subsidizing
their exports, underwriting the credit risk of their foreign investment and allowing
them to accept "antisocial invitations" to settle abroad for tax advantages.
These lines of argument provoked a variety of responses. The charge.about "expor-
ting jobs" was heard to have an "irrelevant protectionist ring" and was_characterized
by an American participant as "just one side of the century-old international trade
question" . A British speaker pointed out that huge projects such as the development
of the North Sea and Alaskan oil fields would eventual1y produce domestic benefits
for the investor countries, but they could not have been achieved without the
transfer of resources abroad. '
Various British and American participants with direct experience of multi-
national company management made the following points:
As MNCs had acquired more bargaining power with their ability to move invest-
ments internationally, it was understandable that tn;
tde unions should find fault
with them. But is was pointless to chastise MNCs t'or troubles which had been
caused in truth by changing world economic conditions. Far from being irrespon·
sible, the managements of MNCs wen~ accountable to their employees, shareholders
and host governments, besides having to answer to such groups as environmentalists,
feminists, consumerists and racial minorities. They could not make investments
except for sound economic reasons and, once committed, it was not easy for them
simply to withdraw from a country. Even the largest international company could
not stand up to the smallest sovereign nation, and it was a myth to imagine that
MNCs roamed the earth free of controls or social constraints.
A Canadian participant referred to the positive contributions made by MNCs
in the internationalization of expertise and the creation .of employment in relatively
undeveloped areas, which often had the effect of sa~ing jobs at home. In his ex-
perience, moreover, MNCs were better at adjusting to local conditions than were
trade unions.
An American participant expres~ed concern about the preoccupation in his
country with guaranteeing equality of condition, in a~dition to the Constitutionally·
46
protected equality of opportunity. If the U.S. went too far down this road of "affir-
mative action", with quota systems imposed by the governmental bureaucracy, the
speaker feared a substantial impingement on the freedom of businessmen, university
administrators and others to manage their own affairs effectively.
5. The Position of U.S. Trade Unions
It became apparent during the course of the discussion that there was a degree
of misunderstanding in Europe about the fundamental orientation of the American
labor movement, and about how it differed from Europe counterparts. At the
request of the Chairman, two participants who were American trade union leaders
described the current union scene in the U.S.
Salient characteristics of the American system were these: (I) Enforceable labor
agreements with no-strike clauses and well-developed procedures for settling
grievances; (2) the shop steward's role confined to handling grievances; no author-
ity to call work stoppages; (3) a well-developed system of jurisprudence; and (4) a
system of mediation and conciliation served by an experienced cadre well-versed
in the minutiae of industrial relations.
There was virtually no interest in the U.S. in the co-determination issue, outside
of the media and the academic world. This was due to labor's relative faith in, and
lack of frustration with, the process of collective bargaining, which was well suited
to deal with a wide variety of questions (e.g., seniority, job security, promotion,
discipline, new plants, day care, legal and medical problems).
Union leaders had all the tools they needed to protect their members, and did
not feel left out because they were not represented on boards of directors. Labor
relations in the U.S. were non-ideological, and not imbued with class overtones.
While fraternization between union officials and management was not frowned
upon, there was the conflict of interest inherent in any contractual relationship.
Unions would therefore resist strongly any development which risked tingeing the
representatives of the workers with the point of view of their adversaries.
The general serenity of the American labor scene did not mean, though, that
there were not difficult areas. Union officials were still working hard to advance
their cause in Southern textiles and in public service companies. They would con-
tinue to seek to regularize and standardize conditions of employment within indus-
and crafts regardless of fluctuations in profitability among firms.
6. Combatting Inflation in the Mixed Economy
An American participant offered the opinion that the average consumer was
much more concerned with inflation than with the pros and cons of the mixed
economy. The public inevitably looked to large institutions, including government,
47
for the solution of problems arising from institutional causes, and it would tend to
demand mandatory price and wage controls if inflation could not be curbed
voluntary means.
A Dutch speaker lent his support to the notion that more active government
intervention at all levels was needed to curb inflation. If we relied only on global
demand management, as we had since the 1950's, he predicted that inflation would
be with us for a long time.
The implications of a British intervention were that the mixed economy by its
very nature tended to foster inflationary wage settlements. With the state partici-
pating more and more as an employer in the economy, larger numbers of its citizens
were brought into a new relationship with it.
While industrial disputes used to be between groups subordinate to the state,
strikes were now aimed increasingly at the state itself. As these strikes grew in size,
so did the political stakes, and settlements were increasingly based on voting power
rather than on economic or even philanthropic considerations. Industrial policy
thus became political policy and non-ideological strikes became political conflicts.
A German participant replied that, in his view, the implications of the mixed
economy for inflation depended not so much on the amount of state intervention
as on the reasons for it. Unfortunately, the truth was that - even before the break-
down of the Bretton Woods fixed-parity system or the quintupling of oil prices -
most of us had been guilty of (a) consuming more than we produced, and (b) prin-
ting money to fill the gap.
We should not now delude ourselves by talking about "reflation", which was just
a cheap disguise for inflation. Politicians, industrialists and labor leaders alike had
to understand that the evils of our societies could not be abolished unless they firmly
opposed the idea that claims on our gross national products could exceed 100 per
cent of that G.N.P. "There is no G.N.P. in the world", he said, "this year or next,
which adds up to more than 100 per cent. If you allow excess claims to rise to five
percent, you get five percent inflation if the central bank allows that; otherwise you
get unemployment".
The speaker urged leaders in all sectors to have more confidence in their own
judgment and to take heart from their own endeavors. Governments might be weak,
but industrialists, too, would be weakened if they allowed their self-confidence to
be undermined.
A Canadian participant characterized infl ation as "the greatest single menace, the
most pernicious, corroding force loose in our society", causing destructive social
effects and threatening the governability of our countries.
If inflation were not checked, it would mean the end of the mixed economy, and
of the high hopes we had had for it as a compromise between abandonment to blind
market forces and the dictatorial allocation of resources.
48
As he saw it, the first difficulty in combatting inflation lay in attacking a moral
social problem with economic tools. The second was the perseverance of myths,
as the one which held inflation to be the product of excessive and unscrupulous
wage demands and the policies of greedy corporations. In truth, inflation was a
product of government as arbiter of the money supply. Neither big unions nor big
companies could produce inflation by themselves because they could not print
money.
Another myth was that inflation could be :overcome through an incomes policy,
or price and wage controls. That would be: to attack the symptoms, leaving the
disease to grow and spread. High prices were the result of inflation; indeed, they
were counterinflationary, in that they tended to reduce demand.
Still another myth was that nations were unable to cope with inflation, as it
stemmed from global conditions. This was pure self-justification. The German and
the Swiss experience had shown that nations with little or no inflation could exist
next to neighbors with high rates of inflation.
Seeking an explanation for our inability to cope with inflation, the speaker found
that, even after social welfare had become a prime political objective, it had long
been thought wise for government to keep its hands off the money system. But
this principle had been abandoned when, with the rising expectations'of the elector-
ate, the control of the " money machine" had passed from central banks to govern-
ments.
The strategy of demand management had fostered, from its inception, a strong
inflationary bias, and the consequences of 30 years' experience had finally submer-
ged the very solid objectives for which the strategy had first been adopted.
There was still a simplistic belief that "money doesn't matter", and those who
thought that it did were labelled "monetarists", a pejorative term with rather reac-
tionary connotations. That·attitude among the public admittedly presented a pro-
blem for politicians who themselves saw what ought to be done. But whatever the
political obstacles, we could no longer tolerate government deficits financed by
money creation. "The sands are running out", the speaker warned.
7. Guideposts for the Future
An assessment of our experience so far with the mixed economy in the western
democracies should help set some guideposts for the future, and several participants
offered their conclusions.
A Finnish speaker confessed frankly that he had lost all faith in a general theory
about the mixed economy, and felt that each country had to look at the matter
from the viewpoint of its own special problems. By and large, though, the speakers
tended to divide into two camps: those who had found compelling theoretical or
49
practical reasons for nurturing the mixed economy, and :those who were uneasy
about the implications of its growth. Among the former were participants who said
that the mixed economy was here to stay because the market price mechanism
alone was incapable of carrying out the economic function of allocating resources,
and that the mixed economy was not all that bad, there being no reason to suppose
that private business hac\ a monopoly on good management.
A Dutch participant alluded to the fundamental changes that had occurred in
recent years; the technological innovative race in production systems, overinvest-
ment in some sectors, demographic changes, and the satisfaction of the demand for
consumer goods. He argued that the attendant adjustment was so radical and
painful that the state had had to intervene to ensure social and political tranquility.
An International speaker said that a heavy dose of state control had become
inevitable in many sectors- rail, post, energy, East-West and North-South trade-
and that the main question was how to make it most effective. Finally, there was
the notion, expressed by an American, that government intervention was warranted
wherever business concentrated too much on "profit making" to the neglect of
"social goals and responsibilities" (to provide employment, for example).
On the other side, another American claimed that the mixed economy was based
on a kind of egalitarian-oriented welfare state that was incompatible with a demo-
cratic society aimed at promoting the most efficient use of resources. Furthermore,
as a French speaker saw it, the mixed economy tended to be unstable, as more and
more people learned to live with it and to make it serve them. For some, manipu-
lating the state had proved to be more profitable than doin'g "straight" business, but
in the end an expanding public sector led to a progressive erosion of human rights.
However one felt about the mixed economy in theory, it seemed to have achieved
a degree of permanence, and the important practical issue was how it could be
constrained so as to preserve democratic values and the dynamism of the private
sector. An Italian participant suggested four rules which, he said, had been dictated
by his country's experience: (1) When the mixed economy took a vindictive turn,
with nationalization "by the back door", the results were likely to be disastrous;
the best mix was an open, above-board partnership. (2) There had to be a clearly-
defined code of conduct for state-owned firms. (3) A balance had to be found
between management independence and'the need for political control. (4) Account-
ing systems had to be devised to give the public a clear picture of state-owned
enterprices, and they should not be allowed to beggar their competitors with capital
borrowed at below-market rates.
Other participants agreed that the state should not compete with private enter-
prise except on a fully-equal, non-subsidized basis.
It was suggested that there were at least two "danger points" to look out for in
the evolution of the mixed economy. One was where the level of government inter-
50
vention tended to nullify the market mechanism. Even if there were a call to cut
back at that point, as an American pointed out, there was the risk that the people,
having got used to the government's being the savior of last resort, would lack the
will to force a retrenchment. The second point was where the level of taxes rose
so high that it killed personal incentives (a level which some participants felt had
already been reached in the United Kingdom).
A German speaker reminded the meeting that our governments had all become
involved as arbiters of externalities. As new exogenous factors, such as the oil price
increase, would certainly continue to appear, some degree of international coordi-
nation was bound to be required.
An American participant spoke in a similar vein, referring to the experiene of his
own business. From the end of World War II until the late 1960's, U.S. industry
had generally operated with a sense of unlimited resources. It had been assumed
that there was "plenty of everything" - money, raw materials, energy, labor - and
industrial firms had been run internally as very enterprises, with considerable
autonomy granted to division managers.
In time, shortages and increased costs of capital, raw materials and energy had
manifested themselves, and businessmen had discovered that "there were more
things we wanted to do than we had resources to do". This had led necessarily to
"balance sheet management" and a centralization of asset allocation.
The speaker predicted that, so long as the world situation was characterized by
such shortages, nations would have to do as individual businesses had done and
accept a high component of central decision making and asset allocation. This
would call for greatly improved performance by both government and business,
neither of which had been functioning to the entire satisfaction of the general
public.
The speaker admitted that, as a "free enterpriser", he would have preferred as
little state interference as possible. But he now saw no likelihood of a return to the
old days, and he felt that there was some cause to be hopeful about the outcome if
we would face the reality of our new situation.
Other participants agreed that, rather than looking for panaceas, we should
address ourselves to the long-range task of educating politicians, the public and the
media in the realities of economics and business life. As a British speaker put it, the
free enterprise system had not been defeated, but it was in danger of being lost by
default, and it was up to business management to lead the way in this job of ex-
plaining fundamental economic relationships to the public.
According to a Swedish participant, the "disinterested citizen" referred to in the
American working paper needed not only to be informed on economic questions; he
was also supposed to be accountable to some overriding principle in acting to ar-
bitrate the demands of special interest groups. As nearly everyone now hac\ a direct
51
economic stake in what government did, these disinterested citizens were becoming
relatively few in number. Moreover, they seemed to be in danger of losing their
sense of accountability. To safeguard our democratic institutions, we had to find
a way to rekindle that sense.
*
* *
52
II. THE THIRD WORLD ' S DEMANDS FOR
RESTRUCT'URING THE WORLD ORDER
French Working Paper:
"AlTITUDE OF THE EUROPEAN COUNTRIES TOWARD THE DEMANDS OF THE
THIRD WORLD FOR A REFRAMING OF THE WORLD ORDER, AND THE
POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS OF THIS ATTITUDE"
I. The questioning of theworld order
The Third World demands for a reframing of the world order are part of a more
general questioning of this order which must first of all be placed in context.
1. In the first place we must agree on the meaning of the words. The concept
of world order implies a certain consensus on the rules of the game, be they explicit or
implicit, which govern the relations between political units in the "world". Abstract-
ly, one can say that an orde~ exists within a system of political units when each one
of these units is dissuaded by the others from not respecting the rules of the game. In
the former European system, the Treaties of Westphalia and the Treaty of Vienna
(to which some have made a rather audacious attempt to compare the final act of
Helsinki), are classic examples of an order. In the period following the end of the
Second World War, the Western economic system was subject to the IMF and
GATT order.
Such a conception of order is ethically neutral. A political unit may be compelled
to accept the existing ord~r without a deepseated adherence to it. For example,
one may think that the system formed today by the countries of Eastern Europe
constitutes an order which has been imposed. Inversely, it is not enough for an
order to be economically advantageous for all the units in a system for them to
submit to it. An isolated unit, in the absence of any sanctions, may find it in its
interest to "cheat" (this is what, in games theory, we call the "free rider problem").
In the simplest situation, there is a dominant unit which polices the system itself.
This can be considered to have been the case for twenty years in the postwar
Western economic system (having said this, leaving open the question of the benefits
from free trade for each 9ile of the units). The European order after the Treaties
of Westphalia (1648) and Vienna (1815) is a more complex case, for there was
no dominant unit. (In point of fact, the rise of Prussia was, on the contrary, the
53
cause of the breakdown of the Vienna system). Obedience to the rules of the
game was, in this case, the result of a long process of apprenticeship.
An international order is in danger when one or several of the units cease to
respect the rules of the game which had previously been accepted without the others
(the dominant unit where it exists), wishing (for example, the Prussian victory over
the Austrians at Sadowa to the applause of the French nation) or being able (for
example, the first time the price of oil was doubled in 1973) to compel it or them to
respect the rules again. Save in time of war, it is never easy to put other than a
symbolic date on the breakdown of an order in a political system.
2. The international order established after the Second
1
World War may, in its
broad outlines, be characterized as follows:
- bipolarization around the U.S. and the USSR, relations between these two powers
being governed by the rules of nuclear deterrence.
- definition of the economic relations between the market economy countries
around the IMF and GATT in accordance with the liberal viewpoint of the U.S.,
which, moreover, provided a de facto guarantee of the functioning of the system;
- relations between the industrialized and the underdeveloped countries governed
within the framework of decolonization.
A gradual change took place in this order, and it can be said that by the beginning
of the 70's it had broken down. The main causes of this evolution are:
- detente, following on peaceful coexistence which resulted in a certain "debi-
polarization", that is, as far as the Western camp is concerned, a certain breaking
free from the U.S.
- a decline in American economic supremacy over Western Europe and Japan
and an increase in the number of unauthorized deviations,from the Bretton Woods
and GATT rules of the game.
The breakdown of the international monetary system between 1971 and 1973 and
the oil crisis in the autumn of 1973 can be considered as marking the end of the
old economic order. Here again, the main point is the disappearance of the U.S. as
leader of the system.
- decolonization (which has still not yet been accomplished, particularly in Africa),
with the emerging of new independent pations which, because of their territorial
sovereignty, acquire a certain freedom of action in the international system. By their
number the new nations have completely changed the face of the United Nations
Organization. As far as this institution is concerned, the entry of the People's
Republic of China into the Security Council also marks the end of the old order.
3. We are at present in an intermediate stage between the old order which has
disappeared and a new order which has not yet been conceived but which is the
subject of debates of ideas and of diplomatic discussions.!The day will come when,
54
in a favorable situation, ideas will take shape and effectively lead to the setting
up of a "new world order". This was the case in France where the Revolution and
the Empire were able to implement projects which had been formulated under the
ancien regime.
After the Second World War, the U.S. was in a position to establish an order
in their own camp which corresponded to their own viewpoint (this term seems
more apt than "interests") of the world. The superiority of this country was such
that its will could not but assert itself, and furthermore, it did not lack support in
other Western countries.
Today the situation is radically different; the U.S. and the Soviet Union are
fairly equally powerful. Other centers of power have emerged or re-emerged,
lastingly or temporarily, as varied as Germany, Japan, China or Saudi Arabia. The
new nations of the Third World, because they have won their sovereignty and hence
the possibility to control the use of their territory; because they can use blackmail in
the East-West game while taking advantage of the concept of non-alignment; be-
cause their economic demands fall within the framework of the failure of the old
liberal system; because, also, they have been able to transform the United Nations
into a sounding board to their advantage and they do not lack support from the
liberal democracies, will henceforth have a real disposition for disturbing the world
scene. The principal event in this respect was the embargo and the first doubling
of the price of oil in October 1973, followed by a second hundred percent increase
at the end of the same year. The hopes of the Third World, and hence its unity,
are still largely based on this remarkable exploit.
Finally, the spreading of power throughout the world today is such that no
country is in a position to impose its own kind of order. This is obviously incon-
ceivable as far as a world system is concerned. It is not even conceivable in a more
limited system. Today, for example, we can no longer really speak of a Western
bloc, since countries like West Germany and France, relying either on their eco-
nomic strength of on the relative autonomy of their defensive capacity, have won
considerable freedom of action in their dealings with the U.S. and the Soviet bloc.
As for the Third World countries, they have escaped from Western tutelage and are
seeking to compensate their economic dependence on the industrialized market
economy countries by political support from the socialist countries without the
latter managing to control them.
The international system is nowadays no longer under any form of regulation,
and the various forces of protectionism which are beginning to appear are but the
expression of a natural self-defense reaction in the light of this fundamental fact.
By what process of apprenticeship will we achieve new rules of the game which will
be commonly accepted in a leaderless system? How long will it take to achieve this?
What trials will we have to suffer before a stable situation is possible once more?
55
The new international order will be defined by trial and error and the accidents of
history will certainly leave their mark on the final product.
These then are a few of the very general questions which can be posed. It is
obvious that specific matters as diverse as the setting up of an energy policy, the
coordination of macroeconomic policies, nuclear arms limitation, the control of
arms sales throughout the world, nonproliferation, pose very similar methodological
problems. In other words, how is interdependence to be managed in a leaderless
world?
This is the obviously vast framework in which we must, of necessity, place our-
selves before tackling the specific question of the demands of the Third World and
the attitude of the Europeans.
II. The demands of the Third World and the attitude of the Europeans
1. It is always delicate to speak of the Third World as if it were a unified entity
with well-defined and coherent objectives. Nowadays, a distinction must be made
between the OPEC countries (and distinctions must be made among them as well),
the semi-industrialized countries such as Brazil, Taiwan or South Korea, and the
"real" underdeveloped countries such as the landlocked African countries. It is,
however, convenient to reason as if the Third World formed one bloc, since we are
discussing demands of a general nature.
In political matters, the Third World intends to have its say ; that is, it intends
to have a front seat, not just a back seat, in the international organizations, in par-
ticular the monetary and financial organizations (IMF and World Bank). In the
United Nations, they are questioning the principle of permanent members of the
Security Council and the right of veto which they wield within the Organization.
The Third World also intends to take the decolonizing process to the bitter end,
winning independence or the application of majority rule for a certain number of
territories in Africa: Rhodesia, Namibia, the T.F.A.I., the Union of South Africa.
In economic matters, the viewpoint of the Third World is largely inspired by
the Leninist theory of imperialism. The market economy industrialized countries are
accused of having built their prosperity on the looting of the Third World. The
more specific economic demands of the Third World can be found in detail in
several successive documents, texts of the Vlth and VIIth special sessions of the
United Nations General Assembly, Charter of Rights and Economic Duties of
States, the Manila Charter, UNCTAD documents (and in particular of the Nairobi
conference in May 1976), as well as in the positions expressed during the Con-
ference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC).
These demands may be grouped in five main chapters of which the titles will be
quoted with a minimum of comment:
56
a) Trade in basic products: the Third World, with a certain nuance, supports the
integrated program of UNCTAD.
b) Manufactured and semimanufactured:products and international trade: this is
a question of improved access to the markets of the developed countries, of con-
trolling the activities of the multinational corporations, of financial aid for exports
from the developing countries, of international cooperation in restructuring indus-
try.
c) Financial and monetary questions: this entails the rescheduling or the remis-
sion of debts of the developing countries, the increase of capital flows in their favor,
adjustments to the international monetary system.
d) Special measures in favor of the less-advanced, the insular and the landlocked
countries.
e) Technology transfers: here it is essentially a question of facilitating the Third
World's access to the "technology" of the Western countries.
2. What is the attitude of the European countries when faced with these de-
mands?
From a strictly political point of view, the attitude of the major European coun-
tries remains purely defensive: formal opposition (in the case of Great Britain and
France), not without ulterior motives (in the case of the Federal Republic of Ger-
many) in the face of demands for a reformulation of the UN Charter and the rights
of the members of the Security Council.
As concerns economic matters, first of all the Lome Convention, which links 46
countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific to the European Community,
which was signed at the end of February 1975 and which has been in force since
April 1, 1976 should not be forgotten. This Convention covers all the aspects of
cooperation: trade, industrial cooperation, financial and technical aid, the stabiliza-
tion of income from expo~ts. This convention clearly reflects the wishes of the Third
World and, furthermore, has begun to operate in a way which, in the main, satisfies
the partners on the whole.
Apart from this, the European countries are relatively divided. France and Great
Britain, former colonial powers, are adopting open attitudes towards the demands
of the Third World. The first concern of each of these countries is the protection
of its customers' interests: mainly the French-speaking African countries and the
Magreb countries as far as France is concerned, India and Pakistan for Great Brit-
ain. But whereas France which, in the past had endeavored to set up a centralized
economic organization of its colonial interests and which has introduced at home the
concept of "indicative planning" to correct the errors of the market, agrees to play
with the idea of a certain organizing of international economic relations (for
example France has defended for 15 years the principle of product agreements),
Great Britain, whose empire was founded on trade and banking profits from inter-
57
national trade and on the supplying of the mother country at the lowest cost,
remains attached to a free•trade viewpoint, even though the decline of its traditional
positions makes it consider the problem differently now. Germany, which has no
strong colonial tradition and which is assured of its economic strength, maintains
a free-trade position which is not devoid of dogmatism.
The attitude of Holland is particularly interesting. In 1974, the Dutch Ministers of
the Economy and of Cooperation set up a program of industrial reorganization as
part of the national policy of development cooperation. This fund was granted 35
million florins a year for 1975 and 1976, that is, roughly $ 16 million. The idea is to
give financial assistance to industrialists who agree to abandon the manufacture of a
traditional product in the Netherlands when it appears that the same product impor-
ted from a developing country is competitive. Although the implementation of this
program has come up against a certain number of practicai difficulties, the idea be-
hind it is very interesting. It is the first attempt to apply the idea of a new international
division of labor which is more in line with the interests of .the Third World and yet
which is compatible with the free-trade ideal to which Holland also remains attached.
On the diplomatic scene, France has, without doubt, been the most active coun-
try as regards the demands of the Third World. It has sought bilaterally to develop
its links with the Arab world and strives to give a satisfactory response to the
demands and preoccupations expressed by its African friends (strengthening of
diplomatic links, embargo on the export of arms to South Africa, proposing an
African development fund, etc.). It took the initiative of a multilateral concertation
between industrialized countries and Third World countries which was to lead
to the CIEC. Its efforts, however, are marking time. It has been directly implicated
in the affairs of Djibouti (which are being settled) and of Mayotte. The pressure
of economic difficulties has prevented it, so far, from going further than the others
in the framework of the CIEC.
3. In the short run, the problem of the attitude toward the Third World has two
aspects:
a political aspect: How must the CIEC exercise materialize?
an economic aspect: The world has not come out of the economic crisis and the
recovery of the foreign balances of the industrialized countries has been achieved
at the expense of the increasing indebtedness of the non-petrol producing develop-
ing countries; or, if one prefers to put it this way, the counterpart of the financial
surplus of the oil producing countries is found almost entirely in the Third World
countries. We are faced, then, with a very urgent problem of how to avoid the
bankruptcy of certain Third World countries which would inevitably have reper-
cussions on the industrialized countries as a whole. ·
58
On these two points, the attitudes of the European countries seem to be quite
similar and, moreover, comparable with the attitude of the U.S. The CIEC must
produce results sufficiently concrete for all of the parties concerned to be able to
speak of a success or at least of a non-failure. No one wishes an intensification of
Third World demands which could result, in particular, in a strengthening of the
common front formed by the extremists of the OPEC and the poorest countries
of the Third World, and hence oblige Saudi Arabia and the moderate developing
countries to harden their positions once again.
Economically, a reduction in the demand of the Third World countries would
have a negative effect on the economic activity of the industrialized countries
After all, 20 per cent of the European Community's exports go to non-petroleum
producing developing countries. Contrary to what is too often said, this argument
is valid only in the short run (in the long run the problem of outlets does not arise
because supply is adjusted), which does not make it any less important. Further-
more, a payments crisis would have serious repercussions which it would be hard to
control on the functioning of an international financial system, which, it should
not be forgotten, has since the beginning of the crisis been the supplier of funds
to the Third World. (The indebtedness of the developing countries tripled between
1969 and 1976; two-thirds of this debt was covered by private loans, which went
from 40 percent in 1970 to 65 per cent in 1976).
Naturally, the political and the economic aspects are linked; the question of
indebtedness is one of the stumbling blocks of the CIEC. Differences of opinion
appear as to what action should be taken. What concessions should be made as far
as indebtedness is concerned? On what countries should possible recovery efforts be
concentrated? As concerns this last point, the neo-liberal approach, well reflected
by the Germans and the Americans, consists in laying the accent on the "semi-indus-
trialized" countries like Brazil, Taiwan or South Korea, whereas a more "social"
approach would insist on the case of the poorest countries. The advantage, in the
first case, is that the capital injected would be more capable of producing income
later, and so would make a surer contribution to the recovery of world activity.
Naturally a combination of both approaches is possible. Conflicts will not fail to
arise between the European countries and the U.S. when it comes to deciding the
criteria for chasing the countries to be favored, for their economic and political
interests in the various Third World countries are not identical and each will strive to
grant privileges to those countries which are normally within the orbit of its export
trade interests.
Another source of conflict will appear, of course, when it comes to deciding who
is to bear the cost of these new injections of capital into the Third World. The coun-
tries whose balance of payments is in deficit will not hesitate to send the ball into
the court of those which have a surplus, who will, at least in part, seek to avoid
59
paying. They will try, in particular, to make the countries which are structurally
in surplus pay (Saudi Arabia, the Emirates), and the latter will no doubt be
reluctant to do so.
The solutions to these two types of conflict are obviously interdependent, the ·
countries which finance these transfers being better placed to defend their views
on the criteria which should be applied to the receiving countries. It is very prob-
able that Europe, and France in particular, will be the losers.
4. As far as the long term is concerned, it is much more difficult to reason in
terms of interest other than in a very general way. It is rather to a "conception" of
the role of the Third World in the international system that reference must be made.
The European countries, for various reasons, are conscious of their dependence
as respects raw materials. Furthermore, the geographical proximity of some of the
Third World countries attracts attention for security reasons (the Mediterranean
basin as a security zone for Europe, Africa). The Keynesian argument of economic
interdependence, i.e., the notion of the Third World as a potential market, is also
important.
Politically, and to speak like the Chinese, many Europeans think that the "second
world" will not be able to maintain its independence of the "first world", that
is to say the super powers, unless it is capable of allying with the Third World.
Naturally, this argument can be interpreted in a more or less extreme way. It is often
defended in France by the supporters of a privileged alliance with the Arab world,
which they see as the basis for greater European independence as far as the U.S.
is concerned. It may also be thought that, because of its wealth of relationships,
Europe can play a part in guiding the evolution of certain Third World countries,
particularly in Africa. Are these countries condemned to fall under the sway of
totalitarian regimes which are Marxist-inspired, or which at least use Marxist
rhetoric, or can it be thought that the experience of development on a liberal model,
such as in the Ivory Coast or in Senegal, may have a lasting success? Is not the
cooperation of France with these two countries, for example, highly significant in
the very long-term prospects for developments on the African continent?
These considerations have so far failed to lead to the precise formulation of a
policy (save perhaps that which is embodied in the Euro-Arab dialogue, the asso-
ciation with the Africa-Caribbean-Pacific countries, and the generalized preferences
granted by the Community to the developing countries), but the feeling is wide-
spread in Europe that the old continent has a particular role to play as regards the
Third World. Relations with the Third World may also be a federating theme for
the European Community.
60
III. Political implications ·
1. Everything is happening, finally, as if the European countries were divided
into two camps but with a cleavage which differs according to whether one con-
siders what they say or what they do, whereas their interests seem uniform enough
asregards the U.S. If we consider what they say, we find on one side those who are
in favor of more or less orthodox free trade (Great Britain, the Federal Republic
of Germany), and on the other side those who are in favor of a controlled and
corrected free trade (the Netherlands, France). lf we consider what they do or want to
do, we find on one side those countries which are not in a hurry (Great Britain, the
Federal Republic of Germany), and on the other side those which would like to take
account immediately of the changes which have occured in the Third World (in
particular the Netherlands).
If we now consider what are the real interests of the Western countries, we find
that the cleavage this time is between Western Europe (Japan is completely omitted
from this study) and the U.S. Western Europe, as we have already seen, is histori-
cally and geographically nearer to the Third World and more dependent on it for
its supplies of energy and raw materials.
2. So long as the countries of Europe are not sufficiently aware of their common
interest in this matter, and so long as the pressure of necessities is insufficient, they
will attempt to scheme in order to safeguard their short-term interests, while at the
same time they will endeavor to keep open the range of long-term possibilities.
Europe, then, will probably make the minimum of concessions in the short run
which are compatible with the political interests of its members and the preservation
of its trade flows. It will attempt to oppose any developments which would tend
to subordinate North-South relationships, which are in fact West-South relation-
ships, to East-West relationships. It will attempt to develop specific relationships
with the countries associated with the Community. In all likelihood, it will be led
to accentuate its efforts towards the Mediterranean basin (as foreshadowed by the
enlarging of the Common Market toward Greece, the Euro-Arab dialogue and
toward Africa). It will gradually become less free-trade in outlook and will so have
a more organized conception of international economic relations. During these
changes, difficulties with the U.S. will not be lacking, for the American short- and
long-term interests are different and its long-term conception of the international
system will take some time to adapt itself to the fact that it is no longer the sole
center of power in the non-communist world.
*
* *
61
In his introductory remarks, the French author referred to the principal
available to the LDCs for bringing pressure on the industrialized world. The
was OPEC; if it had succeeded so far in retaining the friendship of the less-devw.v
oped countries (who had been the first to be hurt by the oil price rise), it
because OPEC was seen as a unique spearhead for the demands of the
World.
The second instrument was public opinion in the developed countries,
there existed a large reservoir of ideological sympathy for the plight of the
World. Finally, there was the dependence of the industrialized world on the
materials produced by the LDC's.
In the longer run, there was the prospect that by the year 2000 the
of the industrialized countries would represent only ten per cent of the world
putting them in a beleaguered position which the author compared to that of
Rhodesian whites.
Then there was the possibility that some Third World nations would
nuclear arms; some spokesmen had already openly stated their objective of
so in order to bring pressure on the industrialized world.
*
* *
American Working Paper:
DEVELOPED COUNTRY REACTIONS TO CALLS FOR A
NEW INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORDER
In recent years numerous groups, some governmental, some private, have
forward appeals or claims or demands for changes in the workings of the
economy and in the decision-making machinery regarding how it is to work.
the claims differ in detail from forum to forum, they share several common
The first is that there should be larger transfers of resources and of technology
the rich industrial countries to the poor countries of the world. A second theme is
the poor and non-industrialized countrie_
s should be subject to specially
treatment, and that in general they should be exempt from the prescriptions
government behavior with which the rich industrialized nations are (
charged. A third theme is that the decision-making machinery governing
national economic questions should be revised to give greater participation
greater weight to the poor or nonindustrialized nations.
The rationale for these claims rests in part on the contention that all
62
a right to satisfaction of certain basic human needs and that those who are
to do so already have a corresponding responsibility to satisfy that right for
in the name of the solidarity of humanity. They rest in part also on the
that, at best, the existing international economic order - meaning the
of institutions, formal rules, and informal conventions that govern economic
among n·ations - disregards the special problems and concerns of de-
nations, and at worst has fostered the exploitation of poor countries, so
some restitution for past and present injustices is in order.
The particular proposals that have stemmed from these claims are numerous
vary from group to group, but they include such items as:
1) establishing international commodity agreements on those commodities pro-
by developing countries, to assure that they receive equitable and remuner-
prices (a variation of this involves indexing commodity prices to prices of
goods, to assure that commodity prices rise no less rapidly than
prices in an inflationary world);
increasing official development assistance from the rich countries up to the
Nations target of 0.7 percent of gross national product;
renegotiating the principles of allocation of Special Drawing Rights at the
Monetary Fund to give developing countries a larger sl;lare;
providing general debt relief in the form of forgiveness or postponement of
repayment obligations of developing countries on their external debt;
granting and enlarging preferential treatment for imports from developing
into the developed countries;
increasing the flow of relevant technology to developing countries, at reduced
to them;
asserting the right to all property within national boundaries, and hence, the
to take over foreign-owned property without regard to international legal
regarding compensation;
changing the decision-making procedures in such institutions as the Inter-
Monetary Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for Reconstruction and
(hereafter, the World Bank) to give greater weight to developing
is noteworthy that these claims have been directed almost exclusively at what
Nations terminology are called the developed market economies, i.e.,
Europe, North America, and Japan, Australia and New Zealand. (These
be called the "western" countries hereafter). In particular, they are not
y directed toward communist countries such as East Germany or the Soviet
The reasons for this are no doubt complex. The communist countries
excepted) themselves do not participate in some of the important inter-
63
national forums, such as the World Bank, the IMP, and (with the further exceptions; ':llllder the domestic law of the nationalizing state. The Charter also a~serted (Art.
of ~oland and Rom_ama) the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GAIT)./ ~~8) the duty of all states to cooperate in adjusting the pnces of their lillports, 1.e.,
:his would not restnct their contributions in other contexts, however, such as gran-"*' ~\0"index" the prices received by developing countries.
tmg development assistance, participating in commodity agreements, or grantin{lc" _;:·· The Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States had_ its orig_ins long befo~e
trade preferences. In general, the communist countries have lower per capita inJ "'the increase in oil prices, as did proposals foLchanging the mternat10nal economic
comes than do the western countries, and this might seem to absolve them from '4 t order. Many of the specific proposals that made up the content of the proposed new
bein_g_ cal_
led upon to meet the claims. But some of the claims (such as those for.rJ ¥ international economic order had been under consideration for some time. And the
rect1flcat10n) are not especially related to income, and in any case some communist'l ·,.developing countries had increasingly used their majority in the UN General Assem-
countries have per capita incomes that exceed those of the poorer western countries~· ,f'bly to push through resolutions over the objections of the western countries, as
such as Italy and Ireland..Indee?, by 1976 the per capita income of East Germany~· ~~:~hen, in 1969, they voted a moratorium on all attempts at mining the seabed _until
exceeded that of the Umted Kmgdom. What is probably more important is thli'c/ · new international regime for the seabed was worked out. But what astomshed
perception of leaders in developing countries that they are unlikely to alter th~ · members of the western public was the new assertiveness with which these proposals
policies of communist countries much by making appeals in international forums f ·. were advanced the extreme claims of some of the provisions, and the unwillingness
in p~rt becaus~ of the nature of communist governments, in part because the com:,:). '".,of the majorit/of the General Assembly, made up of a cohesive group of developing
mums_t countnes cannot so easily be held hostage to them in terms of needed : countries, to compromise on many of the provisions. While many of the provisions
matenals or vulnerable foreign investment. Their success with the western countries .''' the Charter were unexceptionable to all countries, a theme of extreme state
is likely to ?
e~ubstantially greater, largely because with appropriate arguments·,~; .-sovereignty runs through the Charter. The U.S. objected especially to the three
they can en!Jst Important segments of public opinion in their cause. , provisions noted above. The provision for settlement of disputes exclusively under
Public response to calls for a new economic order
The initial response of publics in western countries to the stance adopted by
developing countries was one of shock and astonishment: first, at the Arab oil embar- .
go imposed in October 1973- the event that brought publics into general awareness
that important changes were taking place- and then, by the four-fold increase in oil
prices announced by the Organization for Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)
for January 1974. This assertion of market power emboldened the developing
countries, under the leadership of Algeria, in 1974, to put forward a "Program of
Action" in a special session of the United Nations for establishment of a new inter-
national economic order. In November 1974, the UN General Assembly approved
the "Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States", which among other (on ·
the whole straightforward and widely accepted) provisions asserted (Art. 5) "the
right to associate in organizations of primary commodity producers in order to
develop their national economies . . ." and the corresponding duty of all states to
refrain from applying economic and political measures to limit that right - a
provision that would legitimize OPEC's actions and those of other potential cartels
among producing countries. The Charter also asserted (Art. 2) the right of any
state to expropriate foreign-owned property within its borders, paying "appropriate .
compensation . . . provided that all relevant circumstances call for it". Resolution
of any controversy regarding expropriation and compensation is to be determined
64
. domestic law, in particular, seemed to sweep aside a long (western) tradition regar-
ding international settlement of disputes.
The initial reaction of astonishment was soon overtaken by a more differentiated
reaction. Some westerners applauded the new assertiveness of the developing coun-
tries and in their own writings supported them and contributed further to the claims
for redressing past wrongs and for a moral obligation to make transfers from rich
countries to poor countries. Others reacted with a sense of guilt, implicitly acknowl-
edging the merit of the positions taken by the developing countries, and urged
negotiation and a willingness to compromise on both sides in the emerging debate.
They wanted some kind of accommodation. Still others reacted with anger at the
seeming exploitation of newly-found power - in votes in the General Assembly and
. in monopoly in the provision of oil - and urged stiff resolution against yielding to
what was regarded as extortion. Numerous shadings, of course, exist within all of
these groups, and to them must be added the diplomatic pragmatists, who are less
concerned with the substantive merits of the particular proposals and the arguments
for or against a new economic order than with the fact that a large number of
countries are resolutely serious in their claims for a new order, and who urge
diplomatic accommodation as necessary to restore a degree of harmony in relations
among countries.
It must be observed that the idea of a new international economic order is, itself,
aprofoundly western idea. It has been advanced and rationalized by western-trained
leaders in developing countries and even by a number of westerners. Philosophically,
65
the notion that conscious human action can change the "order" of things, even
human things, and moreover that mankind can attack world poverty in a systematic
way with ultimate success are fundamentally western ideas, drawn from the idea of
progress. They have no counterparts in the reflective philosophies of the East or in
the doctrines of Islam concerning the execution of God's will.
The varied reactions to calls for a new economic order can be found to some extent
in all western countries, and to some extent they correspond to the political spectrum
from left to right. The radical-liberal-conservative political debate within countries
has now become global.
Governmental responses to calls for a new economic order
Governments of the western countries also differed in their responses to the new
claims, but the variation was far less than it was among the literate public. The U.S.
tended to be the most resistant to the various proposals to change, and the rhetoric
that accompanied them. Europe and Japan, much more dependent on imported
materials, hence more vulnerable to serious deterioration in relations with primary
producing countries, were verbally more accommodating in their responses. These
differences can be found, for instance, in the response to the oil embargo and the
increase in oil prices. The United States sponsored the formation of the Inter-
national Energy Agency among the western countries, designed to deal with future
embargoes should they arise; whereas France sponsored the Paris talks among oil-
producing and oil-consuming countries, in order to establish a dialogue with the
presumed objective of making future embargoes, or further large price increases,
less probable. The U.S. initially resisted the idea of producer-consumer talks alto-
gether, on the grounds that oil prices, in all likelihood, would be discussed and
that such discussion would not be in the interests of the consuming countries. This
resistance was based on the conviction.that sooner or later the forces of competition
would reduce oil prices. Immediately after imposition of the oil embargo (which
formally was directed only at the Netherlands and the U.S., because of their
support for Israel), Japan, in an open effort to curry favor with the Arab oil pro-
ducers, called on Israel to yield the occupied territories.
Even earlier, the U.S. (openly supported by Germany, but only silently supported
by a number of other European countries) opposed changing the formula for the
allocation of Special Drawing Rights' (SDRs) to favor economic development, on
the grounds that monetary manage~ent and resource transfers for development
should not be commingled. And the U.S. had also opposed the extension of tariff
preference to less-developed countries, wheras the European Community and Japan
each made a symbolic nod toward developing countries by introducing a system of
tariff preferences in mid-1971, although the systems then introduced were shame-
fully restrictive in the degree of preference actually provided. (The U.S., bowing to
international pressure, also introduced tariff preferences in 1975, with a scheme
less restrictive than the European and Japanese ones, although it could hardly be
called generous). Resistance to price-raising commodity agreements has been more
general among western countries, with the exceptions of Canada (which as a large
exporter of primary products would stand to gain) and France.
The general picture, then, is one of western governments being skeptical of most
of the proposals that have been put forward in the name of a new international
economic order, but differing among themselves in their willingness to discuss the
various proposals and even, if necessary, to implement them. The U.S. (often sup-
ported by West Germany) has tended to adopt a principled stand on the desirability
of preserving relatively free markets, whereas other western countries have tended
to adopt a more pragmatic approach aimed at mollifying the developing countries.
Ethical and Prudential Reasons for Resource Transfer
The calls for a new international order raise a host of questions, some concer-
ning the philosophical foundations of claims for resource transfers between nations
- or indeed between individuals - , some concerning the system of governance at
the global level, and some concerning the desirability and the feasibility of the
particular proposals that have been advanced. It is not possible, in a short paper,
to deal with all these questions satisfactorily, since a fair assessment must deal
sometimes with profound philosophical questions and at other times with technical
economic evaluation of the consequences of certain policies. But a modest philos-
ophical excursion on the rationale for resource transfers will be usefull in putting
the proposals into broad perspective, before turning to some constructive sug-
gestions for the North-South dialogue.
Although many of us have come to take the desirability of foreign assistance
for granted, it is not in fact self-evident that nations should voluntarily relinquish
some part of their incomes to provide transfers to other nations. Incomes in indus-
trial countries, while high both by historical standards and in comparison with
incomes in many parts of the world today, have not yet reached the point of psycho-
logical satiation. We know from the perennial battle over wage claims and from
the often agonizing decisions that have to be made over the size of government ex-
penditures that industrial countries can quite comfortably absorb higher incomes
than they now have.
The arguments for extracting some (usually tiny) fraction of this income for
transfers to other poorer countries have rested partly on ethical or moral grounds,
party on grounds of prudence and political expediency. There has been a good
deal of tension between the ethical arguments and the prudential arguments, for
I
they often require both the character and the direction of foreign assistance to be
quite different. Ethical arguments call for transfers from the rich to the poor,
while prudential arguments call for transfers to those who can harm. There is a
second tension which is likely to become even more pronounced in the years to
come, between the ethical arguments for foreign assistance and the exaggerated
sense of national sovereignty which all nations, but especially in this context devel-
oping nations, have acquired. I want to say something about each of these tensions,
but particularly the second one.
The western industrial nations have a long tradition, both of religion and of
rationalism, favoring a distributive justice that pushes toward greater equality. The
Christian tradition of charity is deeply rooted. Economists have perhaps been more
influenced by the rationalistic utilitarian tradition, which early attempted to show
that a more equal distribution of income would lead to greater overall welfare.
More recently, we have the attempt by the philosopher John Rawls to show, through
original social contract reasoning, that society should organize itself to maximize
the net income of those of its members that are worst off. There are intellectual
difficulties with all these various attempts to rationalize some measure of redistri-
bution toward greater equality, from Bentham's sum-of-utilities to Rawls' maximin
criterion. But it is significant that the effort persists; and there is little doubt that the
sentiment for some form of distributive justice - if not in circumstance then at
least in opportunity to better one's circumstance - is very strong. And there is
widespread recognition that adequate nutrition, health, and (in today's world)
education are necessary conditions for creating and taking advantage of opportu-
nities for individual betterment.
This is not the occasion to dissect the various ethical frameworks that have been
put forward. But it is important to note that all of the main lines of ethical thought
apply to individuals (or families), not to collectivities such as nations. Much recent
discussion on transfer of resources falls uncritically into the practice of what I
would call anthropomorphizing nations, .of treating nations as though they are
individuals and extrapolating to them on the basis of average per capita income
the various ethical arguments that have been developed to apply to individuals. This
is not legitimate. If ethical arguments are to be used as a rationale for transferring
resources, either a new set of ethical principles applicable to nations must be devel-
oped, or the link between resource transfers must be made back to the individuals
who are the ultimate subjects of standard ethical reasoning. We need therefore to
ask explicitly about the connectives between any given proposed transfer of re-
sources and the ultimate ethical objectives that are to be served.
Not to ask questions about these linkages would be morally obtuse. Yet to ask
them involves peering inside the national shell, an activity which many developing
countries view as a gross and unwarranted infringement of their national
68
sovereignty. The current mood among developing countries resists strongly the
notion that donor nations have a legitimate interest, much less (on the above argu-
ment) a moral obligation, to inquire clos~Jy into the use of resource transfers to be
sure that their ethically-based objectives ~re being served.
A clear impasse thus results. Ethical arguments, based on the welfare of individ-
uals, cannot be used to support resource transfers that do not serve the ethical
aims; but attempts to assure the service of ethical aims leads to rejection by recipient
countries as an affront to national sovereignty.
If we are to justify resource transfers on ethical grounds, it must be on the basis
of knowledge that the transferred resources will benefit those residents of the
recipient countries that are clearly worse _
off than the worst-off "taxed" (including
taxes levied implicitly through commodity prices) residents of the donor countries.
That is, general transfers must be baseq on some kind of performance criterion
satisfied by the recipient country, or else'transfers should be made only in a form
that benefits directly those who the ethical arguments suggest should be benefited.
But this proposition has profound implications for the acceptability of a number
of proposals outlined above, for it implies that no completely general transfer of
resources from country to country can be supported on ethical grounds. This res-
triction would encompass the proposal for more SDRs to be allocated to poor coun-
tries, general debt relief, and actions to improve (not merely to stabilize) the terms
of trade of developing countries. Ethically-based transfers should discriminate
among recipient countries on the basis of performance in improving, directly or
indirectly, the well-being of their general population, and/or they should discri-
minate among uses of the transfers to maximize the flow of benefits to those who
are the intended beneficiaries, which generally means concentration on general
nutrition, health care, and education in the recipient countries.
Pursuit of distributive justice is not the only reason for giving foreign assistance.
There are "prudential" reasons as well; foreign assistance can play a role, occa-
sionally even a decisive role, in maintaining good relations between donor and
recipient countries and .r;nore generally in giving recipient countries enough of a
stake in ongoing international arrangements to behave according to conventions
acceptable to the donor nations. Here it is governments, not individuals, that are
the relevant units for examination, and the appropriateness of assistance is not
necessarily related to economic performance and is certainly not related to relative
poverty. On the contrary, it will tend to be the better-off developing nations that
could, if so minded, create the greatest difficulty for the developed nations, both
in the short and in the long run, in terms of such issues as making nuclear weapons,
supporting radical political activities in other countries, or withholding cooperation
from issues of global concern that requires their cooperation. Therefore, these
middle-range countries, not the poorest ones, are the most likely recipients of
69
assistance. Moreover, prudential considerations often (though not always) dictate
that assistance should flow bilaterally, from individual donor to individual recipient,
rather than through multilateral channels. Thus, it is unlikely that completely gene-
ral transfers of resources, such as the SDR-link or general debt relief, would be
supportable by prudential considerations either; indeed, several of the most impor-
tant developing countries have specifically rejected the suggestion of across-the-
board debt relief, presumably on grounds they can do better without it.
Less-developed countries are themselves ambivalent on the question of appro-
priated foreign assistance. On the one hand, they have expressed disappointment
that the developed countries are not meeting the official development assistance
target of 0.7 percent of gross national product in each donor country that was
agreed in the United Nations General Assembly. On the other hand, they have a
host of dissatisfactions with foreign assistance, both bilateral and multilateral, as
it is actually administered. Too many conditions attach to such assistance- stipula-
tions regarding economic policy on program loans, requirements to buy in the donor
country giving bilateral assistance, limitations on the types of goods and services
that can be purchased with project loans, and so on. The reactions, of course, vary
from country to country, and in many instances the restrictions are not onerous, or
may even be welcome. But the donor-recipient relationship is an intrinsically diffi-
cult one, and is likely to leave both parties dissatisfied.
The ambivalence in developing countries is met by increasing questioning in
donor countries about whether foreign aid is worthwhile to the recipients and
justifiable to themselves. The United Nations target of one percent of donor-nation
gross national product to be transferred (through private as well as official channels,
through official export credits as well asforeign aid granis) to developing countries
was in fact achieved for the first time in i975, for a total of $ 39 billion. It is a com-
ment on the times that there was no rejoicing, only assertions that the amounts were
not high enough and the terms were not easy enough. There is an intrinsic difficulty
with direct resource transfers between countries based on distributive considera-
tions: more is never enough, so targets are arbitrary an.d their attainment merely
provides the occasion for setting a higher target.
With respect to conditions attaching to foreign assistance, it is worth noting that
while inter-governmental transfers within countries are common, they usually carry
with them strong implicit or explicit conditions. Totally unconditional transfers,such
as the developing countries are calling for, are rare. In most countries (e.g., Britain,
France) local governments are the legal creatures of the national government, so
the recipient is directly accountable to the government which is making the grant.
In Federal countries such as the U.S. certain sub-national governments (the states)
have a constitutional existence and are not subordinate to the national government.
But U.S. government grants to the separate states are all conditional. Either they
70
are restricted to certain categories of expenditure, by program, such as highway
construction, aid to families with dependent children, urban renewal, improvement
of sewage systems, etc., with financial accountability to the federal government
under each program. Or, in the case of "revenue sharing", they are not restricted as
to program, but they are subject to general requirements on the behavior of the
recipient state, notably on questions of civil rights and racial or sex discrimination,
conditions of a type and stringency that would strongly offend developing countries
if applied to them. Thus even within the U.S., with its relatively high homogeneity
of values and where governments are politically responsible to the same voting
publics, transfers are used to influence the pattern of expenditure and governmental
behavior. Totally unconditional aid is not congenial.
A clear impasse exists on the question of unrestricted transfers from developed
to less-developed countries. The less-developed countries demand more in transfers,
channeled in a variety of different ways: higher commodity prices, a larger share
in the creation of international money, straight foreign aid, and so on. Given the
current American suspicion of government in general, and of the governments of
less-developed countries in particular, these proposals are not likely to be well
received.
Proposals for a new international economic order involve a deep paradox: devel-
oping countries want maximum freedom of action and assert-strongly their demands
for sovereign equality, including lack of interference in their internal affairs. Yet
many of the proposals they have put forward, if implemented, would require pro-
found internal changes within the western countries, for example, with respect to
the functioning of markets, the generation and dissemination of technical know-
ledge, the enforcement of contracts, and tax-expenditure programs. The inconsist-
ency in position has not been missed.
In reality, the proposition that countries should not be subject to outside-
generated influence and change - developed and less-developed countries alike -
is untenable in today's interdependent world. An extreme position of self-reliance,
such as China and Burma each adopted, would be required. Collective self-reliance,
now strongly supported by many leaders in developing countries, will not be
sufficient to assure insulation from outside influence. In the context of resource
transfers, donor countries will at least want enough influence to assure that the
funds are used for their stated purposes, whether those be to foster economic
development, to relieve poverty, or what have you. One way to provide some assur-
ance that the transferred funds are in fact serving to satisfy basic human needs is
to restrict their use, with appropriate auditing, to activities that in their nature will
do that. Examples would be activities to increase the production of food, to improve
water supplies and sanitation facilities, to extend local health care and family plan-
ning clinics, and so on. Developing countries could be told that funds are available
71
for incremental activities in the areas indicated, subject to periodic audit for effec-
tiveness. Beyond that, the recipient country would be on its own.
More generally, however, "transfer of resources" is an unfortunate choice for
emphasis in discussions of the new international economic order, for it suggests
taking from one group and giving to another, a process which is rarely harmonious
and which is especially unlikely to be so when the developing countries insist that
the transfers be made with minimum of scrutiny and guidance, for that under-
mines the one basis on which transfers are likely to be agreeable to those making
them, namely, satisfying general sentiments in favor of distributive justice.
The implicit assumption underlying focus on resource transfers is that B's route
to prosperity is by getting it from A. In game-theoretic terms, it involves a zero-sum
game: B's gain is A's loss, and vice versa. This has been the dominant assumption
throughout much of human history, and remains the dominant assumption within
many developing countries today. A major contribution to material success in
western countries was the ability to break out of that framework into "positive
sum" thinking: the 18th century doctrine of progress shifted the "game" from one
of man against man to one of man against a parsimonious nature. By cooperating
with one another, or by establishing political-economic regimes whereby men's
actions were mutually reinforcing rather than mutually destructive, men could
improve their collective condition and at least lay the groundwork for improving
the condition of each one of them.
Possibilities for Mutual Gain
Human "solidarity" is not a sentiment in harmony with zero-sum thinking. If we
want to achieve global solidarity rather than global discord, the emphasis must
be shifted to the areas in which there are possibilities for mutual gain. Here is not
the place to spell such areas out in detail, but five in the economic arena can be
mentioned briefly.
First, the commercial policies of the developed countries should be geared more
clearly toward accommodating the growth in exports of industrial products from
developing countries. In particular, tariff structures that now distort the location of
early-stage processing of raw materials in developed countries should be altered to
permit economic location nearer to the raw materials. In the long run, all countries
would gain by such a change. In addition, the developed countries should avoid
the use of trade restrictions on competitive manufactures from developing countries;
problems of dislocation to domestic industries can be handled with adjustment
assistance to the factors that are injured. The developing countries would do well to
concentrate their negotiating efforts on limiting the resort to "safeguards" by devel-
oped countries rather than on gaining further preferences on paper. They would
72
also gain by reducing their own sometimes absurdly high protection against imports,
which increasingly will deny other developing countries important markets and
i~hibit mutually productive specialization among developing countries.
Second, the western countries should manage their own economies much better
than they have in the past; that alone would go a long way toward stabilizing the
export earnings of developing countries. To the extent that they fail to manage
demand smoothly, they can rightly be called upon to provide foreign exchange
assistance to developing countries through generous compensatory financing arrange-
ments. Beyond this, both developed and developing countries have an interest in
reducing the wild commodity price fluctuations such as have been experienced in
the past decade. Reducing price variability is a task distinct from raising average
prices, and has much greater chance for realization. Wide price swings, quite apart
from their effects on earnings, are disturbing both to consumers and to producers,
and commodity agreements based on buffer stocks could reduce the variation of
prices.
Third, the high mobility of multinational corporations creates potential problems
for all governments, home governments as well as host governments. At their best,
multinational corporations can contribute greatly to the process of economic devel-
opment (but those countries that do not accept this judgment, or for other reasons
prefer not to rely on them, should not be pressured into doing so.) But by skillful
manipulation, they can also evade taxes and exchange control regulations, exert
undue influence on national policies, and diminish world competition. Govern-
ments have a collective interest in providing an environment in which the social
benefits from the activities of these great corporations can be enjoyed while mini-
mizing the costs. In particular, closer coorperation on global antitrust policy and on
disclosure of financial information should be undertaken.
Fourth, management of some of the global "commons" requires the joint efforts
of many nations. This is especially true of the world's stocks of marine life and of
the quality of the oceanic and atmospheric environments. Many of these are regional
rather than global issues, and global solutions would often be inappropriate. But
international cooperation on a regional basis is essential for effective management.
Moreover, the revenue potential of proper management of the world's fish stocks
is substantial, but cooperation in installing the right kind of management regime
is essential not only if the stocks are to be utilized for maximum human benefit but
also to realize those potential revenues (estimated at over $ 2 billion a year at
today's levels of harvest from the Oceans).
Fifth, in the long run the relationship between the earth's food supply and its
population will govern whether it can evolve into a humane, pluralistic global
society or whether large masses of people are condemned to starvation and the
populations of the relatively rich countries must inure themselves to the continuing
73
presence of poverty, destitution, and starvation- with undesirable consequences for
their own system of values. Sound long-term policy calls for whatever efforts can
effectively be made by the developed countries -partly through financial assistance,
partly through transfer of relevant technology - to improve food supplies, nutrition,
family planning information, and general health care in the developing countries.
These suggestions are not meant to exclude resource transfers from developed
to developing nations - indeed, proper management of the oceans would generate
a useful source of revenue for such transfers - but rather to shift the focus of
discussion away from those areas that are in their nature conflictual and potentially
acrimonious, to those areas where all participants to a degotiation among sover-
eignly equal nations may hope for some gain. Such a shif.f in focus would improve
substantially the prospects for a new international economic order.
*
* *
In presenting his paper, the American author observed that the rhetoric in the
Third World seemed more subdued than a few years ago, but this might indicate
simply a "wait and see" attitude. , '.
The immediate forum for the North-South dialogu~ was the Conference on
International Economic Cooperation (CIEC), which was .scheduled to hold its final
ministerial meeting in the month following this Bilderberg conference.
The substantive positions on both sid~s of the Atlantic seemed to be converging
nicely. There were no major differences of view, and th~re was notable agreement
on the point that there should be no completely unconditional foreign assistance.
Whether the CIEC could be concluded "successfully" depended very much on the
LDCs, who could play it one of two w~ys: (1) They could note the very real pro-
gress that had been achieved, and hope for a continuation of the dialogue; or (2)
they could emphasize the real gap remaining and concluded that it had failed. Some
indeed hoped that it would fail, although most hoped to go on working toward a
successful conclusion.
Among the important longer term questions were these:
(1) The proper management of national economies. Because the economic
environment in which the LDCs operated was crucial, the management of the
economies of the developed countries swamped anything that the latter might seek
to do directly to aid the LDCs.
(2) The openness of markets which we would be willing to maintain vis-a-vis the
products of LDCs. This was not a sensitive issue concerning raw materials exported
from the LDCs, but it was sensitive with respect to their.exports of manufactured
goods. The Third World was aspiring tq - and increasing]_)' succeeding at- produc-
t·"
74
ing competitively a range of the less-sophisticated, labor-intensive manufactured
goods. It was important for them to know if they could count on a continuation of
an open world economy, or whether they would meet restrictionism at every turn.
(3) The level and conditions of foreign assistance, especially its general orien-
tation. The moral and ethical argument for assistance from rich to poor was a strong
one, and would continue to be used, even if cynically. We were in need of a strategy
which addressed that ethical motivation without doing violence to the ethical objec-
tives themselves. The author recommended a strategy which would suggest that,
within large margins, the developed countries stood ready to support programs for
nutrition and health care (including family planning). But we would need to have
an audit power to be sure our financial grants were not wasted. This sort of strategy,
unlike foreign aid generally, would not involve resource transfers which were out
of line and politically unmanageable in the developed countries, and it would do
much to take the wind out of the sails of the high rhetoric we had heard from the
LDCs.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
1. The Philosophic Basis of Resource Transfers
An International participant analyzed the reasons behind the growing belief that
stricter conditions should be applied to transfers of resources to the LDCs. In the
beginning, the idea had been that unconditional development aid would inevitably
serve to raise production, employment and standards of living in the Third World
(which had been thought of vaguely as a monolithic bloc).
Many years of experience, however, had shown that this "trickle down" theory
was not valid. The growth strategy had failed to alter life in rural areas and among
the urban poor, and the masses of the Third World remained in absolute poverty.
Moreover, the concept of a unitary Third World was found to be simplistic; there
was a wide range of LDCs, including ones newly rich with petroleum resources.
With these new perceptions, support was declining in the West for broad-based
transfers, and several participants agreed with the author of the American working
paper that the strategy ought to shift to favoring basic human needs in the LDCs.
Some felt, however, that we could not limit ourselves to feeding and adding to the
life of the Third World peoples, but should also supply them with primitive tools
to enable them to build their own money economy - somewhere between crafts-
manship and real industrialization.
75
A German speaker thought that we had been wrong to approach North-South
problems "in the mood of a reluctant do-gooder instead of an enlightened egoist".
We should shift now from a passive to an active attitude, shaped more in the light
of our own interests. It was a mistake to think that the countries most vulnerable
to rapid change in the international monetary and supply systems were the LDCs,
when in truth it was the free democracies, particularly in Western Europe, who were
vulnerable. We were the ones who had the greatest stake in stability and predic-
tability of change, and we had to work to steer change in the direction of our inter-
ests. Stability was needed not only in the LDCs - in their purchasing power and
balance of payments - but also in our own economic systems.
An American participant pointed out, though, that with the industrialized coun-
tries increasingly preoccupied with local problems, their voters would require more
compelling arguments in favor of the mutual advantage of Third World transfers.
If we put into sharper relief our own idea of how the international economic system
should be managed, we might be surprised to find the LDCs agreeing with us on
many points.
But what were our real interests? one American asked. We all tended to assume
that we ought to do something for the LDCs, and then to concentrate on a discus-
sion of the best means. We ought to stop to consider exactly what it was we were
trying to accomplish. Some were inclined to equate Third World assistance pro-
grams with the Marshall Plan, but the speaker found this comparison irrelevant.
The Marshall Plan had been aimed at repairing the gap between prewar capacity
and postwar penury, which was not at all the case with the LDCs.
Nor was it instructive to try to link our eighteenth century Western revolutionary
tradition- which had its roots in the aristocracy and the upper bourgeoisie - with
twentieth century Third World revolutionaries, who tended to be authoritarian,
anti-Western and Marxist (not out of economic conviction, but because it gave them
a rationale for staying in office without elections). Despite the insistence of such
leaders, industrialization and economic development would not assure the salvation
of the LDCs. The peoples who had the best reason to be hopeful were rather those
who had preserved a legacy of moral or educational standards left by colonizers
such as the French and the British.
Too often the Western nations strained to try to fulfill the demands of the Third
World without analyzing them, impelled to undertake major projects by a kind of
"international masochism". It was unclear what sort of theory might eventually
come to be accepted as justifying the transfer of resources to the Third World, but
for the present we could hope at least to forestall a coalition of the Soviet Union,
OPEC and the LDCs, and to work at separating the moderates of the Third World
from the radicals.
Support was expressed for the view that a Western show of firmness at the right
76
time would help constrain nonaligned nations from falling into the Communist
orbit. It was odd, said a Portuguese speaker, that many such nations considered the
East bloc to be their natural allies, while the Western democracies, who had given
them the most help, were looked upon as· adversaries. Perhaps this was because
Marxism purported to offer global answers, which the West did not. Another factor,
mentioned by a Canadian, was undoubtedly the residual tendency, especially in
Asia and Latin America, to equate private enterprise with colonialism (e.g., India
and Sri Lanka).
In any event, it was important that we try to engender confidence in our inten-
tions by giving a positive response to the expectations of the Third World, and
continuing to make our presence felt in their development work. A useful ingredient
in this process was the MNC, which was an efficient distributor of technology, and
had been a progressive force where it was ~ade welcome.
Other participants countered that it would be unfortunate to put our assistance
efforts in the service of political purposes, and that the aim should be no more than
to help one's fellow man. A Dutch speaker said that, during periods of recession in
his country, foreign aid was the last government expenditure to be cut, and the
trade unions would have it no other way.
A Briton suggested four objectives in foreign aid: (1) to keep the other fellow
alive; (2) to keep him sufficiently alive to be human (which meant that he might
disagree with us); (3) to develop mutual links of respect with him; and (4) to pursue
his interest and ours by tying conditions to our aid so that we would be protected
from the risks of misgovernment.
An Italian ~ensed some ambivalence in the poor countries' requests for aid, and
advised moving carefully to avoid poisoning our relations with the Third World.
Distributive justice was n:ot a sufficient reason for transfers, nor was mere political
calculation. We could not "just set up a new set of moral principles as one would
buy an evening dress", she said. It was perhaps enough simply to take note of the
fact of inequality.
With the best of motives, though, it would not be easy to work against the
background of constraints imposed by the attitudes of LDCs, who felt they were
owed something and were emboldened to emulate OPEC in trying to obtain it. An
American predicted that the future of North-South relations would be shaped not
so much by ideology as by such large new forces as shortages (of energy, capital and
raw materials), rising expectations, demographic changes, and the widening gap
between rich and poor. Our interdependence called for long-term cooperation, but
many nations wanted to stop short of such a commitment, apparently feeling that
interdependence was to be resisted rather than embraced. We could therefore expect
more confrontation than cooperation between developed and developing nations in
the years ahead.
77
According to an Italian participant, the imbalance in the flow of informa-
tion between LDCs and the developed countries would complicate our dealings.
It appeared that the Third World was now intent on creating their own government-
controlled news agencies, so as to be able to give a distorted, always favorable image
to the outside world. This was an example of the comprehensive plans of the LDCs
for a new world order. The West was not prepared for this, and still clung to out-
moded concepts of diplomacy and assistance.
2. The Importance of Agricultural and Commodity Arrangements
It was generally agreed that a high priority should be given to helping LDCs with
food production, but as one American pointed out, their attitudes and policies had
regrettably often been detriments to progress. Self-sufficiency would require plan-
tations large enough to be economical, which might disrupt patterns of peasant
life, but pilot farms could be established to show the way. LDCs would have to
recognize that it was farmers, not governments, who grew crops, and that they
would need, among other things, fertilizers at affordable prices, harvested crop
m'anagement and distribution systems.
It was true that the LDCs were hampered by a lack of access to technical know-
how, but this problem was more apparent than real, at least in the sphere of food
and agriculture, where technology was available at a reasonable cost. A Swiss
speaker reported that the UN had recently sent a mission to various developing
countries to survey their technological needs. Most of the respondents had put food
and agriculture at the top of their list, followed by population control and industry
(non-research oriented). The speaker, who had been a member of that mission,
noted that two countries Brazil and Mexico - had so far been the recipients of the
lion's share of technology transfers, but he felt that conditions were promising for
private enterprise to play an important part in achieving a much wider dissemina-
tion of technology through licensing and direct investment in the Third World.
Commodity markets and agreements were discussed at some length. While price
fluctuations could admittedly be distressihg to both exporters and consumers, many
were suspicious of attempts to supplant market mechanisms. There had to be room
for flexibility in trading, given the fact that commodities were both perishable and
subject to substitution.
A British suggestion was that the best solution lay in selective income guarantees,
with agreements of the Lome type meriting careful consideration. In the judgment
of a German participant, though, the stability promised by the Lome Convention
now looked more expensive than originally imagined. It seemed to give all the ben-
efits to the LDCs, and none to the developed countries. When prices were low,
there was likely to be radicalism across the board, expressed by a willingness to
78
withdraw from the system. If commodity agreements got prices very wrong, it
could be extremely disturbing for trade balances and inflation.
An American speaker, however, was attracted to commodity agreements because
they could "enable us to find a formula for rewarding countries which conduct them-
selves responsibly rather than assaulting the international order".
A British participant took exception to the contention in the French working paper
that it had been counter to British policy to support commodity agreements. He
thought it was hypocritical to expect commodity markets to remain free so long as
governments in the developed countries intervened. From an industrial point of
view, one had always to be mindful of the condition of primitive people, and the
best guarantee of stability was a recognition that contractual rights could be as
important as national sovereignty.
3. Financial Considerations
Several interventions touched on the role of the banking system, which - since
the oil price increase - had taken on an abnormally large proportion of the expan-
ding debt of the LDCs. The transfer of resources, masked as commercial debt, had
thus taken place on a much greater scale than would ever have been made possible
by the mechanisms of national budgetary arrangements. Although it had been said
that no man was impatient with his creditors, we now lived, according to a British
participant, "in a world of anxious creditors and indignant debtors". (A Norwegian
speaker thought it was partly our fault if we were mistreated by our debtors, as we
had been careless bankers in misjudging the credit risk).
There was some disagreement about what the future was likely to hold. A Briton
implied that a large volume of Third World loans had in effect been aid disguised
as debt, and might not all be repaid. We should explain to our constituents that
this was an aspect of the development process and try to allay their worries. A
French participant thought there was good reason to worry: we had reached the
limit in credit extensions to the LDCs, and moreover the effects of this recycling
were highly inflationary. A different view, expressed by an International speaker,
was that loans to the Third World had been not so much inflationary as anti-
deflationary, in a period when the world economy needed a stimulus.
The author of the French working paper said that indebtedness of some coun-
tries - both developed and underdeveloped - ought to be accepted over a very long
period and funded in a non-inflationary way. This presupposed two things: (a) that
financial circuits between the ultimate creditors and ultimate debtors should be as
short and stable as possible; and (b) that the existence of long-term indebtedness
ought not to be an excuse for the lax management of national economies. In this
regard, anything that could be done to strengthen the power the I.M.F had over
79
deficit countries was desirable, however difficult that might be to achieve-politically.
According to an American participant, the banks had done a skillful and prudent
job in financing the balance of payments deficits of the oil- importing countries
following the 1973 price increase. Contrary to some observers, the speaker did not
believe that the private banking system faced massive difficulties because of these
loans. For one thing, the bulk of the debt was owed by the stronger, less vulnerable,
of the developing countries. For another, he expected a shift to more government
assistance and less exposure for the private sector. In this connection, there was a
place for both the proposed "safety net" arrangement and the special IMF fund.
4. Trading with the Third World
As state-to-state aid was often regressive, failing to engender mutual respect and
to raise standards of living in recipient countries, Italian and British speakers ad-
vocated that "trade, not aid" should become a watchword in our dialogue with the
Third World, much as it had been in American-European relations after the war.
This would mean shifting our commercial policy to encourage the LDCs to export
manufactured goods, and accepting a deterioration in our own terms of trade to
accommodate them. Even then, there was bound to be a widening gap between
expectation and reality in the LDCs, as their aspirations were not compatible with
the likely rate of expansion of their trade with the developed world.
Several participants -notably Britons and Americans - felt we had already gone
too far in accommodating the export of finished goods from the LDCs. Wage rates
in Korea were onetenth of those in Western Europe, Taiwan's one-half, and Hong
Kong's three-quarters. In textiles and fibers, for instance, Europe had exported its
best technology to those countries, and as a consequence had lost 300,000 to
400,000 jobs within the past four years. Germany and the U.K. were now getting
about 23 per cent of their textiles from the LDCs, and European industry might
well find itself with ghost towns reminiscent of the disused New England textile
mills.
During the past decade, the U.S. had lost over 140,000 jobs to foreign competi-
tion in textiles, and the unemployed working people felt as if they were bearing a
heavy part of the foreign aid burden. The psychological and economic impact of
such dislocations was often underestimated. There was a growing constituency
opposed to a further liberalization of trade so long as domestic unemployment
remained high. Labor was not asking that trade with the LDCs be stopped, but that
its rate of growth be slowed to match our domestic growth rates. Some measure of
fairness would have to be restored, by quotas or other regulations.
The author of the American working paper said that, while he dissociated himself
from some of the foregoing remarks, he agreed that our governments had the re-
80
sponsibility to preserve a high level of employment within our economies. Several
governments, including that of the U.S., hao failed in this regard, and there was no
question but that it was more difficult to undertake structural adjustment in an
environment of slack demand in the labor market.
On the other hand, he said that it was important to keep one's perspective about
the time dimension. Understandably, most people were preoccupied with what had
happened in the last few years and what might happen in the next few years. In
principle, though, those concerns could be separated from consideration of a strat-
egy for a longer period of time.
The speaker said that when he spoke of trade adjustment and U.S. willingness
to undertake it, he was thinking in terms of the next decade or two, not the next year
or two.
In any case, he felt that, of all the adjustments our economies had undergone
over the years, the adjustment to imports was surely one of the least consequential.
Changes in technology, in the pattern of government procurement, and so forth, haq
called for much more extt;nsive adjustments in the structure of our production and
our labor force than had the increase in imports.
The speaker looked forward to the day when Americans would mature out of
the feeling that foreign competitors belonged in a different category from compet-
itors from another part of their own country, such as the Southerners who had
during the last generation created serious problems for New England industry.
A Canadian wondered, however, whether the Western countries in general were
not running a "high wage cartel". Had we not, through the inflationary printing
of money, created in our own countries a fictitious scale of living that was pricing
us out of world markets?
81
III. CURRENT PROBLEMS IN
EUROPEAN-AMERICAN RELA~IONS
\.:
No working paper was prepared for this topic, but the discussion was introduced
by a German participant who analyzed European impressions of the Carter adminis-
tration and then enumerated certain areas of potential friction between Europe and
America.
No European who had recently been in the U.S. could; have failed to detect the
change in national temper. There was a new mood marked by buoyancy, effer-
vescence, dedication and hope, and President Carter had to be given much of the
credit for this.
But many Europeans took a wary view of the new mood because it seemed at
the same time to engender self-righteousness, cockiness and high-handedness. There
was great panache and a proclivity to "throw stones in the pond and sort out the
ripples afterward", a toughness on questions of principle combined with a lack of
detailed argument on practical matters. Some Europeans applauded this, feeling that
the main task of a new administration was to stir things up and let the practical
results grow out of the ensuing confusion.
Others, though, felt strongly that in today's interdependent world not even the
U.S. could singlehandedly impose its imprint on the international system. Procla-
mations of American interests and "gut feelings" dit not constitute policy. What
was needed beyond that was accommodation of other interests as well. Things had
to be spelled out, translated into operational strategies and discussed thoroughly
with both partners and adversaries.
The style of the Carter presidency so far seemed to compound America's built-in
tendency toward unilateralism. The new administration had on several important
occasions violated the basic rule calling for consultation with one's partners: in
issuing its statements on human rights (a high-level aide remarking that it was not
necessary to consult about what the nation stood for); in lecturing the Germans and
Japanese on how to reflate, "having neglected to do its own homework"; in sending
Secretary Vance to Moscow with a SALT offer "patently loaded against the Rus-
sians"; in trying to 'stare down" the West Germans on ~~he issue of the Brazilian
deal; and in inviting comments within a three-day deadline on its draft statement
on nuclear non-proliferation (over which the Germans gave themselves "consider-
able trouble sub-editing the imperious language").
82
The speaker acknowledged that initial apprehension about President Carter
among European leaders may have been traceable to his representing a new govern-
ment, while they represented old ones. New governments, full of ideas, tended to
cast manners to the wind in their hurry to remake the world, wheras old ones were
preoccupied with relationships, stability, procedures and protocol. All the same,
Europeans were coming to feel that they could "do business with" President Carter
because (as a Greek participant put it) he was a "fast learner", and the prospects
seemed propitious for the May summit meeting.
There were nevertheless bound to be areas of friction between America and
Europe and the speaker's enumeration of these topics set the frame work for the
discussion:
(1) The style of the Carter administration and its implications for consultations
with America's partners. While several participants criticized the Carter adminis-
tration for failing to consult its allies, others said that reactions in their countries
had not been so negative; that it was too early to pass judgment; that the U.S.
continued to participate fully in international forums; and, as a Turk remarked,
that it was ironic to hear speakers from the Nine complain of non-consultation.
An International speaker remarked that, after all, the American style had always
had a streak of self-righteousness and that it was not a bad thing to believe you were
in the right.
Other participants, though, feared that President Carter was too quick a learner
and showed a tendency to back down under pressure (e.g., tax rebate, change of
tone after Secretary Vance's return from Moscow, muting of the human rights
statements, and aftermath of the German-Brazilian affair). While improved relations
with the allies had at first been given top priority, it now looked as if the Soviets
were receiving greater consideration.
Various American responses were heard: that these changes in style tended to
move in eigth-year cycles, with newcomers to Washington "tearing up all the trees
to see if the roots are still there"; that the new administration had in fact inherited
"a logjam in foreign policy" and needed time to set up new patterns of policy- and
decision-making to deal with both old and new issues; and that the President's
withdrawal of the tax rebate signified no change of priorities but a changed estimate
about tbe course of the domestic economy.
A member of the new American administration who was present protested that
he could not possibly consult more without moving from Washington to Europe,
while a member of a former admini_
stration observed philosophically that intensified
consultation would not always solve our problems. Nations disagreed not just
because they misunderstood each other, he said, but sometimes because they under-
stood all too well.
83
(2) The human rights issue had a double significance: it exemplified both the
positive mood of the new administration and its tendency to act without consulting
its partners. An American speaker emphasized that the human rights question was
deeply felt on both sides of the Atlantic, and that President Carter's speaking out
had struck a responsive chord in the U.S. But the President dit not purport to speak
for other governments, who were free to handle the matter in their own way.
Europeans replied that how the U.S. acted inevitably affected other nations.
They were no less committed to the principle of expanding human rights but, as one
German put it, we all had to avoid articulating our claims in ways that risked
being counterproductive. The question was whether we should take our stand in
the marketplace or behind the scenes, where we had already made progress.
It was not widely known, but since Helsinki tens of thousands of Germans, in-
cluding whole families, had been allowed to come home from the East, and it was
hoped that equal numbers would be permitted to follow during the next few years.
This explained why some countries had to pursue their claims somewhat differently
from others, so as not to jeopardize further progress.
For the upcoming Belgrade conference, a Briton said it was vital that the
West present a solid front, with no one appearing to be more or less interested in
the matter than his partners. It was also important that expectations should not be
aroused in the East which did not have a reasonable chance of being satisfied.
A Greek participant wondered how the Russians could possibly justify having
done so little about human rights after signing the Helsinki agreement, and a Turkish
speaker cautioned against our letting the Soviets conclude that human rights was
the only field in which we felt improvement was needed. There were many others,
he said.
Both Americans and Europeans agreed that the human rights issue was not con-
fined to the East bloc countries, and reference was made to conditions in Uganda,
Chile and Argentina.
(3) Nuclear non- proliferation. The Brazilian affair had produced the first real
difference on a fundamental policy question between the Germans and Americans
in a quarter century. German industry felt that the export of non-military nuclear
technology was a field in which it could hope to excel, and that U.S. disapproval
of the Brazilian deal was not in line with America's treaty obligations.
An American participant replied that, despite our differences, we all shared the
objective of trying to halt the spread of nuclear weapons, and even of halting the
capacity to build them. Unfortunately, that technological capacity had outstripped
our political capacity to insure against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. We had
a long way to go to find appropriate political means to stop the growth in the
number of nuclear powers.
R.::l.
While Europeans felt sure there was no commercial motivation behind the U.S.
position, the nuclear issue pointed up for them the problem of America's deciding
what was best for others. .Europeans fully Shared the U.S. concern about prolifer-
ation, and they ought to have a voice in solving these questions. But what forum
was available for discussions that did not include non-Western nations? It was
recommended by an International speaker that ad hoc meeting of the suppliers'
group in London be arranged for this purpose.
Close policy coordination among France, Germany and Japan on matters such as
the fast breeder and reprocessing was deemed essential to foster Europe's energy
independence.
An American pc."ticipant pointed out that nuclear issues were inherently divisive
because (a) the whole concept of nonproliferation was discriminatory, and (b) there
were wide differences of opinion within the scientific community on safety ques-
tions. We were paying now for many years of neglect of the subject. If it had been
properly anticipated, the Brazilian dispute could probably have been resolved with
much less abrasive consequences. Because discussions had been so long overdue,
it was not surprising that there was some initial friction, but an Irish speaker coun-
selled against getting excited about that.
(4) On the energy question, the Carter program was welcome in Europe because
it promised to reduce America's dependence on Middle East oil. But an Internatio-
nal participant advocated urgent consultations about its likely impact on trade.
Some criticism of the Carter measures as Draconian had been heard in Europe, but
the Americans, having been lectured so long for their profligacy, found it ironic to
be now told that they were moving too fast.
(5) Economic and monetary issues. The Carter administration's call for a refla-
tion of the German and Japanese economies was criticized by another International
speaker as a departure from the agreed OECD strategy of June 1976 to aim for
moderate growth which would not lead to a speedy and inflationary return to full
employment. A German speaker - who cautioned against overestimating the in-
fluence of any single country on the world economy - pointed out that Germany
was currently running the largest budget deficit as a percentage of GNP of any of
the industrialized countries (41/2 per cent vs. about 3 per cent for the U.S.). So
Germany was in effect reflating, although perhaps not in the manner the Carter
administration had had in mind. He also urged that attention be focused not so
1
much on trade surpluses as on current accounts, Germany's current surplus having
dropped substantially because of tourism abroad.
An American participant replied that the size of the budget deficit was not a
measure of the stimulus, but of the dimensions of the problem. He went on to say
that the American-German disagreement was minimal and was related not so much
to targeted 1977 growth rates (5112 per cent vs. 5 per cent) as to the likelihood of
reaching the target. The U.S., he said, was not seeking to impose solutions but was
looking for a "shared appreciation of problems" such a's that of the global im-
balance of payments deficits. The discussions in Bonn this spring had indicated
that the Germans indeed shared this appreciation.
(6) African policy was seen by some partiCipants as ·a subject of European-
American disagreement and by others as an illustration of cooperation. A Briton,
for example, said that his government welcomed the degree of commitment the U.S.
seemed ready to undertake in southern Africa. A Genrtan was pleased that Vice
President Mondale had evidently been given a brief to define a new African policy,
and they would not be inclined to follow a "hands off" po.licy. While they did not
An International speaker commented that Europeans felt a primary sense
of responsibility for Africa, which lay within their "natural sphere of influence",
and they would not be inclined to follow a "hands off" policy. While they dit not
need U.S. stimulation to do anything in Africa, they woulp need American help.
Some speakers praised France's recent action in Zaire, saying it had restored
Europe's sense of mission in Africa. Others were not so sure that European opinion
was unanimous on this point.
(7) The imperfect state of European unity presented a serious obstacle to effec-
tive consultation, according to an American participant. When the EEC had no
mandate to negotiate, he said, no one was able to "deliver". On the other hand,
when there was a mandate, the position was usually inflexible. This was a source of
constant fr.ustration for the U.S.
European speakers recognized this problem, but one of them was tempted to ask
who was able to "deliver" for the U.S.: Congress of the executive?
Some participants were inclined to agree with an Italian speaker who said that
"Europe" was no more than a collection of nation states. A German claimed
that this was the fault, not of the Eurocrats in Brussels or of the Americans, but of
the weak national governments of Europe. Others objected to equating Europe with
the Nine. An Austrian speaker pointed out that there were ten or eleven other
nations, with 100 million people, who ;vere also part of Europe and ought to be
included in transatlantic and intra-European consultations.
Europe was indeed an entity, but one which a Gennan participant described
as a "strange animal ... now you see it, now you don't". It had a job to do in
identifying its common interests and in finding a united way to approach the U.S.,
which had consistently encouraged the process of European integration. A Belgian
speaker remarked that the words spoken by Paul-Henri Spaak about the urgency
86
•-'-·
of the matter were now truer than ever: "II n'est pas trop tard, mais il est temps".
An International participant said that he hoped to live long enough to hear the
Americans complain about the unilateralism of the European Community!
*
* *
At the close of the meeting, the Chairman thanked all those whose work had
contributed to the success of the Conference: authors of working papers, inter-
preters, secretariat, and hotel staff. He expressed his special gratitude, on behalf
of all the participants, to Sir Frederic Bennett and his British associates for serving
as hosts at Torquay.
An American participant, speaking for all those attending the Meeting, thanked
Lord Home for his having acted as Chairman in such a skillful and kindly fashion.
The announcement that Lord Home had accepted to continue the Chairmanship
for another two years, was received with enthusiasm.
87
