O')
I
c.o
c_
c
:J
CD
.......
c.o
c.o
.......
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
BADEN-BADEN
CONFERENCE
6-9 June 1991
NOT FOR QUOTATION
CONTENTS
IN1RODUCTION........................................................ 5
PARTICIPANTS ........................................................ 7
AGENDA.............................................................. 13
OPENING.............................................................. 15
I. EASTERN EUROPE: ECONOMIC PROSPECTS
Introductory Remarks, I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..17
Introductory Remarks, II ........................................... 20
Discussion ....................................................... 21
II. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SOVIET UNION:
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT ON THE ALLIANCE
Introductory Remarks, I ........................................... 24
Introductory Remarks, II . . . . . . . . . . . ................................ 25
Introductory Remarks, III. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......... 26
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . ........................................... 28
III. THE MIDDLE EAST: POLITICAL FALLOUT AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Background Paper. . . . . . . . . . . ..................................... 33
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ............... 40
Introductory Remarks, II............................................ 42
Introductory Remarks, III........................................... 43
Introductory Remarks, IV.......................................... 46
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . ........................................... 49
Concluding Remarks.............................................. 51
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: GERMAN ECONOMIC RECONCILIATION:
THE TREUHAND EXPERIENCE
Introductory Remarks. . . . . . . . . . . .................................. 54
Discussion.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......56
V. THE PRACTICAL AGENDA FOR THE ALLIANCE
Introductory Remarks, I. ............................................ 59
Introductory Remarks, II............................................ 61
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . ........................................... 63
3
VI. DO WE HAVE THE INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH THE AGENDA?
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . ................................. 66
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . ................................. 68
Introductory Remarks, III. . . . . . . . . . . ................................ 69
Discussion...................................................... 71
VII. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL THREATS TO THE ALLIANCE
Inttoductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . .............................. ~ .. 73
Inttoductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . ................................. 75
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .............................. 78
VIII. CURRENT EVENTS: SOUTH AFRICA
Inttoductory Remarks, I. ........................................... 81
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................. 83
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . ........................................... 85
IX. CURRENT EVENTS: YUGOSLAVIA
Inttoductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . ................................. 87
Inttoductory Remarks, II............................................ 88
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................ 90
CLOSING.............................................................. 91
INTRODUCTIGN
The thirty-ninth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the SteigenbergerHotel Badischer
Hof in Baden-Baden, Federal Republic of Germany on June 6-9, 1991. There were 110
participants from 18 European countries, the United States, and Canada. They represented
government, diplomacy, politics, business, law, labor, education, journalism, the military,
and institutes specializing in national and international studies. All participants spoke in a
personal capacity, not as representatives of their national governments or their organiza-
tions. As is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit frank and open discussion, no
public reporting of the conference proceedings took place.
This booklet is an account of the 1991 Bilderberg Meeting and is distributed only
to participants of this and past conferences and to prospective future participants. Inttoduc-
tory remarks are reported essentially as they were presented, with only minor editing and
without referring these texts back to the speakers. Comments and interventions made in the
discussion sessions, as well as panelists' closing remarks, are organized and reported
according to subject matter and not necessarily in the order in which they were made, nor in
their entirety.
PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN
LORD CARRINGTON
Chairman of the Board, Christie's International pie;
Former Secretary General, NATO, U.K.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA
VICTOR HALBERSTADT
Professor of Public Economics, Leiden University, Netherlands
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR U.S.A.
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.
Senior Research Fellow, Hoover Institution on War,
Revolution and Peace, Stanford University, U.S.A.
HONORARY TREASURER
CONRAD J. OORT
Former Adviser to the Board of Management, Algemene Bank
Nederland NV; Professor of Money and Banking,
University of Limburg, Netherlands
ITA GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
USA PAUL A. ALLAIRE
USA GEORGE W. BALL**
POR FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO*
USA ROBERT L. BARTLEY
GER CHRISTOPH BER1RAM*
NETH ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL**
TUR
ICE
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
BJORN BJARNASON
Chairman, FIAT S.p.A.
Chairman, Xerox Corporation
Former Under-Secretary of State
Professor of Mass Communication,
New University, Lisbon; Chairman,
Sojomalsari; FormerPrime Minister
Editor, The Wall Street Journal
Diplomatic Correspondent,
"Die Zeit"
Emeritus Professor of International
Relations, Leiden University;
Former Honorary Secretary General
of Bilderberg Meetings for Europe
and Canada
Director of Companies
Member of Parliament,
Independence Party
DEN RITI BJERREGAARD Labour Member of Parliament; SWI FRI1Z GERBER Chiiirman ofthe Board, F. Hoffmann-
Chairman of the Labour Group La Roche AG
CAN CONRAD M. BLACK* Chairman, The Daily Telegraph plc USA KATHARINE GRAHAM Chairman, The Washington Post
USA ROBERT D. BLACKWILL Lecturer in Public Policy, John F. Company
Kennedy School of Government, USA MAURICE R. GREENBERG Chairman, American International
HarvardUniversity; Former member Group, Inc. -
National Security Council CAN ANTHONY G.S. GRIFFIN** Director of Companies
GER KLAUSBLECH Ambassador to U.S.S.R. SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON* Chairman of the Board of Directors,
USA MICHAEL J. BOSKIN Chairman, President's Council of AB Astra
Economic Advisers USA RICHARD N. HAASS Special Assistant to the President
GER BIRGIT BREUEL Chairman of the Board, and Senior Director Near East and
Treuhandanstalt South Asian Affairs, National
UK GORDON BROWN MemberofParliament (LabourParty) Security Council
Shadow Secretary of State for Trade TUR VAHIT M. HALEFOGLU Fonner Minister of Foreign Affairs
and Industry UK CHRISTOPHER HOGG Chairman, Courtaulds pie
NOR ARNE OLAV BRUNDTLAND Senior Research Fellow, Norwegian FIN JAAKKO ILONIEMI* Managing Director, Council of
Institute of International Affairs Economic Organizations in Finland;
BEL JEAN-LOUIS CADIEUX Deputy Director-GeneralforForeign Fonner Ambassador to the United
Affairs, European Community States of America
ITA GIAMPIERO CANTONI Chairman, Banca Nazionale del FRA CLAUDE IMBERT Chief Editor, "Le Point"
Lavoro AUS PETER JANKOWITSCH* Minister of State in charge of
GRE COSTA CARRAS* Director of Companies European Integration and
SPA JAIME CARYAJAL URQUIJO* Chairman and General Manager, Development Cooperation
Iberfomento SWE LARSJONUNG Professor of Economics and
USA JOHN H. CHAFEE Senator (Republican, Rhode Island) Economic Policy at Stockholm
USA BILL D. CLINTON Governor of Arkansas School of Economics
FRA BERTRAND COLLOMB Chairman and Chief Executive USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer
Officer, Lafarge Coppee & Feld (Attorneys-at-Law); Former
USA KENNETHW. DAM* Vice President, Law and External President, National Urban League
Relations, IBM Corporation; Former USA HENRY A. KISSINGER* FormerSecretaryofState; Chairman,
Deputy Secretary of State Kissinger Associates, Inc.
BEL ETIENNE DAVIGNON* Chairman, Societe Generale de NETH BENKNAPEN Editor-in-Chief, NRC Handelsblad
Belgique; Former Vice Chairman of UK ANDREW KNIGHT* Executive Chairman, News
the Commission of the European International pie
Communities INT MAX KOHNSTAMM** Former Secretary General, Action
DEN AAGE DELEURAN* Editor-in-Chief, Committee for Europe; Former
"Berlingske Tidende" President, European University
GER WERNER H. DIETER Chairman oftheBoard, Mannesmann Institute
A.G. GER HILMAR KOPPER* Spokesman of the Board of
NOR PER DITLEV-SIMONSEN Managing Director, Sverre Ditlev- Managing Directors, Deutsche Bank
Simonsen & Co. A.G.
CAN MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN* Executive Director, Hudson Institute NETH PIETER KORTEWEG President and Chief Executive
of Canada Officer of the Board Committee of
FIN AATOSERKKO Publisher, "Helsingin Sanomat" the Robeco Group
USA DIANNE FEINSTEIN Former Mayor of San Francisco SWI ALEX KRAUER* Chairman and Managing Director,
UK LAWRENCE D. FREEDMAN Head of Department ofWar Studies, Ciba-Geigy Limited
King's College FRA MARC LADREIT DE LACHARRIERE* Chairman, Fimalac
INT JOHN R. GALVIN Supreme AlliedCommanderEurope, GER KURTJ.LAUK Vice Chairman of the Management
SHAPE Board, AudiAG.
FRA ANDRE LEVY-LANG Chairman, Compagnie Financiere de
Paribas
8
', •..~,_,.,.,,,," ... -~''
-----· ~ _______.,
NETH RUUD F.M. LUBBERS Prime Minister GER THEO SOMMER Editor-in-Chief, "Die Zeit"
BEL WILFRIED MARTENS Prime Minister SPA HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF SPAIN
USA CHARLES MCC. MATHIAS* Partner,Jones, Day,Reavis & Pogue; INT HELGA STEEG Executive Director, International
Former U.S. Senator (Republican, Energy Agency
Maryland) IRE PETER D. SUTHERLAND* FormerMember, Commission ofthe
USA JACKF. MA1LOCK,JR. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. European Communities; Chairman,
ITA GIANNI DE MICHELIS Minister of Foreign Affairs Allied Irish Banlcs Group
POR CARLOS A.P.V. MONJARDINO President of the Fundacao Oriente GER ERWIN TEUFEL Prime Minister of Baden-
FRA THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of Wurtemberg
International Relations; Professor of AUS FRANZ VRANI1ZKY Federal Chancellor
Economics, Ecole Polytechnique INT HENNING WEGENER Assistant Secretary General for
NETH HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE NETHERLANDS Political Affairs, North Atlantic
FRA MICHELNOIR MayorofLyon,Ex-SecretaryofState Treaty Organisation
for Foreign Trade NOR NIELS WERRING, JR.*' Chairman of the Board, Wilh.
ICE DAVID ODDSSON Prime Minister Wilhelmsen Limited NS
TUR TUGAY OZ<;ERI Under Secretary, Ministry of USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD* Former Deputy Secretary of State
Foreign Affairs USA BRAYTON WILBUR, JR. President and ChiefExecutive
GRE JOHN D. PALEOCRASSAS Minister of Finance Officer, Wilbur-Ellis Company
POR CARLOS PIMENTA MemberoftheEuropeanParliament, USA LAWRENCE D. WILDER Governor of Virginia
Former Secretary of State for DEN NILS WILHJELM President, Industrial MortgageFund;
Environment Former Minister of Industry
GER KARL OTTO POHL President, Deutsche Bundesbank USA LYNN R. WILLIAMS* International President, United
CAN JOHN POLANYI Professor ofChemistry, University Steelworkers of America
of Toronto CAN MICHAEL H. WILSON Minister of Industry, Science and
SPA JORDIPUJOL President, Generalitat de Catalunya Technology and International Trade
USA WILLIAM B. QUANDT Senior Fellow, The Brookings USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN* President,JamesD.Wolfensohn,Inc.
Institution GER OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN** Chairman and ChiefExecutive
SWE BOC E RAMFORS Managing Director and Group Chief Officer of Otto Wolff
ExecutiveofSkandinaviskaEnskilda IndustrieberatungundBeteiligungen
Banken, Board member of several GmbH
companies INT MANFRED WORNER Secretary General of the North
USA ROZANNE L. RIDGWAY* President, The Atlantic Council of Atlantic Treaty Organisation
the United States UK PATRICK WRIGHT Permanent Under Secretary of State
SWI MICHAEL RINGIER Publisher, Chairman of the Board of and Head of the Diplomatic Service
Ringier Inc. GRE MINOS ZOMBANAKIS Chairman, Group for International
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER** Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank Study and Evaluation
International Advisory Committee
UK LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN** President, S.G. Warburg Group pie * Member of the Steering Committee
ITA RENATO RUGGIERO Chief Negotiator G.A.T.T. ** Member of the Advisory Group
GER VOLKER ROHE General Secretary Parliamentary
PartyCDU
GER HEINZ J.H. RUHNAU Chairman of the Board, Deutsche OBSERVER
Lufthansa A.G.
AUS GUIDO SCHMIDT-CHIARI Chairman of the Managing Board, NETH H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF ORANGE
Creditanstalt Bankverein
SPA NARCIS SERRA Deputy Prime Minister
USA JOHN S.R. SHAD Director and Philanthropist RAPPORTEUR
USA THOMAS W. SIMONS, JR. Ambassador to Poland
UK JOHN SMITH* Member of Parliament (Labour USA GRANTF. WINTHROP Partner, Milbank Wilson Winthrop,
Party); Shadow Chancellor of the Inc.
Exchequer USA ALICE VICTOR
IO 11
IN ATTENDANCE
NETH MAJA BANCK
FRA FELICIA CAVASSE
GER GUNTHER W.F. DICKE
FRA VERONTQUE MORAL!
USA CHARLES W. MULLER
List of Abbreviations
AUS Austria
BEL Belgium
CAN Canada
DEN Denmark
FIN Finland
GER Germany
GRE Greece
ICE Iceland
INT International
IRE Ireland
12
ITA
NETH
NOR
POR
SPA
SWE
SWI
TUR
UK
USA
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg
Meetings
Organizer, 1992 Conference
First Vice President, Deutsche Bank
A.G.; Organizer, 1991 Conference
Organizer, 1992 Conference
President, Murden and Company;
Adviser, American Friends of
Bilderberg, Inc.
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States of America
AGENDA
I. EASTERN EUROPE: ECONOMIC PROSPECTS
II.
Moderator: Hilmar Kopper
Panelists: Jean-Louis Cadieux
Thomas W. Simons, Jr.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SOVIET UNION:
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT ON THE ALLIANCE
Moderator:
Panelists:
Rozanne L. Ridgway
Klaus Blech ,
Jack F. Matlock, Jr.
VolkerRiihe
ill. THE MIDDLE EAST: POLITICAL FALLOUT
AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Moderator:
Panelists:
Lord Carrington
Richard N. Haass
Tugay Oz~eri
William B. Quandt
Patrick Wright
Lawrence D. Freedman
(author background paper)
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: GERMAN ECONOMIC RECONCILIATION:
THE TREUHAND EXPERIENCE
Moderator: Franz Vranitzky
Panelist: Birgit Breuel
V. THE PRACTICAL AGENDA FOR THE ALLIANCE
Moderator: John C. Whitehead
Panelists: Henning Wegener
Henry A. Kissinger
VI. DO WE HAVE THE INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH THE AGENDA?
Moderator:
Panelists:
Etienne Davignon
Robert D. Blackwill
Ruud F. M. Lubbers
Manfred Womer
13
14
VII. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL THREATS TO THE ALLIANCE
Moderator: John Smith
Panelists: Michael J. Boskin
Karl Otto Pohl
VIII. CURRENT EVENTS: SOUTH AFRICA
Moderator: Thierry de Montbrial
Panelists: Conrad M. Black
Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.
IX. CURRENT EVENTS: YUGOSLAVIA
Moderator: Peter D. Sutherland
Panelists: Gianni De Michelis
Franz Vranitzky
OPENING
Lord Carrington, the Chairman of the Bilderberg Meetings, opened the Baden-
Baden Conference by welcoming the participants. He reviewed the conference schedule
and agenda and the ground rules and procedures for participating in the discussions. He
also stressed the importance of observing the private, off-the-record nature of the confer-
ence.
15
I. EASTERN EUROPE: ECONOMIC PROSPECTS
Introductory Remarks
I.
The geopolitical situation ofthe countries ofEastern Europe makes them an essential
piece of the present and future European architecture. Further to the obvious solidarity that
has to be shown between democracies, and especially between European democracies, these
countries represent both a political, strategic and an economic interest, notably in terms of
potential trade.
What we in the European Community have to say on the economic prospects for this
region of the world is ofcourse very much determined by what we have been learning in the
process ofcoordinating Western aid for almost two years now.
What has been the European Commission's role? The Commission was formally
entrusted witli coordinating aid to Poland and Hungary by the G-7 Summit held in Paris in
July 1989. Twenty-four nations volunteered to take part in that collective effort. That is the
way the economic aid and its Community part, the PHARE operation, (the operation for
restructuring the economies ofPoland and Hungary) were born.
The Commission has thus been acting at two levels; G-24, on the one hand, through
coordination and a sizeable contribution to the common assistance including the implemen-
tation of the assistance provided at Community level; and bilateral, on the other, through an
improvement of market access conditions for products originating in Central and Eastern
European countries, the conclusion of trade and cooperation agreements with all of them,
and now negotiation ofassociation agreements with Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
tions:
In this double role, the Commission's action has developed along four main direc-
• the definition of conditions, both political and economic, common to all the G-
24, to be respected by applying countries in order for them to benefit from the
Western aid.
• once these conditions are met, the improvement of the access to Western and EC
markets for goods imported from Central and Eastern European countries.
• the mobilization of the necessary means in order to support those countries'
balance of payments.
• the delivery of the technical assistance required for the establishment of an
adequate regulatory framework and, more generally speaking, investor-friendly
environment in these economies.
Total pledges of the G-24 in assistance to the six countries of Central and Eastern
Europe so far amount to around $40 billion over two years. To this, debt relief to Poland
worth $17 billion can be added. This amounts to $57 billion. By way of comparison, the
Marshall aid in 1989 prices amounted to almost $65 billion over four years.
Of course, such a comparison neglects the fact that today's situation differs consid-
erably from the one prevailing at the end of World War II. It also neglects the qualitative
aspects of the aid itself: it was almost entirely composed of grants under the Marshall Plan,
while today it includes a very important element of loans.
Since the day we decided to help Central and Eastern European countries, we have
faced certain challenges. One is, what is the correct trade-off between economic necessity
and political expediency? There is a significant time lapse between the moment people are
asked to bear the cost of organizing the transition from a centrally planned to a market
18
economy, arid the moment they begin to reap the benefits. This was also the case for
Western Europe after World War II, when almost six years were needed, between 1946 and
1952, to see the first positive results of the Marshall Plan.
The potential conflict between economic necessity and political expediency will
have to be solved internally by the Eastern European governments. The Western govern-
ments had this in mind when they launched economic aid to these countries: constraints
which could be eased by economic support. This will be the case for a longerperiod than the
one initially expected.
How are these countries going to find outlets for their products? Market access was
one of the five original purposes of the exercise. Clearly, it is essential that the Central and
Eastern European countries, if they are to succeed in their efforts to become market
economies, are given the chance to compete against Western goods in Western markets.
A first reason for promoting access to Western markets lies in the necessity for these
countries to service their external debt, which represented in 1990 around 70 percent of the
value of their annual exports, with the exception of Czechoslovakia at 25 percent and, for
well known reasons, Romania at 10 percent.
A second reason is simply to allow these countries to earn the hard currency they need
for the pmchase of capital goods. This constant need, although not new, becomes
predominant in the ongoing restructuring process.
A third reason lies in the advantages to be gained from trade as such. With the CAEM
[COMECON] falling apart, new outlets have to be found in order to promote the necessary
exposure of national economies to competition and let them find their comparative advan-
tages. That is what has already been done within the G-24 framework. Consequently,
exports from Central and Eastern European countries now enjoy, in most of the G-24
member countries, the most favored nation clause, and even the GSP (Generalized System
ofPreferences) treaunent and quantitative restrictions that were imposed on them have been
lifted. .
What are the results so far? We can only compare 1990 with 1989, so it is just the
beginning of the transition process we are looking at. The percentage change in exports
from all six Central and Eastern European countries are: to Japan-8.3 percent; to the EC-
8.1 percent; to the U.S.-5.8 percent.
In relation to this, it is worth noting that, against all expectations, countries like
Poland and Hungary have succeeded in rapidly re-orientating their exports towards markets
other than the USSR, mainly to the EC.
The new association agreements, or European agreements, that are now being
negotiated, will go further and aim at providing free trade as well as for hopefully sizeable
concessions to promote trade in agricultural products. However, the political will to follow
this direction will have to be demonstrated, once pressures from well-founded internal
interest groups become strong in certain areas, such as textiles, steel, agriculture or the free
circulation of people.
How does one strike the right balance between financing and adjustment? It was
found that the Marshall Plan was not very relevant to the present needs of Central and
Eastern European countries. The task today is more complicated, even if the effort now
being undertaken is of a comparable size. Delays in reacting have proved to be shorter than
was the case with the Marshall Plan. Butoverall conditions are different. Western European
countries had clear memories of and adhered to the principles of a market economy. They
also had the structure and expertise necessary to make such an economy work. The effort
had thus to be characterized by short-term technical assistance and long-term financial aid.
The situation of Central and Eastern European countries is clearly different, and this will
probably necessitate long-term technical assistance, ifnot shorter-term financial aid. Whole
new legal and financial structures and a whole new economic environment have to be
created from scratch.
There is a very important lesson to be drawn from the Marshall Plan; that financial
flows should run in the right direction; that is, from that country or group of countries that
are prosperous enough to have an excess savings capacity to the country or countries that
have a net borrowing requirement. That was one of the great achievements of the Marshall
Plan forty years ago, and it must be one of the aims of G-24 action today.
In 1990, the Commission took the lead in providing a $1 billion medium-term loan to
Hungary and in addressing these countries' macro-economic needs. It is also within the
framework of the G-24 that the creation of a stabilization fund for Poland was decided, in
which European countries were involved.
Last autumn, taking into consideration the effects of the Gulf crisis, the collapse of
COMECON and German unification on these countries, the Commission defined their
financial needs for 1991 and formulated proposals to the G-24 in order to meet these needs.
This Commission initiative resulted in joint action with the IMF. Thus, the UvlF has now
granted 1991 loans of almost $5.4 billion in the region, and the G-24 provides a balance of
payments support worth $3-4 billion of which the EC ensures 50 percent.
Balance ofpayments' support has thus been provided until now to Poland, Hungary,
and Czechoslovakia, and is being organized for Bulgaria and Romania. However certain
fatigue among the donors can be observed today. Nevertheless, it is common knowledge
that for some of these countries continuing balance of payments support will have to be
provided in 1992 and maybe longer. Otherwise, adjustment and reforms will just not take
place.
What can be done to make the supply response in these countries quicker, so that the
fall in output bottoms out and recovery begins? The supply response question lies at the very
heart of the transition from a centrally planned to a market economy. It is all the more
important because ofits qualitative nature, since it means both restructuring of the economic
infrastructure and of existing production capacities, and development of new private
activities. It is what people usually have in mind when they say we are moving into
uncharted waters, and that there is no precedent to go by.
The transition from a centrally planned to a market economy is an exercise in turning
the tables around. Whereas previously the state assumed responsibility for organizing
supply and let demand face the consequences and adjust accordingly, the new situation
implies that demand-to be more specific, what Keynes called effective demand-will be
playing the leading role. It will be up to the other side to supply, to do the adjusting and the
responding.
How quickly can one be sure that Central and Eastern European corporate managers
realize that they should forget the old tutelage system, forget that they are in the business of
merely seeing to it that government orders are complied with, and instead focus on looking
for market signals and on adapting their production methods to what the market is calling
for? Already market signals are starting to be recognizable. The private sector is growing
and constitutes the only job creator. In Poland, for example, the share of the private sector
in industry went from 5 percent in 1988 to 15 percent in 1990 and, in retail trade, from 5
percent to 40 percent. This will have to be increasingly the case, and that means guarding
against distortions of all kind. Supply and demand have to be kept on a competitive footing
and subsidies have to be reduced considerably. Tax and credit rules have to be justrules, not
custom-made measures ofsupposedly different companies. This will, of course, mean that
some existing firms will not be restructured, but will simply have to be closed.
But, to arrange all these necessary adjusunents, experience and expertise are needed.
They are badly lacking in these countries. They must therefore be brought first from outside
19
20
and then transmitted to national institutions. That is what is now being done by the
Community under the PHARE program, in coordination with other donors' contributions.
The final and, perhaps, the most important issue is, when will Western businessmen
invest in Central and Eastern Europe, and on what conditions? At first, a certain pessimism
(Europessimism) existed that was based on wrong assessments and an illusion. The illusion
was that the reforms would be achieved quickly. Ofcourse, this could not be the case. Work
is considerable, even if a lot has already been done. More public assistance will be needed
in order to achieve success. It will be determined by a mobilization of domestic and foreign
capital in these countries.
One of the ideas behind PHARE, indeed one of its purposes, was to pave the way for
private investment flows. Reforms to make the legal and general economic environment
more investor-friendly were promoted to the top of the cooperation agenda in order to
advance the day when private financial flows would relay official money. PHARE was
never supposed to be an open-ended commitment; it was to be phased out gradually, as more
and more private investors recognized the opportunities that Central and Eastern Europe
held for them. But, with the exception ofHungary, private funds have not yet been flowing
sufficiently into Central and Eastern Europe.
Of course, the concept of privatization itself, as in the USSR, provoked a certain
resistance among the people of these countries, who tend to consider that they collectively,
as citizens or as workers, own the companies. However, through government action, things
are now moving in Poland and Hungary and, to a lesser degree, in Czechoslovakia. Even in
Bulgaria and Romania, the road to be followed is well known and defined.
Leon Trotsky, who might not be in fashion at the moment in the countries concerned,
wrote 65 years ago (1926) the following words: "It is quite clear that if the impossible
becomes possible and the improbable probable, if world capitalism led by European
capitalism establishes a new equilibrium...and if capitalist production in the forthcoming
years and decades begins to expand, we, the socialist state...will have to try to catch the
express train."
We must not only look at Central and Eastern European countries trying to catch the
express train; we have to help them to get on it.
Introductory Remarks
II.
It seems that it is Eastern Europe's destiny to be a sideshow. But, going back to the
fifteenth century, it has had a tendency to cause trouble and tragedy for the main ring.
Facing West, Eastern Europe has historically been underendowed, underpopulated,
and underurbanized: Europe's Wild East. Facing East, however, it has always seemed
advanced. Vis a vis the West, it has always been one revolution behind, but it has been half
a revolution ahead of its Eastern neighbors.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Eastern Europe began the first in a series
ofcatch-up attempts. It freed serfs and tried to build commerce and industry, but it fell even
further behind. The tensions of being underdeveloped in comparison with the West have
always been dealt with politically. Political domination has always been the solution.
Stalinism was probably the most compelling solution offered to close the gap with the
West. This had to be done with surplus peasant labor, without outside capital and with little
trade with the West. The process produced large working classes, a large intelligentsia, and
large bureaucracies, but not much technology.
By 1930, the peasant labor force began to run out, and Eastern Europe became
dependent on foreign trade for economic growth. This meant an increasing dependency on
the Soviet market. Eastern European economies depended on Soviet raw materials to
produce goods only the Soviet Union would take. The result was stagnation in Eastern
Europe.
There began a new search for political solutions in the 1960s, accelerating in the
1970s. The intelligentsia began to come up with new ideologies.
But economic stagnation continued. The Soviet Union caught up as Eastern Europe
slowed down, and it ran into the same problems in the 1970s. The same sorts of ideological
solutions occurred in the Soviet Union, which began to want to turn to the West.
Meanwhile the West had moved on to the information age-the next industrial
revolution. Eastern Europe was thus another revolution behind.
The Soviet Union then decided to liberate Eastern Europe, to relieve themselves ofan
economic burden and to get closer to Western markets. This was its means of leapfrogging
Eastern Europe into the West.
The first effect of this revolution was to bring to power coalitions of workers and
intelligentsia. The second was to lay bare the dependency ofEastern economies on foreign
trade-especially the Soviet Union-just as Soviet trade began to collapse. The third effect
was to show the need for political solutions.
The West should bear in mind eight pointers in dealing with Eastern Europe: (1)
continue to build the architecture for security in Europe; (2) recognize the need for an
economic component; (3) realize a radical economic and political transformation is needed;
(4) recognize the need for strenuous and strict conditionality for assistance; (5) raise the
political priority given to Eastern Europe; (6) avoid ruinous competition among ourselves
and among the Eastern European countries; (7) provide technical assistance, market access,
and then capital; (8) have an integrated view of the area, which includes Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union together.
It is important to recognize that Eastern Europe has assets for the information
revolution that it never had for the first two. It didn't have coal, iron, or oil, but it does have
millions ofeducated, talented people. It has no infrastructure, but it is dedicated to building
it, and we have the wisdom and resources to help.
Discussion
Economic and political integration of Eastern Europe. One of the foremost
concerns in the minds of participants was to what extent the countries of Eastern Europe
should be integrated into the European Community. A German wondered if their admission
into the EC might be the answer to the political problem. But the majority of those who
addressed this question opposed EC membership for the Eastern European countries any
time soon. A Frenchman said that the Eastern European countries would not be ready for EC
membership for at least 10 to 12 years, that membership for countries such as Sweden,
Austria, and Norway had to be considered first. It was an American speaker's opinion that
early EC membership would destroy the Eastern European countries and the EC itself.
Putting that thought more mildly, an Italian saw "objective difficulties" in defining how the
EC should enlarge to include Eastern European countries.
An American speaker thought it ironic that, now that Eastern Europe had taken a step
into the future, the reaction in Western Europe was to appear to be inconvenienced. The
developments in Eastern Europe seemed to be causing trouble for the "the club."
The needfor an institutional framework. The question of EC membership aside,
there was agreement that some sort of institutional framework in which to address the
problems ofEastern Europe was necessary. An Italian was concerned by what he saw as the
tendency of Eastern European countries toward economic and political fragmentation.
2
22
What was lacking was an institutional framework where all the Western and Eastern
European countries could get together to discuss economic andpolitical issues. An Austrian
agreed with this, saying that the West tended to talk about Eastern Europe as though it were
a "branch office." It was important to recognize that Eastern Europe had gotten rid of
bureaucratic structures without replacing them with anything else. Technical assistance
from the West was needed, involving such things as public administration, setting up of tax
systems, etc. A participant from Belgium observed that the success of the postwar period as
seen in the Marshall Plan was linked to the credibility of existing institutions. There was
today a need for something similar, a system that included countries of East and West.
The roles ofthe public and private sectors. Observing that the private sector had
played a crucial role in the success of the Marshall Plan, an American argued that there was
too much thinking about government assistance and not enough about providing a climate
for private enterprise to attract private capital. In this regard, it was "naive" to suggest that
the Eastern European countries should not compete with each other; they ought to compete
for capital, just as the countries of the G-24. Another American supported the emphasis on
private capital because, he said, governments could not come up with all the necessary
resources.
Nevertheless, the role of Western governments was thought to be pre-eminent by
many speakers. It was an Austrian•s view that, unlike what had happened in South America,
governments had to act before the banks. It was important that governments create
conditions for those countries that had been servicing their external debt to be able to
continue to do so; financial support was a prerequisite for debt rescheduling. A French
speaker saw this as a public responsibility which should not be transferred to the private
sector. The role of government, in a Greek's view, should be to prepare the ground for
private enterprise.
Conditionality of assistance. Several speakers expressed concern about applying
conditions to the granting of Western assistance to the countries of Eastern Europe. An
American, questioning the West's will to "put its money where its mouth is," wondered if
the imposition ofconditions mightbe a step backward. A speaker from Finland agreed with
this, warning that the West had to be careful about how it imposed conditions, especially
"value-loaded" ones. Another American responded that conditions had to be used subtly.
But the primacy of the political solution and the interconnection between democracy and
economic development had to be foremost.
Other Issues. A French speaker queried if any distinctions should be made among
the countries of Eastern Europe; that is, should Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia be
considered a "buffer zone?" These countries, said a Turk, were Europe's "natural children,"
while Romania and Bulgaria were its adopted children. But the general consensus of those
who spoke to this issue was that, while Romania and Bulgaria were starting from a less
developed point, they should not be singled out for different treatment.
The same Frenchman wondered if there ought to be a division of labor regarding
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, with Western Europe taking special responsibility for
Eastern Europe and the United States and perhaps also Japan dealing with the Soviet Union.
This notion found little support, but several speakers argued that the U.S. and Japan ought
to do more.
Some speakers expressed concern about such issues as the problem of nationalities
and of social and political instability in Eastern Europe. The people, said a Dane, were
losing their purchasing power and were getting poorer. Might there not be serious
consequences of people not being able to buy even necessities?
A Spanish participant was prompted to wonder if there was too much emphasis
being placed on economic issues. One major difference between the Marshall Plan era and
today'was that, after the war, there was great destruction which gave impetus to reconstruc-
tion. There was an emphasis on creating wealth rather than on redistributing it. Was such
an impetus evident in the countries of Eastern Europe? There could be no recovery without
the total effort of the populations. An Englishman agreed, saying that what was needed was,
more than capital, a "dynamic and systemic change." He suggested that the energy and
ability to lead such a process of change might be found in .the most recent former prime
minister of the U.K. and that perhaps her help should be enlisted.
23
~ -~--~----· -----~~" ---------
24
II. DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SOVIET UNION:
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACT ON THE ALLIANCE
Introductory Remarks
I.
The internal situation in the Soviet Union is serious, deadly serious, and it will
remain so. But the situation is not hopeless. What we are seeing in the Soviet Union is not
a major governmental crisis which could be solved within a given system. We are not
witnessing an economic crisis which can be solved by the substitution for a bad policy of a
better one. What is happening is really the end of a system, the clinical death of the old
Soviet system. It is a historical crisis, involving the whole nation, the whole society. It is
very different from past crises. It is far-reaching and all-embracing and involves the
institutions, the social structure, the politics, and the Soviet mentality. It is a crisis that
escapes a master plan for its solution.
We in the West must realize that we cannot think about the Soviet crisis in terms of
reform. If we think there can be one big reform that will solve the Soviet crisis, we will be
disappointed. The Soviet leadership has mistakenly led us to expect that such reform is
possible. When Gorbachev started out, he thought he could reform the old system within
that system and come up with something completely new. He felt that just turning some
screws would make the system function much better.
The Soviet Vice President said recently that the leadership had operated on the
country for an appendicitis and found, upon opening it up, that the body was full ofcancer.
Gorbachev himself has said that it has taken the leadership six years just to find out where
things really stand. Taking these remarks into account, we can understand why things are
so confused in the Soviet Union and why we cannot expect it to become clearer in a short
time.
The old system has practically disappeared, but it is like a corpse that still has some
reflexes and is still moving a bit. There is a political fight going on, undertaken by people
who are children of the old system, to build something new out cf its fragments. Not much
has been built so far, but, the country has been half reformed in the sense that the old system
has disappeared.
What about the reconstruction? What are the intentions ofGorbachev and his team?
Do they have the right ideas? Not always, because they are children of the old system.
They are, as they admit, in a permanent process of learning. Do they use the right political
methods? Not always. They are making some mistakes, some real blunders. Do they
really know how to put together a real democracy, a free market, and a civil society? No,
they do not; they have to learn. They know very little about the mechanisms of a free
market economy.
Are the Soviet leaders sincere? This question is frequently raised, particularly in
connection with the so-called tum to the right made by Gorbachev last fall and in connec-
tion with the resignation ofShevardnadze. Gorbachev, with all his tactical movements, has
kept to his line, and that line is leading toward democracy. This is going to bring about new
institutions, a new structure of the Soviet Union which is supported by a consensus of the
nationalities. In the creation of free market economy, in development of the rule of law,
and in the emergence of a new mentality, there has been progress. The glass is no longer
quite empty.
What is most important is that the attitudes are changing. The nation is no longer
resigned in lethargy. Common people are beginning to grasp such ideas as what a free
'. ~ "" •~tJ-;<e _, • , .---
market economy means for them. People are discussing such things as buying shares in
companies. A year ago that did not happen. And democratic freedoms, such as the freedom
of discussion, have taken root. It has happened in a very spontaneous way, without any
discipline, which is a problem, but in a way that is irrevocable. There can be backlash,
attempts to turn the changes back, but this will always face great resistance. People know
they want change. They don't know exactly what kind ofchange, and this is the job of the
Soviet leadership to convey.
As for Gorbachev, he will be around for a long time to come. There will be others
with him, and there will be fights in store, but he will remain.
Introductory Remarks
II.
As in the political and economic system in the Soviet Union, we are seeing the end of
ideology in foreign affairs as well. There are still people who think in ideological terms, but
the overwhelming majority are sick and tired of the old ideology. They know it hasn't
worked and they are looking for something new. They haven't yet found it, and they are ex-
perimenting with different approaches. This has political implications both for Soviet
internal and foreign policy.
It is also clear that, with all the formidable hardware still in the hands of the Soviet
military (which is something the West must not forget, particularly the nuclear component),
the fact is that the political feasibility of using this power directly abroad or even using it for
serious threats abroad, has virtually disappeared. It is simply unacceptable domestically to
in any way suggest that the Soviet Union might get involved directly in military action
abroad. This was very clear in the Gulf crisis, where the most emotional issue was whether
Soviet troops might at some point be introduced. The mere suggestion that there might be
such a contingency would cause a public outcry at home. We must not forget that there is
still immense destructive power in the hands of the Soviet leaders and their military
lieutenants, but the political ability to use this power abroad is practically nil.
So what are the Soviet foreign policy interests? They are faced with the necessity of
protecting their interests and security without the military dominance and threats they used
in the past. This is Gorbachev's foreign policy, it was Shevardnadze's, and it remains
Bessmertnykh's. The idea is that, if you cannot insure your security by military force, you
better do it by persuasion.
We have been seeing this approach in the very radical changes in Soviet policy
toward the Third World. And we have seen it most spectacularly in Europe. It is probably
not correct to say that Gorbachev liberated Eastern Europe; he allowed it to liberate itself.
He had the wisdom to see that he was unable to prevent it from happening, and it would
have been counterproductive to try to do so. That is quite different from being part of his
design.
Another aim has to be to secure economic support from the rest of the world, and we
see these efforts going on now. To brandish the sword is not a very productive way ofdoing
that, and the Soviet leadership knows it. There are a few marshals and generals who don't,
but their views don't go very far these days.
Perhaps most important of all, foreign policy is seen as an instrument to try to
prevent outsiders from bringing about the disintegration of the Soviet Union as a political
entity.
The changes in Soviet foreign policy in Europe and in the Third World have been
very encouraging. We have seen very rapid military disengagement, although there are still
25
26
some problems with respect to Cuba and some other places that need to be worked out. But
the trend is unmistakable and the results are inevitable. The only question is how fast and
under what circumstances will we see a Soviet withdrawal.
The Soviet leaders will continue to talk a lot about arms control, and this time they
probably mean it as, internally, they really need agreements to show the people that they are
getting something in return for negotiated concessions.
The debate about the Soviet Union is too often about false issues. One of them is,
should we help Gorbachev? Of course we should not help any political leader. What we
should be doing is supporting those forces which are in our interest, and happen as well to
be in the Soviet interest. If these are part of Gorbachev's program, then we should not
refuse support. On the other hand, if he wants something that doesn't make sense, we
should not support it, just because he has presented it.
In general, our public debate has suffered from a rather indiscriminate and damaging
placing of labels on people, such as putting a white hat on Yeltsin and a black one on
Gorbachev. This simply confuses thinking about the issues, and we ought not to do it.
Another false issue is, do we financially aid the central government, or do we aid the
republics? We should not pour money into the center, or into the republics. We should
work with the Soviet Union, conditionally, as it moves toward convertibility, in creating a
stabilization fund. It is not in our interests, nor in theirs, to see a replication of the state
structure of managing the economy at the republic level, so we need to look beyond that
sort of issue. We should also look beyond the idea that assistance is just money. Money is
involved in assistance. But we should not feel that we are not doing our part if we are not
throwing a lot of money at the Soviet Union.
This brings up the Marshall Plan analogy, which is not a good one. We face an
entirely different situation. In the Marshall Plan, there was a Western European pump that
was dry, and it needed priming. In the Soviet Union, the pump hasn't even been built yet.
If you pour money in, it just flows onto the ground. Worse, if you pour it into the central
state system, you preserve this clinically dead body, giving the impression that it might
come alive again. That certainly would not be in our interests or theirs.
The Marshall Plan analogy is apt only in the respect that we need collectively to give
very careful thought about how to have an integrated approach toward the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe. Eastern Europe is not going to be able to fully become a part of the
world economic community if it does not have close economic relations with the Soviet
Union. We have to try to bring them both along. It is not a question of giving priority to one
or the other, but to the process.
There are certain bottom line issues we must keep in mind. The most critical one for
the Soviet Union is to keep the process of opening up and democratization going. Without
that, nothing is going to be possible. In the economic sense, this means to create those
mechanisms that will make possible the movement toward an open market system in which
the private sector will grow and eventually become dominant. We have to keep these
strategic goals in mind and pursue policies which discourage backsliding and encourage
moving forward.
Introductory Remarks
III.
There is a relationship between the reforms in the Soviet Union and the revolution-
ary change that occurred in Germany and Central Europe last year. In 1953, Soviet tanks
were in the first line to crush the upheaval of the people. In 1989, it was probably Soviet
troops who prevented East German security forces from killing people in the streets. If this
had happened in the presence of Soviet troops, it would have meant the end of perestroika
in the Soviet Union.
The reunification of Germany is an enormous undertaking. The Marshall Plan
involved, in today's currency, DM 800 per capita. This year, West Germany is pouring DM
6,100 per capita into East Germany. The success of German reunification will be very
important for the development of the new democracies in Central Europe, with a heritage of
40 years of socialism, and also, to some extent, for the Soviet Union. It can be added that,
psychologically, the situation today is different from after the war because then, everyone
had the same problems. There were no rich people. The problem in Germany today is there
are two societies in one state that are 40 years apart. The people in Dresden and Leipzig
don't compare themselves to people in Warsaw, Prague, and Moscow, but to those in
Hamburg and Baden-Baden, and they feel bad about it. But these differences cannot be
bridged in a short time. Our suci;ess in doing it will have great importance for the future
international role of Germany.
Regarding the Soviet Union, the question is not whether Gorbachev will be around
or not, but how long he will be around. That will make a big difference. If he had not been
there two years ago, the revolutionary change in Central Europe, including Germany,
probably would not have occurred, and we would not have 400,000 Soviet troops leaving
Europe. It will make a big difference if Gorbachev stays in the future, and so we should
concentrate on preserving what has already been accomplished in the process of reform in
the Soviet Union, in spite of the enormous difficulties.
Assistance from the West should be applied in a way to help and support reforms,
but not to postpone them or create a situation where they can be avoided. Certain kinds of
assistance can give Soviet leaders some breathing space and take pressure off reforms.
Much has already been accomplished in terms of arms control, cooperation in regional
matters, the larger measure of openness in Soviet society, the breakup of the information
monopoly, freedom ofopinion, the right of self-determination, foreign contacts, and a more
realistic assessment of the Soviet situation.
The reform process is in the interest of the West as a whole, and we should work to
make it irreversible and more independent of the fate of individual Soviet leaders. It will be
a long process that will require patience, perseverance, and flexibility on the part of the
West. What is needed is a cultural change, from the perspective of Soviet and Russian
history.
The reforms must be implemented from within. The West should use its imagination
in looking for ways to support change toward a more pluralistic Soviet society. Much can
be done in this area, quite apart from financial support. We should implement a compre-
hensive network of relations with people in the republics and local communities. For
example, partnerships have been formed between cities, universities, institutes, sports and
youth organizations, etc. in Germany and in the Soviet republics. These kinds of contact
support and promote the overall process of decentralization.
We cannot expect a clear path toward parliamentary democracy. There will always
be authoritarian governmental structures. But we can help build a functioning multi-party
system, through which existing power structure can be changed. Democratic movements
and formation of parties should be encouraged and supported.
The assistance needed to reform the Soviet economy can only be provided through a
global cooperative effort. We will need a joint effort involving Europe, the U.S., and Japan.
A normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and Japan is, in this context, in the
interest of the West as a whole. Without Japan's financial strength and economic potential,
a breakthrough to a market economy in the Soviet Union is hard to imagine.
27
28
There is a necessity to expand the advisory functions and infonnation exchanges·
already being carried out at the governmental level, and there should, in particular, be a
strong expansion of training programs. A joint training offensive on the part of Western
industrial nations will be needed in many areas to help those who are interested in reforms
in the Soviet Union.
It is also very important that the West use its influence to see that peaceful negotia-
tions that are legal and based on mutual consensus are carried out between the Soviet
government and the republics. A decision on the distribution of rights and responsibilities
between the Union and the republics is urgently needed.
By continuing the arms control process and maintaining secure defenses, the West
must insure itself against the risk of failure of the Soviet refonn process and the resulting
instabilities. The economic crisis in the Soviet Union is putting its military procurement
programs under severe pressure. At the same time, the Gulf War demonstrated the
technological inferiority of Soviet weapons systems. This dilemma is making further
constructive cooperation on arms control a necessity for the Soviet Union. The West
should make use of this situation to continue the arms control process at all levels.
Even after the implementation ofagreement on conventional arms control in Europe,
and even with a new European security structure, the SovietUnion will continue to have the
largest land force in Europe and will continue to be a nuclear and naval superpower. Thus,
NATO will continue to be indispensable as a guarantor of security in Europe. The West
will have to continue to spent a lot of money for weapons, but spending money on the
support of refonns in the Soviet Union and on support of new democracies in Central
Europe will also enhance our security and will be money well spent.
Discussion
The "grand bargain." The discussion began with a discourse by an American
participant on the proposal for a "grand bargain" between the U.S./Western Europe and the
Soviet Union on behalf of the transfonnation of the Soviet Union. The speaker made the
following remarks.
What is necessary at the Union and Republic levels is a sustainable commitment to
and the day-to-day implementation ofa coherent program oftransfonnation-not just more
pronouncements, laws, and organizations. With or without Western assistance, the Soviet
leadership and the leadership of the republics should undertake these measures:
• Ownership of private property.
• Stabilization of the macro economy, meaning sharp cuts of more than 20
percent of GNP, cuts in defense expenditure, cuts in subsidies to military
enterprises and other state industries, and successful control of the money
supply.
• Liberalization of prices.
• Privatization of enterprise.
• Nonnalization of trading practices.
Implementation of these actions would involve hundreds of specific steps, includ-
ing, in 1991:
• Doubling of private plots provided to families on collective farms.
• Announcement to sell no less than half of all farmland to collective farmers or
others in 1992.
• Complete and rapid privatization of all small enterprises in the Soviet Union.
• The sale of not less than half of all state trucks, cars, and tractors to private
citizens.
• CuL~ in non-salary subsidies of defense enterprises by an additional third.
• A freeze on the adoption of new social spending programs at the Union and
republic levels.
• Cuts in other budgetary expenditures in the second half of the year based on
new emergency budgets for the republics and the Union.
• Rapid liberalization of prices on broad categories of luxury goods and con-
sumer durables.
The transfonnation in the Soviet economy that these steps and subsequent actions
would represent can only be fully realized with the accompanying transfonnation of the
Soviet political system. The magnitude and difficulty of the economic and political
refonns are unprecedented. The initial responsibility for carrying out this transfonnation to
democracy and a market economy rests with the Soviet people and leadership, not with the
West. The transfonnation will require unflinching commitment on their part. But too
much is at stake in both strategic and moral tenns for the West to stand aside hoping for the
best, but expecting much less. The steepness of the path Soviet leaders must follow, the
degree ofpain, and the severity of the risks-including that ofcatastrophic failure-depend
critically upon the extent of Western engagement. Mone~ is neither the first requirement
nor the last. If the West were now to put a bag of billions on the table, failure would be
assured. As Secretary Baker said, there should be no big bang at the outset. Instead,
Western aid should be incremental and strictly conditional on the adoption and implemen-
tation of democratic and economic refonn programs. Western aid should go forward in a
grand bargain of step-by-step mutual engagement. This means the West would provide
large-scale assistance if the Soviet leadership pursues a real program of transfonnation. If
it does not, then aid would not be provided. The West would be called on to provide about
$20 to $30 billion per year for the first two or three years. The money would come from the
governments and the international lending institutions, and the amount is based on an
extension of the calculations presented in the Joint Report on the Soviet Economy by the
World Bank, IMF, OECD, etc.
Some have said the Soviet Union is a rich country and should go it alone. Techni-
cally, over a long period of time, that is possible. All the changes could, in principal, be
introduced in the Soviet Union without financial or technical assistance from abroad.
However, radical economic reform in a situation like that in the Soviet Union, where output
is already declining very rapidly, would produce massive economic dislocation, a collapse
of investment and output, and extremely sharp declines in consumption. Under these
conditions, the refonn program would probably not be politically sustainable, and eco-
nomic and political disintegration and chaos would likely follow.
The Soviet Union is indeed at a historic crossroads. Many believe the West can do
little or nothing to affect the outcome of the domestic struggle. This is wrong and defeatist.
The West's preeminent interests are engaged in the future of the Soviet Union. Western
policies should display a vision and energy which clearly defines that fact.
The survival of Gorbachev. Much of the discussion centered on the person of
Gorbachev, and the degree of importance that should be attached to supporting his survival
at the head of the Soviet leadership. An Austrian speaker reported that it was the opinion of
a high-ranking Soviet official that it would not make a great deal of difference whether
Gorbachev or Yeltsin were the Soviet leader. The same problems would still be there if
Yeltsin's and Gorbachev's roles were reversed. An American argued that the political fates
of the two men were intertwined; neither one could survive without the other, as they both
had apparently started to realize. A Gennan added that Yeltsin could probably not survive
alone on center stage in light of the reactionary forces. The combination of Gorbachev and
Yeltsin was probably a good thing.
29
30
A speaker from Turkey p0inted out that, in his experience, the Russian people had
been able to see little difference between the Czars and the Communist rulers, until
Gorbachev came along. He was different from his predecessors and ought to be supported
by the West, not for himself, but for the ideas he represented. It was an American's view
that, in light of all the problems in the Soviet Union, it made a difference how long
Gorbachev could influence the process of change, and that was why the West ought to
support him.
The state ofthe Soviet economy. Several speakers expressed concern that the Soviet
economy was "on the verge of a total collapse," as a Frenchman put it. Enlarging on this
theme, an American likened the Soviet economy to "an erector set composed of many
pieces connected to form one large apparatus." Ifone piece were removed, the whole thing
would fall apart. There certainly was the possibility ofrapid economic deterioration. There
had not yet been much real reform, rather "a lot of talk about how to get there." There were
some new themes being talked about, like private property, but little evidence ofa readiness
to undertake drastic measures. Perhaps, the speaker suggested, Pushkin was right when he
said Russia would take 500 years to catch up with the West. In any event, the West should
not have very high expectations about the pace and extent of Soviet reform.
A Canadian agreed that not much real progress had been made in reforming the
Soviet economy. The country was still ruled by Communists; there was still great
resistance to private property; and a huge share ofSoviet GNP was still devoted to military
spending. A German participant worried about the effect on financial markets, banks, and
governments around the world should the Soviet Union not be able to service its debt and
fulfill its financial obligations. Normally, a country in the poor economic shape of the
Soviet Union would apply to the IMF for assistance. It could reasonably be expected that
the Soviet Union would soon apply for IMF membership, and this would present a very
complicated situation. Who would become the IMF member? The Soviet Union or the
republics? Economically, the Soviet Union was closer to a developing country than a
developed one.
Elements of Western assistance. There was much discussion about the scope and
form of Western assistance. A Swede expressed the view that the West had achieved rapid
economic growth because it had established property rights and a judicial system that
fostered the development of free markets. The Soviet Union was unlikely to get anywhere
until it established property rights, along with land and capital reforms. One approach to
achieving this would be to encourage the Russians to introduce a Western style judicial
system by relieving the Soviet debt burden.
An American supported this approach, saying that the West ought not to be too
sophisticated in giving the Soviet Union economic advice. A three-point plan was neces-
sary: protect private property, enforce private contracts, and a free market would follow. A
legal and moral foundation was necessary for a free market economy. If the West forgot
that, it risked giving the Soviets counter-productive advice.
Another American speaker urged the West to look very hard at what types of
assistance might or might not advance the goal of Soviet reform. Massive Western aid,
even conditional on certain things, was not likely to be productive. It would be counter-
productive to lead Soviet leaders to think that massive Western aid would follow economic
reform. In this regard, a German added that a Soviet official had remarked to him that
"even $500 billion worth of Western aid would not help." The job of economic and
political reform was up to the Soviet people themselves. This statement drew several
concurring interventions, with speakers emphasizing the need for support of the develop-
ment of human resources, through such measures as technical assistance and cultural
exchanges.
--· ·--~, -~·,-~ "'''::; Ut>il)IQK\WW~t· ~,.,_,
Obstacles to reform. A number of participants expressed doubts about.the capacity
of the Soviet people to move to a free market system. A Greek thought it would be
challenging to teach them to respond to free market principals when they had lived for 70
years under "an oppressive regime with a centrally planned, rigidly stratified economy." A
Canadian felt that the West tended to underestimate the degree to which ordinary Soviet
citizens had "absorbed the principals of egalitarianism and the degree to which they
resented the enrichment of others." This "anti-mercantilist spirit" had roots going back
before the Bolsheviks came to power.
An American agreed with this assessment, saying that Soviet leaders were struggling
with centuries ofattitudes that were inimical to private enterprise. Gorbachev had recently
observed that, in the West, a person who worked hard and made money was admired; in the
Soviet Union, such a person was considered a criminal.
In spite of this, said a German speaker, one should not forget that there was a
functioning market economy in the Soviet Union--the black market. The question was
how to legalize it and make it part of the whole Soviet culture.
An Austrian was struck by what he called the "lack ofa countervailing power" in the
Soviet Union. Without such a force, economic and political reform could not take place.
What would be the nature and shape of the countervailing power in the Soviet Union?
What was the equivalent of the U.S. Congress, the New York Times, or General Motors?
The issue of the republics. Several participants spoke of dichotomy between the
reform process in the Soviet Union and in the republics. Of particular concern was the
question of the Baltic states. A Norwegian wondered if the West should directly aid and
invest in these states. An American felt that the Baltic states had a special status unlike
other republics, and that the West ought to support their right to independence.
A speaker from Greece worried that the West's initiating economic and other
relations with the republics would "help create the forces that would bring about the
downfall of the Soviet Union." An American agreed that the question of the republics
presented a real dilemma. The process of going from a centrally planned to a market
economy was a painful process requiring central authority. If the Soviet Union attempted
to establish authority democratically, it would surely lose many of its republics. Ifit tried to
establish authority by repression, it would lose the possibility of outside support.
The only course for the West to follow, said a German, was to first support the
Democrats in the center, and then to support those in the republics, but not in a way that
would be an outside stimulus to disintegration of the union.
The Western objective. An American questioned whether the West really knew
what kind of Soviet Union it wanted to see. Much had been said about not weakening the
SovietUnion, but, in the light of400 years ofRussian and Soviet history, was it necessarily
in the Western interest to have a strong Soviet Union? To this, a Frenchman responded
with the question: would the West's interests be better served with a Soviet Union that was
in total economic and political collapse? One speaker suggested that the Soviet Union
could potentially become a Lebanon on a grand scale. What the West needed, added a
German, was not necessarily a strong Soviet Union, but a stable one, because "an unstable
one would simply fall upon us."
Another American opined that the West tended to address the Soviet Union much as
a parent would address a "rebellious child who had rejected the parent's value system and
whom the parent was now trying to bring back into the family." The West should avoid this
approach and really decide what its goals ought to be. The primary one, offered the
speaker, should be to have a drastically reduced Soviet military capacity. From that
objective would follow the question of how best to achieve it and through what kinds of
assistance. In other words, it was better to think in broad terms than to get "bogged down in
details."
31
32
A German agreed that it was "philosophicaily wrong and politically a mistake" to be
paternalistic toward the Soviet Union. The West had to approach the Soviets tactfully, not
by offering big plans, but by asking them what their own plans were. No plan could
succeed if it were viewed by the Soviets as a dictate from the other side.
An American concluded the discussion with the exhortation that the West put its
collective heads together and think through the issues that surfaced in the discussion. We
had not yet begun to focus on these issues in the most useful way, nor to think ahead. We
had to remember that the West could not impose its own standards upon the Soviet Union.
ill. THE MIDDLE EAST: POLlTICAL FALLOUT AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Background Paper
I. Introduction
l. The Gulf crisis was presented as the first great test case of the post-cold-war era.
The results of this test can not be fully judged for some time. The primary objectives of the
coalition were achieved but the post-war situation is confused and fluid and this makes it
unwise to offer quick judgements. Equally, because the new era contains so many dynamic
elements, it would be unwise to assume that the Gulf saga sets a pattern for all future
international crisis management or that it represents the first stage in the construction of a
'new world order'. Nonetheless, as so many aspects of the events that were set in motion by
the occupation ofKuwait last Augnst were unprecedented, their examination should at least
provide us with some clues as to the workings of the international system at its latest stage
of development.
2. This paper is in three parts. The first describes, in very general terms, some of the
major systemic changes of the past few years and their implications. The second part
illustrates these features at work in the buildup to the war and its aftermath. The third part
draws some conclusions from this experience for the European Community.
II. The new international system
I. Prior to the Gulf crisis there were many who believed that with the end of the cold
war, western countries could settle down for a quiet life, as if the evaporation of the most
formidable strategic threat would allow engagement in the affairs of the rest of the world as
a matter of choice. The turmoil in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as in the Soviet
Union, always made that unlikely but the events of the past ten months have confirmed that
the West is caught in a web of international expectations and responsibilities from which
there is no easy escape. The basic challenge is no longer one of confronting a great
adversary but of coming to terms with pre-eminent power.
2. The years which saw the start of the cold war also saw the start of the anti-colonial
movement. Arguably the two ended together. The last Western Empire-the Portuguese-
collapsed in 1974. Now the Soviet Empire is fragmenting, with the post-1945 acquisitions
liberated. This fragmentation has not quite run its course, but already one of the conse-
quences of the revolution of 1989 has been to increase the number of truly independent
states to add to the many that have entered the international community over the past 45
years.
3. This means that all the categories through which international politics has been
habitually discussed must be reappraised. The idea, for example, that because the East-West
conflict has now been transcended the North-South conflict will rush to the fore, is
contradicted by the diversity and complexity of the 'South'. States which were once bound
together by a shared anti-colonial impulse now find otherissues much more salientwhile the
banner of 'non-alignment' is less relevant when the alliance system has become so less
significant in the politics of the 'North'. Nor does there seem to be much point in talking
about the 'third world' when not only does it now contain so many disparate and often
conflictual elements, but the 'second world' has collapsed.
4. The world is no longer characterized by bipolarity, but what has replaced it?
Certainly not the multipolarity rooted in the 1970s which posited Chinese and Western
Europe increasingly asserting themselves independently of the United States. Nor, despite
American leadership during the Gulf crisis, is this now a unipolar world. The United States
33
34
is much more ofa superpower than the SovietUnion butits less than commanding role in the
international economy means that its power is not that super. During the crisis it looked to
others to help subsidize its military contribution and took care throughout to be seen to be
working as part of an international consensus.
5. The collapse of the Soviet pole has had a dramatic effect on the world's political
magnetic field:
i. In the past the Western pole(s) were oriented towards the Soviet pole. Its
decline leaves the West disoriented. Awareness of Soviet global power guided
Western policy in terms ofboth selecting areas of special interest and accepting
limits on intervention.
ii. In the past the West could disregard the needs ofCentral and Eastern European
countries because they were firmly in the Soviet sphere. Now they seek entry
into the Western sphere.
iii. East-West antagonism meant that the United Nations was liable to be dead-
locked on key issues. For the moment this is not the case, although whether a
Soviet Union suffering from inner turmoil will prove easier to deal with than
one which was simply hostile remains to be seen.
6. The most critical feature of the current scene is the pre-eminent position of the three poles
of the political 'West' -North America, the European Community and Japan (politics and
geography get hopelessly confused by these labels). Contrary to the speculation of some of
the gloomier international theorists, by and large these appear to be poles ofattraction rather
than rejection, although this is obviously less so in the economic than in the security sphere.
7. Each ofthese poles acts as a regional magnet-the United States for the countries ofLatin
America and the Caribbean, Japan for East Asia, and the European Community for Central
and Eastern Europe and, to some extent, North Africa. In each region political life appears
no longer as a dialectic between imperialism and national liberation, or capitalism and
socialism but oforder and disorder, with the relatively orderly states by and large character-
ized by liberal democracy and market economies (although we must take care in disentan-
gling cause from effect here) and the disorderly suffering from fragile economies and often
deep social tensions.
8. For each of the 'Western' poles the main priority lies in its own region. They will feel the
most direct effects if disorder takes too strong a hold in their immediate environment. This
explains the US preoccupation with Central America. It also indicates the challenge for the
European Community in its encounter with a neighborhood where there was a rigid order in
the past but where now there is increasing disorder.
9. A number of regions are outside the immediate influence of a Western pole. Some of
these are generally well ordered and fully integrated into the international community but
others are not. The most problematic areas are South Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
These areas have inherent tendencies towards disorder. In the policies adopted by the
orderly world to the disorderly there will be a varying mixture of self-interest and moral
obligation. The nature of this mixture and its effect on policy-making is critical in orienting
Western states to the new international system.
10. By definition, the disorderly parts of the world are awkward places in which to get
involved, especially in military terms. 'Realists' warn of the perils of intervention-of
getting sucked into quagmires of regional conflicts where our allies are likely to be corrupt,
our interests vague and insubstantial, and our best intentions wholly counter-productive.
The old reasons for intervention-to block the strategic advances of the Soviet Union or an
associated Communist insurgency no longer serve. Nor is the smooth functioning of the
international economy so much at risk from regional conflicts as is commonly supposed.
Even in the Gulf the implications of Iraqi hegemony for the oil market were ambiguous.
11. Nonetheless, the cominanding position in which the West finds itselflimits its scope for
steering clear of regional conflicts. Past rhetoric and proclaimed values mean that it is
difficult for the Western countries to disregard those international problems in which the
West has no obvious interest. Public opinion is also a factor here, and we have had a recent
example of the role of the media in alerting populations to developing crises on which it
thinks some action ought to be taken. It may only be that regional disorder poses a direct
challenge to Western interests when it occurs close to one of the Western poles, but one
should not underestimate the impact of images ofdistress or evidence of minority persecu-
tion to move policy, nor of the difficulty of ignoring gross breaches of international law.
12. Paradoxically it is easier to avoid enervating entanglements by strengthening interna-
tional institutions and their norms but this process requires, as we saw in the Gulf, a
readiness to intervene. It is easy to be cynical about this sort of intervention by pointing to
precedents in which the norms were not enforced. But this course leads only to erosion of
the authority of the institutions. Ifi Iraqi aggression had not been so blatant, then no doubt
plenty of reasons could have been found to ignore it. As it was so blatant then, to let it pass
would have been to acquiesce in the breach of the most elemental ofall international norms.
Now the case law is positive rather than negative. By taking action in the Gulf to reverse and
punish aggression, a precedent for intervention elsewhere has been created. Perhaps more
important, a precedent has also been created for humanitarian intervention to protect a
persecuted minority.
ill. The Gulf Experience
I. The former fear ofintervention was based on involvement in protracted civil and colonial
wars in which Western states seemed to be working against the tide of both local and
international opinion. More recently, rather than get directly involved, the preference has
been to support friends indirectly through training programs and arms transfers. The
problems here have been that arms sales have a commercial aspect that can override political
judgement, which is anyway often dubious because of the fickleness of friendships in
disorderly regions. Attempts to exert influence have increasingly come to depend on
economic measures-access to Western markets and various forms of assistance in return
for political favors and the denial ofthese and possibly sanctions in response to unacceptable
behavior. The problems here havebeen the adverse consequences for business and financial
communities who have been reluctant to suffer for the sake of foreign policy and the
unconvincing track record of using economic carrots and sticks for diplomatic purposes. An
additional instrument is to downgrade or break diplomatic relations, but this has been
largely symbolic and has often proved complicated to reverse even when the immediate
upset has passed.
2. It is of note that in the Gulf, when it was possible to agree on substantial measures against
Iraq, diplomatic relations were not broken until the war and then formally"only by Iraq.
During serious crises, forms of communication are essential if there is to be any hope of a
diplomatic settlement.
3. Economic sanctions were implemented right from the start and enforced more rigorously
than ever before. Not waiting to see whether they could work by themselves, disappointed
those who saw this as the best opportunity ever to demonstrate their value in policing the
international system. In the end, sanctions were notjudged to be sufficient in themselves to
force Saddam to back down, at least during the time frame in which it would also be possible
to sustain the complementary political and military pressures, without which the sanctions
themselves could not be maintained.
4. Sanctions would probably have been more effective if linked to a more promising
diplomacy: there was little obvious 'middle ground' upon which to build a deal. Nonethe-
35
,,K ,,,,~*,iji[\ft'%.MWIJNW.i,,$~£c.~ ·~~--:~'::· ;·--~.--,--.·-·~"··."":\-:::"-:v;.c:-.--.~.·=,-:--~-,- - -..t ::\.qt:., ,,,.,.. "' iik·ilhfa'-'· ·- • ··"' .e::m;:m::H;;;;J>.,-J \j NJURWili&l\4..mt:iill
36
less the influence ofsanctions should not be disregarded: an international coalition could be
forged around them in a way that would not have been possible in a rush to armed force, and
this was also the means by which the United Nations was drawn into its central role. Five
months of the embargo undermined the ability of Iraq to sustain a long war. A continued
embargo provided the main means of exercising influence over post-war Iraq.
5. It was the blatant nature of the Iraqi aggression which created a political context so
supportive of intervention. The intervention was:
• At the request (albeit with a little coaxing) ofmost of the key Arab states affected
by the invasion.
• Supported by a variety ofdirect and indirect military and financial contributions
from many states.
• Endorsed by the UN Security Council.
• Against an enemy which lent itself to being demonized.
• Conducted in conditions which played to the West's comparative milirary
advantages.
6. It should not be supposed that all these conditions will apply in the future. Without local
regional interest and burden-sharing arrangements, it is unlikely that Western states, and in
particular the US, will be very adventurous in the future. While future adversaries may be
less primitive than Saddam Hussein, it is probably also fair to assume that action will only
be taken against a regime behaving in an unusually outrageous manner. This leaves two
questions: the role of the United Nations and the value of direct military action.
7. The prominent role of the United Nations was helpful but was by no means an anticipated
feature of the crisis during its initial stages, and a formidable coalition could have been built
outside of it, although its role was significant domestically in all Western countries. This
role was made possible by active cooperation with the West by the Soviet Union and more
passive acquiescence from China. Whether these conditions will obtain in the future
depends upon the general state of political relations with these countries and their own
internal development Uncertainty on this latter point helps explain why even in current
circumstances they are clearly unhappy with sanctioning measures which could be seen to
violate the principle of 'non-interference', as with the protection of the Kurds.
8. The resort to war followed Saddam's failure to take the Western threat seriously enough:
he underestimated Iraq's ability to absorb air attacks and overestimated the pain and
political confusion that his forces could inflict on the coalition. This latter point was the key
to Iraqi strategy and was supported by the American fear of high casualties.
9. It may well be that, buoyed by the success of Desert Storm, the American public in the
future will be more ready to let its governments take military risks. However, without
detracting from the skill of the coalition operation, it is important to note the advantages its
members enjoyed: deployment to a country that was essentially a large gasoline station,
with excellent ports and airfields, time to gather intelligence and prepare full plans, an
enemy isolated, enfeebled by sanctions and badly led, complete air superiority and high-
quality ground forces. This does not mean that without all these factors the coalition would
have lost but each one certainly helped.
10. One of the objectives was to undermine Iraq's capacity to develop weapons of mass
destruction. This leads to inevitable speculation of the 'what if Saddam had the bomb'
variety. It will take some time before Middle Eastern states are able to pose serious mass
destruction threats to the homelands of Western states: the threats they pose are to each
other and, perhaps, parts of the Soviet Union. For the time being vague threats of terrorism
are more likely. Proliferation tends to follow evident great power disinterest in the security
of particular regions (i.e. South Asia) and then reinforce this disinterest. This is likely to
confirm the tendency to take military risks only in the event of blatant breaches of
international norms rather than in the pursuit of more ambiguous political interests.
11. The war was followed by involvement in what might have been expected to be the
'quagmire' of an Iraqi civil war of uncertain duration. Though the .involvement is of a
circumscribed nature, and carries few risks of casualties, it has illustrated the political
complexities normally associated with this sort of activity including local suspicion, UN
resistance and problems with defining objectives.
12. A moral case can be made to support any intervention in aid of a persecuted minority.
However, the West is likely to insist that the Kurdish issue is a special case and creates no
precedent. Civil wars and persecuted minorities in the disorderly parts of the world may
prompt sympathy but little action. The conditions ofa sense ofresponsibility (reinforced by
striking media images) may not obtain. Nonetheless where there is evident distress in the
neighborhood, countries of the Western 'poles' may find it harder to keep disorder at arms
length than they currently suppose. This is especially true for Western Europe.
13. At issue is the redefinition of the Western sphere of influence in the post-cold-war era.
For reasons ofboth interest and locale it seems inevitable that the Western countries will be
drawn into regions in which prudence might suggest that they keep well clear. The Middle
East is one such region. This is not the place to enter into an extended discussion of Middle
Eastern politics. Suffice it to say that here we have a number ofillustrations of the problems
attendant on any attempt to introduce order into disorderly regions-persuading local actors
that high-risk policies are justified by the requirements of a general regional stability,
defining regional stability in an area marked by a collection of intense, long-standing and
cross-cutting conflicts (of which the Arab-Israeli dispute is but one), accepting that a close
political engagement in the problems of a region needs to be backed up by both economic
and political commitments.
14. The precedent of international action against aggression is powerful and should
continue to be influential. But such crude actions are likely to be quite exceptional: it is
more likely that challenges will stem from messier and more ambiguous'internal upheavals
in particular states. In this sense the more significant precedents may be found in the later
stages of the Gulf saga. The action to help the Kurds reminds how Western countries can
find themselves with little choice but to become active participants in events that are not
clear-cut and contained.
IV. Europe
1. This last point can be explored further by examining the European performance in the
Gulf. Because the GulfCrisis took on a military dimension almost immediately, with the US
announcement of the dispatch of forces to Saudi Arabia, the issue was posed to Europe in
terms of whether or not to follow an American lead. The Europeans had already signalled
that they took the problem seriously by moving swiftly to impose sanctions. They had little
choice but to accept the American judgement that the crisis carried further military risks that
could only be deterred by active steps from the West. Because there was no mechanism for
generating a common European force, the response was inevitably patchy. In these
circumstances it was difficult to develop a European diplomatic effort that was both
distinctive and constructive. A lukewarm response to the American lead threatened to
reduce Europe's weight in coalition deliberations, while a separate and ostentatious dip.lo-
matic effort would either be designed to convey the agreed coalition message, which would
be pointless, or to convey a different message, which would risk a split in the coalition.
2. The Iraqis showed little interest in Europe, assuming that the key to an agreement lay in
Washington. If the Europeans were following the American lead, then there was no point in
talking to them. The use ofthe UN drew Britain and France into a special role in which they
could not always share the secrets of the Permanent Members' deliberation with their
colleagues and had to accept an obligation to UN resolutions.
. ·:-,-·c-:~"'":F~ •
.,,.,,.,,.,..,,,,......._,.~~-~·-··-----·-~· -~"·~·-
37
38
3. The one area in wliich a distinctive European impact was possible was the 'linkage' with
the Arab-Israeli conflict. The European Community view had long supported a negotiated
solution involving the PLO in the context of an international conference. This contrasted
with the view of the United States, although less so in 1990 than previously. There was a
sub-theme, reflecting the presumption that for reasons of history and geography, Europeans
understood the Middle East better than the United States. This was deemed especially true
in connection with the Arab world, in which Europe had special interests, and led to a stress
on the Euro-Arab dialogue.
4. European diplomacy up to 16 January 1991 is best viewed not so much as a search for
some means ofappeasing Saddam, butofpreserving this long-standing position and seeking
to demonstrate its validity. This was a particular feature of French policy and was pursued
up to the last minute. There was never any evidence of Iraqi interest in an international
conference in the form in which it was presented. Something far tougher on Israel would
have been needed before any sort of fig-leaf for a withdrawal from Kuwait.
5. When the war came, the divisions within Europe were aggravated. Britain and France
worked closely with the Bush Administration in managing the diplomatic aspects of the
conflict while their forces came under American command in the field. Germany saw the
biggest protests in Europe against the war. The German government was obliged to
demonstrate its support for the coalition and also moved to support Israel following the Scud
attacks-aware of the importance of German technology in the development of Iraqi terror
weapons. There were not serious European initiatives during the course of the war.
6. Aware of this, the April European Council meeting in Luxembourg had been intended to
discuss how the Community could improve on this dismal collective performance. Instead
they took the opportunity to take an initiative to relieve the plight of the Kurds then
attempting to escape from Saddam's vengeance. The US was dithering in the face of a
problem that had not been fully anticipated. The 'safe haven' idea was circulating before it
was proposed by John Major and France was already pressing for action. But by using the
Community for this initiative, Major was breaking with past British practice. As one
European official remarked at the time: 'The Kurds saved the summit so we must save the
Kurds'.
7. Eventually, the United States accepted the logic of the proposal so, in effect, the
achievement was to help decide an American debate. If the United States had decided to
keep clear, then there would have been little that the Europeans could do. As in the war, the
United States was the dominant contributor to the relief effort.
8. In the post-war Arab-Israeli peace process the European role has been limited. Whether
the Community should play any role at all was one of the issues on which Secretary of State
James Baker was having trouble with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. The suspicion with
which it is viewed by Israel means that it cannot play an obvious brokering role. By the same
token, it is looked on favorably by the Arab world and can be a preferred Western
interlocutor to the United States. Iran, too, has indicated that it will find the Community
easier to work with than the United States. This can all be used to advantage in a Western
diplomatic division oflabor but it also indicates the limits on the Community's ability to act
in opposition to, and even independent of, the United States.
9. Can the Community's performance be improved upon in the future? Proponents of a
common European defense and foreign policy have two tasks. The first is to convince
governments that progress is to be measur¢ by the gradual surrender of the prerogatives of
national security policy-making to the Community. The second is to stake out the
Community's claim to be an effective instrument of security policy.
10. The standard argument against this, in terms of preserving the sovereign rights of
Government, misses the point. Single European states can no longer expect to cope alone on
most security issues: the exertion of international pressure and influence requires close
cooperation. The problem for the Community is to demonstrate that it.is the natural agency
for cooperation in this area. NATO, WEU, UN, CSCE, Council ofEurope and so on can all
claim a competence as well as the EC, and this makes inter-institutional relationships
complicated-as if a competitive 'balance of institutions' is taking over from a 'balance of
power'. In practice the individual institutions can only be made to work through the input
ofgovernments. Europe's rich, complex institutional framework offers individual countries
a choice forparticularcrises. Itcan be reworked in a variety ofways depending on the nature
of the crisis.
11. For the moment the most obvious area for the Community to take a leading role is not
with the Middle East but with the post-Communist states of Europe, for this is after all the
Community's neighborhood. The general presumption here-how warranted remains
unclear-is that the problems of Central and Eastern Europe are now best handled by
political and economic measure11, with military involvement best avoided. Again this
should suit the Community for it already has the competence to take decisive political and
economic measures. Its economic strength and cohesion provide a major source ofleverage.
12. Yet even here the Gulf experience encourages a degree of caution. On the 'sticks' side
existing arrangements made possible swift adoption of economic sanctions and proper
enforcement. On the 'carrots' side the Community (and individual states) also sought to
play a role through outlays ofloans and grants. This came with payments to Turkey, Jordan
and Egypt who had been suffering from economic fallout after the imposition of sanctions;
support to Israel as compensation for its restraint in the face of SCUD attacks; assistance to
the Kurds. In the first two cases the package proved to be complex in terms of the balance
of loan and grant and contribution for the budget from individual states, but also politically
because of Greek unhappiness with support for Turkey and then the need to balance help for
Israel with some for the Palestinians. The third case was simpler and agreed with
appropriate haste but it exhausted the budget.
13. One lesson from this might be that the Community needs to streamline its procedures for
economic crisis management. There is, however, a deeper problem. The Community's
most substantial bargaining card is the offer of access to its internal market. It is this that is
going to make the most difference with Central and Eastern Europe: it could become a
major factor in Israeli attitudes towards the Community. Unfortunately access to Commu-
nity markets for textiles and agricultural goods clashes with protectionist instincts. This is
an example of how an imaginative external policy requires an imaginative approach to the
Community's internal structures.
14. Given these problems with the economic basis of the Community's international role,
which is supposedly quite mature, what can be expected of the military basis?
15. Whereas with economic measures the Community is the natural institution through
which to introduce and then implement any national initiatives, with defense there are a
number from which to choose. The current idea is for the EC to integrate the WEU in some
way to develop an 'out-of-area' capability. Institutionally this is just about possible
although it requires shifts in membership, carries a severe risk of marginalizing Turkey, and
would necessitate building up the WEU far beyond its current competence. All this may
only be to create an illusion of an independent capacity: in practice the issue with a rapid
response force is whether it is European forces with US logistical and intelligence support
(as with the UK in Falklands or France in Africa) or whether it is a combined US and
European operation (Gulf/revived Soviet threat in Europe). There are still major structural
limitations to the formation of a European force. The prohibition on the use of conscripts
meant that France was only able to field a disproportionately small force in the Gulf
compared with its total capabilities. Germany is considering a constitutional amendment
·-'"""""--·_,.,,,...,.,_,~, '~-.-~~~:--~---;---7·--r~.~=-=~
39
40
but this issue has been postponed and:.._if agreed-would only allow operations under the
aegis of the UN.
16. Unless there can be a common response in terms ofa contribution to European defense
policy, it seems unlikely that those taking the lead in terms of provision will not also expect
to do so in terms ofpolicy design and liaison with the US. The main institutional mechanism
for coordinating Western responses to crises beyond Europe (in which NATO appears to be
unable to act) remains the UN, and this puts Britain and France in a special role. The bloc
approach may anyway be unsuitable for crisis management, which requires intensive
'insider' diplomacy and swift and decisive decision-making. The US has expressed a fear
that an EC grouping will tum NATO meetings into replays of GAIT by entering with an
agreed position which, it will explain, must be respected because it represents a delicate
compromise which allows no room for maneuvers.
17. When there have been blatant breaks ofinternational law, whether with the Falklands in
1982 or Iraq in 1990, then the Community can move quite swiftly. However many issues are
much more complex in both the principles and interests at stake as well as the detail.
Different members of the Community are touched in different ways. This can be problem
enough even when it comes to short-term measures but creates even greater difficulties
when it comes to long((r-term commitments.
18. The argument of this paper has been that the West's challenge for the coming decade is
to come to terms with pre-eminent power. As the 'pole' currently experiencing the most
dynamic change, Western Europe will face the greatest problems ofadaption. The reforms
in attitude and behavioras well as in institutions will be forged in response to specific crises.
The end of the cold war means that it is no longer possible to offera 'vision' of the European
Community except in relation to its immediate environment and its wider responsibilities.
19. The current vogue for institution-building in the security sphere may be a distraction. It
reflects the assumption that the post-cold-war era can at least match the cold war on
durability and stability, while scoring higher on democracy and economic growth. The
metaphors with which the new order is discussed reflect this yearning. The new order is
being 'constructed', it has an 'architecture', the 'foundations' must be strong. There are
'pillars'--even a 'common European home'. But ifwe make 'stability' the central strategic
value of the new age as it was of the former, then we are doomed to continual disappoint-
ment. So we must learn the creative opportunities as well as the dangers inherent in
perpetual instability and judge policies and institutions by metaphors of movement-
flexibility, agility, resistance and pressure, pushes and drives. Judged against these criteria
the European Community's common security policy has a long way to go.
Introductory Remarks
I.
An awful lot of books are going to be written about how the last nine or ten months
changed the world. It is more interesting here to ask how the events of the last nine or ten
months changed the Middle East and the Gulf.
If one looks at the Gulf before and after, there are several things one could point out
in the way ofcontrast. Ifone were going to observe the principal characteristics of the Gulf
before last August 2nd, one would see a situation where the United States and what
ultimately became much of the coalition had very little in the way of a real defense
capability. It was more planned than real. Second, one would see the growing proliferation
not simply ofconventional arms but also ofunconventional arms: chemical, biological, and
nuclear, as well as ballistic missiles. Third, as ofthe summer of 1988 and the end ofthe Iran-
Iraq war, one saw clearly an increasing reality of what might be described as Iraqi primacy
in the Gulf, against a backdrop of fairly regular conflict. There were largely authoritarian
societies with very little market economics and very little trade among them. That was
really the Guif that Saddam Hussein decided to change. This was a set of issues that I think
we are beginning to resolve.
Let us look at the principal characteristics of the post-war Gulf. First, security
arrangements between the United States and its coalition partners in the region, and more
generally security arrangements overall, are probably somewhat better. One has the United
Nations force on the border between Iraq and Kuwait. Second, after a bit ofindecision, we
are going to have an Egyptian and Syrian presence in Kuwait. Third, there will probably be
a strengthened Gulf Cooperation Council, particularly in the area of air defense, which is
where the GCC really did contribute militarily during the conflict. And fourth, there is now
an enhanced American ability to interact with these countries in a defense structure.
Overall, on the side of the blue team, if you will, things look better.
On the side of what was the red team (the Iraqis), thanks to the war and to Resolution
687, there is in place a mechanism that will clearly prevent the re-emergence of an Iraqi
threat. One begins with the fact that thanks to the war, Iraq is in no position any more to
project military power significantly beyond its borders. So the biggest threat has been
removed, and the ability to deal with whatever threats do exist has been built up.
There is now in place a new arms control initiative. There will be a meeting within
a month in Paris with the five countries most involved with providing arms traditionally to
this part of the world. So, while cooperation among the regional states themselves is
probably some time off, cooperation among the would-be suppliers is not in any way a pipe
dream. And there have been some changed ways of looking at this part of the world, and as
a result, there will be new opportunities to reduce the flow of technology and weapons.
Societies have been shaken up--not simply Kuwait but others-and there will be
some new pressures for reform in terms ofdomestic policies as well as economics. Whether
this pressure for reforms translates into opportunities is uncertain. Kuwait will be the most
interesting place because of what it was before, because of the trauma. If things do work out
even partially, it could become something of a model for some of the other states.
Ifone were to add all this together, one would end up with a picture of the Gulf that
was, in a glib phrase, not transformed but improved very much by the last nine or ten months
in terms of the prospects for stability. There still remains however the problem of the Arab-
Israeli conflict, which has a spill-over effect. There is still a question of Iraq's reintegration
into the region. There is the question of Iran's intentions. So it is not solved, by any means.
It will continue to be a theater for the United States that will be more problematic than in
either Europe or the Asian Pacific, in part because of geography, in part because of the
multiple crises, and in part because of the still relative weakness of the Allies. It isn't going
to be easy, but then it never has been.
Over the last three months or so since the shooting stopped, there has been a certain
tendency to dwell on some of the problems that continue to exist in this part of the world.
While these problems are real, they pale in comparison to what would have been the
problem had it not been for the success of the past nine or ten months.
"'"'"'
Turning to the Arab-Israeli question, what the U.S. is trying to do in a nutshell is to get
a conference convened-not as an end in itself, but simply because it is the best way to set
up an ongoing process, where Arabs (including Palestinians) and Israelis can address the
core issues. The Israelis want direct negotiation-they have for years-and the Arabs
41
42
clearly want a conference. The U.S. has been trying to come up with a way of splitting the
difference. The real problems involve modalities, specifically the UN role and the power of
the conference plenary. The initial response to the letters the President sent out have not
been terribly auspicious, and success is not certain.
There. is no lack of capability; the leaders are strong enough to come to the table if
they choose. There is clearly a lack of will to do so, and a real fear that even modest
concessions establish precedents that will come to haunt them down the road. If this
approach is not successful, the U.S. is not going to stretch it out forever. We will not keep
trying to solve these modality problems for another six months. Much sooner than that there
will be an inclination to put this approach aside, but not to wash our hands of the Middle
East. Rather the U.S. will attack the problems in a different way. There is no sense that this
is one of those moments in history when allowing the Middle East to stew in its own juices
will create opportunities down the road.
Cutting off aid will not in any way increase the likelihood of Israeli flexibility or
openness. If anything that is the best way to create a consensus in Israel around a Likud
government, and, more important, around a governmeni that is opposed to any concession
and would create a certain go-it-alone mentality. Israelis have to be persuaded that their
security is not endangered.
The real leverage is going to have to be the leverage ofpersuasion. In Israel there are
polls showing that there are still 60 percent of the people who are at the moment open for a
territory-for-peace type exchange. Ifwe have failed to do anything, it is that we have failed
to win the intellectual debate in Israel and the Arab world that peace is not only possible but,
on balance, worth it. That would suggest that a possible next phase of the peace process is
one that emphasizes a little less diplomacy and a little more debate.
Introductory Remarks
II.
It is true, as the background paper says, that it would be unwise to assert that the Gulf
saga sets a pattern for all future international crisis management. The paper's main thesis of
pre-eminent power, constant change and the laws of natural selection working on Western
institutions is also correct. But it may not be right to see the three poles of the United States,
the European Community and Japan acting as regional magnets. It is hard to imagine
Japan's neighbors welcoming Japanese efforts to bring order to their region. What could
Japan do if, for example, developments in China got seriously out of hand? Exclusive
regional specialization is not really feasible for Europe either; in Central and Eastern
Europe, the Soviet factor is bound to involve the U.S., even if the U.S. military presence in
Western Europe is likely to become increasingly eroded. The main priority lies not so much
in our neighborhoods as in our relations with each other. We should also recognize that the
three poles do not have equal power of attraction; the U.S. is pre-eminent.
Secondly, how far will the Gulf be a model for the future? The mixture of Western
cohesion, activism and external funding which contributed to the comparative success ofthe
Gulf War probably means that the Gulf is an exception rather than a model. The question is
whether media pressures will force Western Governments to act against their better
judgement. The dilemma which the coalition governments now face about how or when to
withdraw from northern Iraq illustrates the danger. One lesson of the post-Gulfphase is that,
if we cannot master arms proliferation in all its forms, Governments will have to resist
public pressures to intervene physically to right wrongs in the Third World.
Thirdly, there may be lessons from Europe's response to the Iraqiinvasion ofKuwait.
The response may have been patchy compared with the United States. But what was
surprising was not European patchiness so much as the unique and unrepeatable scale of
American deployments. It is also worth remembering that Europe's role in the Gulf was
bigger than at any time since the end of the colonial period: 35 ships, about 56,000 troops,
9 squadrons of combat aircraft, and responsibility for 21,000 out of a total of 30,000
challenges to shipping. The real test for Europe is not how to deal with a problem which the
U.S. is already managing; it will be how to manage the first major regional crisis which the
U.S. decides to sit out. This lies at the center of the current debate on a European defense
identity.
So, here are some catchwords to focus discussion.
First, media involvement the Gulf War shows that foreign policy makers will have
to take into account the power of tlle media, the concern ofpublic opinion, as never before.
This trend is likely to continue as satellite technology develops. Nowhere in the world
nowadays is there "a far-away country of which we know little." This could distort our
foreign policy priorities. Telegenic problems will be given priority in ministerial minds
over vital interests which cannot be illustrated by eye-catching pictures. Economic and
monetary union will always take a back seat to Kurds, in the opinion of the viewing public.
Second, intervention: will the lesson of the UN-backed intervention in Iraq lead to
further interventions of this sort? Or will the difficulties of extraction from northern Iraq
mean that Western powers will be less ready to wade in later on? It is relatively easy to run
your own country; it is relatively easy to defeat somebody else's army; it is easy to criticize
other people's Governments. But in the post-Colonial era, it is very difficult to run
somebody else's country. In a half-hearted attempt, you end up taking on responsibility
without power-as we are in the danger of doing in Kurdistan. The Sudanese are already
twitching nervously about the work of similar Western military intervention in the Hom of
Africa.
Third, intransigence (to look ahead to the Arab-Israel discussion for a moment): the
current efforts ofSecretary Baker are clearly at risk from the intransigence ofboth Syria and
Israel. Particularly galling has been the establishment or expansion of settlements on the
West Bank just before each of Secretary Baker's four recent visits to Israel. This contrasts
with opinion poll evidence that the majority of Israelis are now ready to contemplate
negotiations on the basis of land for peace.
Throughout the whole of the Iraq-Kuwait conflict, the Western coalition resisted,
rightly, Saddam's attempts to draw parallels with the Arab-Israeli conflict, and his outra-
geous claim to speak for Islam. But one point of similarity was tacitly acknowledged -
injustice. If the injustices of the Palestinian problem are not resolved, the seeds of a major
conflagration, backed up by nuclear, biological and chemical weaponry, will remain; and
the risks of further explosions of the sort we are seeing this week in Algeria will intensify.
Introductory Remarks
III.
President Bush's statement on March 6 that the war was over may, from a wider
perspective, not have reflected an accurate observation. For many the war was not yet over.
The Iraqi army, or what remained ofit, was engaged in crushing domestic rebellions on two
fronts. A civil war that raged several weeks ensued. The Shiite uprising in the south, despite
massive assistance from Iran, was the first to be suppressed. Then, the Iraqi war-machine
43
44
fell on the Kurds. Guerillas caught in the euphoria of their easily-scored initial successes
proved no match for the regular troops of the battle-hardened Republican Guard. With total
defeat seeming imminent, panic-stricken masses fearing severe retribution fled their homes
to seek safety and shelter in Turkey and Iran, neither of which could cope with a refugee
influx of such magnitude.
A human tragedy of exceptional proportions started to unfold on the border strips of
both countries. International reliefassistance, slow to mobilize, remained at meager, indeed
token levels. Soon another military operation involving troops from the U.S. and several
other allied nations, this time with the humanitarian mission ofcreating safe havens on Iraqi
territory north of the 36th parallel, had to be launched. As yet, few ifany, know for sure how
this current episode is to conclude.
Leaving the Mesopotamian situation there and turning our attention to the twin
problems of the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian issue, we see that the war in those
theaters as well is far from over. The Egyptian-Israeli peace deal has remained as an isolated
diplomatic exercise, and no Arab country has yet followed Egypt's example. Besides the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip, Southern Lebanon and the Golan Heights are also under
occupation. So is East Jerusalem. Cease fire or armistice lines are not recognized borders
and frustrated Palestinians have never officially declared that the Intifada was terminated.
The exodus of the SovietJewry continues, and the number of Israeli settlements on the West
Bank does not cease to proliferate. Occasional incidents of terrorism by marginal Palestin-
ian factions and Israel's retaliatory air-strikes that come in their wake have persisted after
the Gulf War, too. A long and arduous diplomatic journey appears to lie ahead of the U.S.-
led, Soviet-sponsored efforts to resume the peace process in a substantial and result-oriented
manner.
Three questions rise from this picture of the Middle East:
(!) In terms of"political fallout", how likely is it for the Middle East to lend itself
to re-ordering on a basis of peace, concord, and cooperation?
(2) Are those developments which we have been witnessing in the aftermath of the
GulfWar symptoms ofa transformation phenomenon, or do they indicate that
little has changed in the region apart from Iraq's loss of stature in the power
equation and the relative reinforcement of that of Syria?
(3) Were Iraq's aggressive policies the only evil in the region, or were they just a
manifestation of a wider malaise brought forth by unwise decisions and bad
statesmanship? If so, are we doing enough to remove the root causes of the
malaise so as to prevent similar outbursts in the future? In other words, is it
possible or indeed wise to try to control fever merely by administering aspirin?
If, by the "fallout" metaphor, we mean the political refuse of the "Gulf crisis
explosion", this can only be gauged through a provisional balance-sheet which, in the longer
run, could prove to be quite deceptive. This is because it is too early to qualify the nature of
the "fallout". Hence, the measurement of a "fallout" against a time-frame of two months
cannot lead us to a healthy conclusion on whether the Middle East would lend itself for re-
ordering at this juncture of its history. History advises caution in this respect. As the
Turkish saying goes "He laughs best who laughs last".
Moving therefrom to diagnose the events and developments of the last eight to ten
weeks either as symptoms of an old order yielding to the new or vice versa, is equally
difficult. However they suggest change. There are certain elements there for the optimist's
loop to magnify:
(!) For the first time since Israel's foundation as a state, Arabs and Israelis are at
least talking about the shape of a peace settlement in the same broad terms.
(2) The defeat of Iraq, at least for the time being, seems to have discredited
n~volutionary pan-Arabism. It appears that individual Arab states may, in the
foreseeable future, act independently and in their own rational interests.
(3) The United States now stands alone as the pre-eminent world power directly
involved in the region and, for the meantime at least, seems poised as never
before to exert influence.
Arabs and Israelis alike now seem agreed on the concept of a peace conference.
Moreover, they seem open to dealing with the easier state-to-state issues ahead of the more
complex question of Palestinian political rights. All apparently agree that UN Security
Council Resolutions 242 and 338 should establish the underlying principles for a settlement.
Insofar as these impressions are valid, we ought to consider ourselves as living
through very special times in the longstory ofMiddle Eastpeacemaking. Provided that such
a consideration holds true, then, maintaining momentum is crucially important.
While discussing various aspects of"political fallout", some brainstorming must also
be done on the new arms race getting under way in the region. With the Iraqi threatremoved;
with the Damascus Declaration on the configuration ofan Arab defense entente to be backed
by a U.S. naval and air presence in the Gulf and beyond; with Iran trying to set in motion
some sort ofa rapprochement with Saudi Arabia and other GCC states; and with the Arab-
Israeli peace process about to be revived, is it not somewhat ironical that such an arms race
is still going on? On March 6th, when President Bush declared that the war was over, he also
said that "it would be tragic if a new arms race were to develop in the region." On t)"le other
hand, economic commentators in the American press say they hope that mounting arms
exports will help to sustain the American weapon manufacturer§ as domestic military sales
shrink with new budgetary cuts. What options may be considered to break out of this
dilemma?
The second aspect of the discussion agenda bears on "future prospects". Needless to
say, these prospects will be determined by how the "political fallout" affecting the present
state of affairs is disposed of. Therefore, it might be helpful to refer to these specific areas
requiring regional and international attention:
(!) In order of priority, the most urgent issue is the situation in Iraq. How would
the displaced masses in the northern and northeastern border-strips and in the
flatland encampments return to their homes in safety? What should be done to
assure some measure of stability in that country?
(2) How could the Arab-Israeli peace process be turned into a sustained phenome-
non and speeded up?
(3) What would be the best way to create an awareness on the part of the Arab
nations, and in due course, on the part of Israel, concerning the need to
increase multilateral cooperation on a larger regional scale with a view to
developing economic interdependence?
Finally we should try to identify and highlight those new factors or characteristics
bearing on the changes in the relations among the members of the international community.
For instance, during the Cold War, the relations among key countries were relatively stable
and clear. There were allies, antagonists and neutrals.
The alignments in the Middle East also reflected a similar or parallel pattern. With
the dissolution of military blocs and the loosening of ties between the Soviet Union and its
Third World clients, relations between countries are becoming more volatile. Ad hoc
coalitions on particular issues such as that assembled for the GulfCrisis could not have been
thinkable during the Cold War era.
.-·-~,-~-~~~~--·~,~--·--·-·--··~·==·--·""""'""""""""'"'"'~'"''"~'''"""-,~....--.cw,,<""-''--0"'7=~-;;<:~;:-~'~?'!":n'-~''l:l'. ~~':"'.".:'..~~~~.-=---~~------------------
45
46
It inight therefore prove interesting to have a closer look at the international p01itics
of the GulfRegion as an extreme foretaste of what global politics could be like in the future.
Iraq, aided by Kuwait and the United States in its 8-year war against Iran, is threatened by
defeat when Iran mobilizes its strength. An end to the fighting is negotiated. Iraq invades
its former backer, Kuwait. The United States comes to Kuwait's help and puts together a
coalition including herNATO allies, the Soviet Union, Egypt and Syria, while continuing-
until recently-to classify Syria as a state supporting terrorism. Shifting and ambivalent
relationships like these did not typify the Cold War, but they seem likely to be typical of the
post-Cold War world.
Introductory Remarks
IV.
The magnitude of the Gulf War with its hundreds of thousands of casualties and
costing ihe world some hundreds of billions of dollars, no doubt, led many to expect that
there would be changes during the war. Many commentators talked about how we would
neverrecognize the Middle East when this was all over. But ofcourse when we now do look
at the Gulf region in particular, it is striking at first glance how little seems to have changed.
Still, the balance ofpower in the area has fundamentally been changed, and dramatically so.
For the next several years, at least, and perhaps for the rest of the decade, we are going to be
living with the consequences of this shift of the balance of power in the region.
Iraq is much weaker and, with or without Saddam Hussein in charge, will pose no
unmanageable threat to its immediate neighbors. Iraq is down, although not necessarily out
of the game of intimidation. Iran, correspondingly, is making a significant and quite rapid
comeback as a regional player, both by demonstrating extraordinary diplomatic skills
during the crisis itself, and since the crisis ended. Iran is rapidly rebuilding its political
relations with most of the countries in its immediate vicinity. The Saudis have been visiting,
the other Gulf States as well, Egypt has resumed ties, and it is only a matter of time before
most countries in the West will be beating a path to Teheran's door, particularly if the
hostage issue is resolved. How Iran is reintegrated into the Gulf politics is going to be a big
challenge to the West. Ifit can be brought back into the regional system as a force for at least
some degree ofstability, fine. If it returns to the region with its revolutionary impulses still
intact, obviously it's going to be a very major problem.
Now, how are these changes likely to affect Gulf security, which is the underlying
concern of the Western Alliance in that part of the world? The fundamental problem for
Gulf security is that there is a built-in imbalance. Iran and Iraq are always going to be more
powerful than the small oil-rich states on the Arab side of the Gulf. And there is no single
perfect solution for that power imbalance. We have seen several efforts made, such as
playing off Iran against Iraq; that was the 1980s strategy, and we saw how it ended. There
is also some thought of trying to build up the GCC as a counterweight that can stand on its
own feet against either of its larger neighbors, and many countries will rush to pump arms
into the Gulf countries. But we should not have any illusions. The GCC will not be able to
stand up against Iran or Iraq.
So that really leaves us with a third alternative: some degree of outside power
involvement in Gulf security, which is going to primarily mean the United States in one
form or another. Even though the Saudis seem to be a bit nervous about the idea of a
continuing American presence around the Gulf, and particularly on their territory, it seems
inevitable, given this fundamental problem of Gulf security, that the United States is going
to need to keep in the vicinity of the GuU:--for a good long time to come-air and naval
units, plus a good bit of pre-positioning of equipment. If we succeed in doing that, the
problem of Gulf security can be managed reasonably well through the remainder of this
decade. In any case, we can have enough power in the region to prevent a repeat of what
happened on August 2, 1990: that is, blatant aggression across an international border.
But those aren't the only problems in the region. As long as Saddam Hussein is in
power, he is going to have some capacity to intimidate the smaller Gulf States, the Kurds,
and the Shiites. And they will be fearful of his attempts at revenge. Some will tum to Iran
for help; we've seen that already. And others may eventually seek to appease Saddam
himself, if they see no other alternative. This raises a question of whether it should not
remain an important goal of Western policy to get rid of Saddam Hussein. Are not he and
his regime still a danger? We stopped perhaps at the right moment, but then we didn't do
enough to help the very substantii11 and impressive efforts by Iraqis, Shiites, Kurds and
others, to rise up against his thoroughly despicable regime. One way or another we need to
think of how we can do what we did not do in the aftermath of the war-that is to help the
Iraqis bring about fundamental political change in their country.
Insofar as there is cause to be worried about oil supplies in the 1990s, the main
concern is internal instability in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia is so crucial to the balance of
oil supplies in the world that we would find it very, very difficult to manage if there were
long and severe disruptions inside Saudi Arabia. There is no way of predicting that this
might happen. Butthere is a different kind of threat than that posed by Saddam Hussein and
his military machine on August 2nd. And it is a more difficult threat to manage because it
may come in many different forms, and may not be deterred by military means. So it is
worth watching Saudi Arabia. One should not be particularly pessimistic about the situation
there, but there are vulnerabilities. The leadership is not extraordinarily in touch with what
we might think of as contemporary trends. It is trying to appease its own conservatives, and
there are real problems within that society.
In conclusion, yes, the Gulfis a mess in the aftermath of the War. It would have been
a greater mess if Saddam Hussein had prevailed. But there is less reason to worry in the
remainder of this decade about an oil price shock than in any time since the 1970s, and that's
the good news.
•••
Was there, in the aftermath of the Gulf crisis, any real change in the political realities
surrounding the Arab-Israeli conflict that gave rise to the belief that there were some
opportunities? The answer is both yes and no. The end of the Cold War really does remove
one of the previous difficulties in Arab-Israeli peace negotiations. The Soviets by and large
are not going to be a major difficulty, either as a supplier of arms to the Arab side or as a
meddler on a diplomatic front. It is striking the extent to which the Soviets now simply echo
initiatives that come from Washington.
Secondly, Egypt, which spent a good bit of a decade somewhat isolated from its Arab
neighbors because of peace with Israel, is now very much back in a central position in a very
divided world. Egypt has as much clout as it has had in any time in the recent past, without
in any sense having to abandon its relationship with Israel. Most Arabs now accept the logic
of what Sadat did, even if they don't like his tactics. They accept Israel as a part of the
Middle East. They accept thatEgypt has made peace, notas a tactic but as a strategic choice,
and that the best alternative of other Arab parties is to follow Egypt's lead. The only
significant opposition to that point of view in the Arab world today comes from some of the
Islamic movements. But the main stream of Arab politics is ready for peace with Israel.
47
,.,.,,..,.,.....,.....,~---·-"''-"""~"""'"""'""""--""=-=1~-.'7'?57'~v.'l"~~~"\~,.:ea,""'iftW,@~.aJ~.:wm:aa ~Jli2!:!·:1.lJ!!ll&!!l··'1l>r-"'-™""'mr.--•~&!iimo~.--.•----------------------------------------
48
Hussein, who has been in the doghouse for his role in the Gulf, is nonetheless back in
a position to play a role in Arab-Israeli peace diplomacy. For the first time since 1985 we
can imagine a Jordanian-Palestinian combined approach to negotiating with Israel. The
PLO, because of its weakened position, particularly because of its stance during the Gulf
war, understands the need to stay in the shadows while West Bank/Gaza Palestinians take
the lead in talks with the Americans and with the Israelis. That is a positive development.
Israeli public opinion, despite the dramatic developments of the last few months-in
the Gulf Crisis, in the scuds, stabbings, so forth-nonetheless seems to be ready for
substantial concessions in exchange for peace. The most recent studies of Israel public
opinion show that, ifanything, a shift toward more moderate views has taken place over the
last few months. People seem to be fed up with the conflict, and are looking for a way out.
Assad, who has traditionally been an obstacle and still is, is nonetheless Jess capable
ofbeing a spoiler because his intrinsic position is weaker with his Soviet backers having cut
significantly on his military support and his economic situation at home is quite weak.
Finally, there is the role of the United States. We have probably the greatest chance
to lead the peace process we have had in some time. The President is widely regarded
positively in the Gulfregion. Any initiative he takes can count on quite significant backing
internationally.
There is a negative side to the balance sheet First, there is a fundamental asymmetry
in the negotiating process between Israel and its Arab neighbors. What Israel wants is not
what the Arabs are inclined to give, and what the Arabs are inclined to give is not what Israel
wants.
Shamir may be somewhat interested in dealing with some of the Arab states,
particularly the Syrians and the Saudis, and might be prepared to offer something up in such
negotiations, although it is hard to imagine what. But strategically it makes some sense. But
the same Mr. Shamir is extraordinarily reluctant to make any real concessions to the
Palestinians.
On the Arab side, the Palestinians, because of their weak position and the desperate
situation of their daily life, are prepared to make quite substantial concessions from their
historic positions. They want to get their foot in the door; they accept the logic ofa process
to get them started. But Mr. Assad-who might have something to offer the Israelis-sees
very little in the bargain, and therefore he seems rather shy about tipping his hand.
The make-up of the current Israeli government is also a very big obstacle in getting
talks going. Even if Mr. Shamir were inclined to take a step toward negotiating with the
Palestinians, he would have to look over his shoulder at a pretty tough opposition from
within his own coalition.
And then there is the question that is in everyone's minds. What if we were to
succeed with the current initiative; what if a conference were convened; what would they
actually talk about? What would we do in the event of a deadlock?
The U.S. government seems to accept that there is some opportunity. It doesn't seem
wildly enthusiastic about the magnitude of that opportunity, and is proceeding very
cautiously.
In answer to the inevitable question of why should we bother at all, there are two
strong arguments that must be heard in Washington. One is that in the absence of movement
in the Arab-Israeli peace process, there will be, and there has been, a radicalization of
opinion both in Israel and among Palestinians and other Arabs (largely in the Arab case to
the advantage of Islamic movements). And secondly in the absence of movement, there
could be pressure on the viability of the Egyptian-Israeli relationship. Egypt, under
President Mubarak, is going to be undergoing a very tough next couple of years. He has his
own Islamic movement, and the IMF is going to be putting the Egyptian economy through
·."";'X>~·:-·rc~~~~rc::~,..,.~,,t·''''!f"';''~~~~l"":::u,.",.. '·'"''"'""'~."'~"'"k'<4ii-.~.w..»
..z<>rn'~:::G:S:ilii1i£i ;t ·'Y~-..::,;,.,~
the ringer. It is conceivable that in a Middle East in which extremist forces are gaining
ground; in which there is no peace process; and where American credibility is on the wane,
having failed to get the peace process started, Egypt also could feel under great pressure. So
the President cannot afford to drop the ball on Arab-Israeli peacemaking. But some
approach other than nibbling around the edges of the procedures to convene this conference
needs to be imagined.
Discussion
Were the war's aims achieved? It was the view of a number of speakers that the
outcome of the Gulf conflict was less than a complete success. To many, it seemed that the
pre-war status quo had been restored. An American, who confessed that he would have
preferred to see the Allies push on to Baghdad, said that, while it was reasonable for the West
to have stopped where it did and hope for a "Ceausescu-like outcome in Iraq," it was not
surprising that we now were back where we started.
Another American agreed that the Allies had fallen short of achieving their goal of
getting rid of Saddam. We had said that the Iraqi people were not ourenemy, but it was they
who had suffered the most, and their leader was still in power.
A third American speaker interjected that U.S. policy would be to continue to "create
an environment where the Iraqis would realize that Saddam was a millstone around their
necks." The U.S. would try to keep sanctions in place. Iraq would not recover its former
status as long as Saddam was in power. The idea was that, after an initial period ofrecovery,
Iraq would quickly "come up against a ceiling ofdiplomatic and political isolation." Sooner
or later, the Iraqis-or just one Iraqi-would decide that Saddam had to go.
But a Greek wondered how intent Western policy was on getting rid of Saddam.
Perhaps he was a "necessary evil." No one was trying to push him out at present because we
did not know what the alternative was.
It was another American's view that the West had come out very well except in the
sense that a stable peace had not resulted. But 3,000 years of history gave little reason to
expect such a result. The various relationships and balances of power in the region would
always be" complicated and impermanent." Stability consisted in keeping these elements
in some sort of relationship. ·
A Greek participant agreed with this, saying that the West had not finished its job.
We had to establish security in the region to prevent "radicalization and disintegration."
The key to establishing a security framework in the Gulf was to be found, in several
speakers' opinions, in the UN. A Canadian observed that the UN role had been a major
ingredient in the success of the Allied coalition, and a role for the UN in the post-conflict
environment should be found. With the U.S. and the Soviet Union working together, a
unique opportunity was at hand. We should take advantage of the UN's success in the Gulf
crisis to give it a role in peacekeeping, humanitarian assistance, resettlement, and in the
security system.
It was a Greek speaker's view that any solution to the Gulf situation would have to
take into account "human life and liberty." A Turk agreed, saying that governments in the
region did not always represent their peoples. In this regard, a French speaker wondered
about the compatibility of such goals as the inviolability of borders, self-determination for
the Shiites and Kurds in Iraq, and democracy. An American responded that "to write a blank
check on self determination of people in the Middle East raised difficult questions."
Another Greek agreed, and posed the question of what would happen if the Kurds and
Shiites sought special recognition or sought to become part offederated states. How would
Turkey, Iran, and Saudi Arabia react?
49
50
Other states in the region. An international participant stated that the energy
question had to be factored into any discussion of crisis management in the Middle East.
The stability of Saudi Arabia was the big issue here. As long as it was strong and stable,
there was no worry about energy problems. A Greek agreed, and wondered how st.able
Saudi Arabia was. How much should the West ask the Saudis to do in the way of financing
our efforts in the Middle East? Saudi Arabia was currently running a big deficit, and
economic strain could lead to internal problems.
An American felt that the threat to Saudi stability was exaggerated. At the time of
King Faisal's assassination, the st.ability of Saudi society was evident This was also the
case in the Gulf conflict, when Saudi Arabia dealt well with an unprecedented degree of
involvement by the outside world. It was not correct to view Saudi Arabia as being
"constantly on the brink." The Saudis had shown themselves to be good at the internal
management of the various forces in their society.
Turning to Iran, another American asked about the future role of that country, which
he saw as a "majorpotential player and mischiefmaker" in the area. How did the weakening
of Iraq affect Iran?
A fellow American's answer was that there could be a potential challenge from Iran
in the long term. In the short term, however, Iran was looking more for integration into the
region, for markets, for aid, for political influence, and to break out of its isolation. But,
longer term, we had to recognize that there had been only two real powers in the region, Iran
and Iraq. If they were not now going to balance each other, there would have to be a third
power-either Saudi Arabia, or the GCC, both of which would require assistance from the
outside.
A number ofspeakers addressed the role of Syria in the Middle East, with particular
emphasis on its leader, Assad. A Turk warned that the West must be careful in dealing with
Assad. An American observed that Western diplomacy had served to build up Assad,
making him the "Saddam pillar of the previous diplomacy." This was potentially danger-
ous.
But another American felt it was unfair to criticize the U.S. for "setting up Assad as
the new good boy." Assad had the ability to affect things that mattered to the West, such as
the Palestinian issue, the peace process, the future of Lebanon, terrorism, and the flow of
narcotics. It was important to engage Assad and Syria, and it had certainly been better to
have Syria inside the coalition than outside it
The Arab-Israeli situation. With reference to the post-Gulf crisis initiatives to find
a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict, an American argued that the West had won the war
but was rapidly losing the peace because it "insisted on dragging the Palestinian issue to the
forefront." During the Gulfwar, there had been a chance to make progress on the Palestinian
issue, because Israel and Saudi Arabia had had a common interest, and the PLO had been
discredited. The West had not done much to take advant.age of this situation. U.S. policy
makers had now decided that a conference was necessary, when the only result of a
conference would be to "force everyone back to the same old intransigent positions."
Another American echoed this view when he said, "to spend a lot of effort assembling a
conference ofpeople who do not want to go into it, in order to generate a deadlock which we
don't know how to break, is doing things the hard way."
Observed yet another American speaker, no conference on the Middle East had ever
been successful. What had worked had been the active mediation by "the only party that had
both carrots and sticks-the U.S." It was not that the U.S. was smarter or more qualified
than any other country, but it did have the unique relationship with Israel. It was the one
country that could simultaneously reassure the Israelis and pressure them. A Briton agreed
that there was nothing equal to the leverage the U.S. had on Israel.
I
~
I
i
I
I
I
~
"
:l
I
f
1
But it was precisely this "stiflingly close identification with Israel" that, in an
American speaker's view, had made it impossible for the U.S. to make progress in the
region. The U.S. was part of the problem, not part of the solution. A conference would be
futile. What would be the incentive for Syria or Jordan to come to the t.able? The only
answer would be for the Europeans to "take this mess outofU.S. hands" and transfer it to the
UN Security Council, which should enforce the various re~lutions it had passed to deal
with the problem.
A Greek agreed that we could not allow a situation to continue that was in direct
opposition to Security Council resolutions. We had an obligation to our Arab allies who
were under tremendous pressure from their public opinions. We also had an obligation to
the Palestinians to prevent them from becoming more polarized and more dangerous. And
we had an obligation to the Israelis, who would need more aid to bring in large numbers of
Soviet Jews. Aii of this presented the West with an opportunity that it did not have before.
Regarding the calls for greater European involvement, a Canadian expressed the
view that European policy in the Middle East had been to "wait for the proposals from the
U.S., and then stake out a position more favorable to the Arabs." Blaming the absence of
peace on the reluctance to pressure Israel gave the Arabs little incentive to take U.S.
proposals seriously.
Considerablediscussion was devoted to the"land-for-peace"concept. In an American's
view, the debate in Israel was refocusing along these lines. There was fairly broad public
support for some sort of deal. But, as another American pointed out, relinquishment of
territory was not acceptable to the current Israeli government.
A third American offered this overview of the current situation. It was not correct to
define the issue as land for peace, as though there was a condition called peace between
Arabs and Israelis that would result. Settlement of the Palestinian issue could not be
compared_ with the peace agreement between Israel and Egypt. In that case, there was a
buffer zone of 140 miles of uninhabited desert. There was no such zone separating the
Palestinians and Israelis. The question was not one of land for peace, but land for time.
What was needed was a process that allowed Arabs and Israelis to live together in the West
Bank in a different posture than the one that now existed, that allowed the restoration of
some territories in a way that did not threaten Israel's survival.
Concluding Remarks
In trying to draw conclusions from the Gulf experience for the state of the interna-
tional system as we now find it, it seems that what we are trying to do at the moment is come
to terms with Western power. It is a power ofa sort we have never had before, because there
is no countervailing power of an equivalent nature to negate things we are trying to do.
On the other hand what we are trying to do, we are trying to do in parts of the world
that do not necessarily lend themselves to our attempts to order them, and to refashioning
them according to our values and, with due respect, to our interests. In each part of the world
there is a confusion ofprincipals, ofinterests, and ofobligations as well. The moral basis of
policy often tends to be neglected in governments, because we have to be realistic. But it is
difficult for politicians not to be able to legitimize what they are doing, at least according to
some basic principles.
These things are easier-though God knows they are hard enough-in our own
neighborhood, Central and Eastern Europe. It is not the case that somehow those problems
are always going to get pushed to one side because of the Middle East. After all, one of the
reasons the gathering storm in the Middle East wasn't noticed is because we were totally
=-m•••-,,-~---~-~--·-.------ .-a.AA™·""'""'""""""""'"""""""""""'""""""'""""""-----------ibllm"""'----------------------------------~
51
52
preoccupied with Europe, totally preoccupied with the· exhilaration of 1989, and the
reunification ofGennany. The key agreement between Kohl and Gorbachev was, after all,
reachedjusta couple ofweeks before the Iraqi intervention. We are more preoccupied, quite
properly, with our own continent, but nonetheless, we have to look beyond that
What is happening is that, despite ourselves, despite what we may feel to be our
interests, we get drawn in. We are getting drawn into Central and Eastern Europe; we'll get
drawn in somehow to the Soviet Union; and we're getting drawn into the Middle East. We
can't duck our responsibilities; there is nobody else who is able to take them on.
The Gulfsituation was made immeasurably easier first because Saddam himself lent
himself to demonizing; he fitted the role very well. Secondly, because this was an
unambiguous breach of international law; if we didn't deal with it, we really couldn't claim
to have any sense of international order at all. And that brought in the United Nations.
Finally, we fought the war from a base which has the biggest airfields in the world, first-rate
ports, and was essentially a petrol station. And we had five months to prepare the military
operation. The idea that those advantages are going to be working for us always in the future
is optimistic.
Successfully doing it in itself has an important cons;:quence for international politics
in the future. One can't imagine many Third World leaders at this moment scratching their
heads saying, "if! had been in Saddam's shoes I would have done a much betterjob.'' It was
an overwhelming power they faced, and the revival of the sense of overwhelming power in
the West is a sobering influence on all international politics from now on. Taking advantage
of that, we shouldn'tkid ourselves that we could make the same impression in the future so
easily.
So the conclusion is that the best thing we can do is work out how to avoid crises, how
to be involved before the crises reach that state. And then we get into these endless debates
about what are the sources of real instability in the Middle East.
We should be careful about the arms race aspect. Anns will always go into the
Middle East, but the amount of money available at the moment is not sufficient to supportan
arms race of the sort we have known in the past. All the relevant parties have got major
economic problems. The cost of reconstruction in the Gulf is going to be enonnous, and
treasuries are always the best arms controllers.
On the Arab-Israeli issue, it is true that there are many more conflicts in the Middle
East than the Arab-Israeli one. And the Arabs are as cynical about the Palestinians as
anybody else. The idea that somehow there is nothing closer to the Arab heart than the
course of the Palestinians has misled us continuously in the past. This was oneof the reasons
why much of the advice that was being given during the Gulfcrisis was wrong on the nature
of the Arab response to a strong stand against Saddam.
Nonetheless, for a variety of reasons of our own, we have reason to be concerned.
Israel has the greatest reason to be concerned, because if it doesn't yield with the Palestinian
problem now, when the position is full of possibilities and the PLO is weak, when it next
tries to deal with it, it will be in a much weaker position itself.
Another important issue is that of the Soviet Jews. They are changing Israeli society
daily in quite dramatic ways and quite unforeseen ways. Partly because of the difficulty of
absorbing all of these people coming in so quickly with an economy which is not in such a
good state, Israel is going to need a lot ofmoney in the future. Ifone may make a prediction,
it seems likely that the SovietJews may end up being to Shamir what the EastGennans have
been to Kohl. They are something that may mark one's greatest triumph but, in the long run,
they may cause more political and economic problems than were bargained for.
To draw some conclusions from this, it seems that there is a danger of both
exaggerating and minimizing Western power in a situation such as the one we are in. It is too
------·--- ~<;J~flli3WWWWWW-i'h1;:::-·---~~,.
simple to say that we won the war, but lost the peace. The peace is more confusing than one
was led to expect during the war because, during a war, in order to make the whole thing
bearable, one tends to talk about better times to come; whatever will result afterwards will
be more just and more durable. Many people know from experience that it never happens
this way, and there is no reason to expect that it will. That is why it is always important to
keep our war aims limited, ifwe are involved in a conflict like this, and to be realistic about
what we can achieve.
And that is why it is not true that it would have been better ifwe had taken a different
position at the end of the war. Although we may well have been able to impose democracy
on Iraq, it would have been difficult. Ifwe are going to get involved in this area in the future,
when we say we do not intend to go further than a certain objective, it won't be believed. If
we say the situation in which we find ourselves requires that we have to go a little bit further
than we realized, then the credibility of our future pronouncements is gone. We said we
would do something; we did it; we should be proud of what we did. We shouldn't berate
ourselves for not doing more. That is not to say we couldn't have had a more intelligent
engagement in Iraq afterwards; we could have. But we have to be quite careful about what
we say.
The conclusion of all of this is that in the Middle East and elsewhere there is a need
to get a sense of the limits and the possibilities of our power, which only comes through
experience. It will come through the experience of crises, not through architectures and
institution-building and so on. From that we should develop constant engagement. It is not
good enough to come into a region at the point ofcrisis, and to suddenly try to sort it out. If
we want to come to tenns with our power, we must come to tenns with the requirement of
constantengagement and the problems ofregions other than ourown. In doing that, we must
be ready to use a whole range of instruments, by no means solely military or economic but
the whole range of possibilities. We also must have a sense of the prizes that can be won as
well as the penalties if we fail.
53
54
IV. CURRENT EVENTS:
GERMAN ECONOMIC RECONCILIATION: THE TREUHAND EXPERIENCE
Introductory Remarks
To say that the Gennan problems have been solved already is, unfortunately, far
ahead of reality. It will take another five or ten years until the social and economic
reunification will be achieved, and probably a whole generation until a complete reunifica-
tion will be possible.
When I was appointed a member ofthe Board ofTreuhand, ourPresident told me that
"from this day on you areresponsible for 6,000 small and medium size companies, for about
2 million employees. You better find sooner or later people to work for you, find an office,
and find a concept to solve the problem." And this is what happened to everyone who started
working for Treuhand, because everything was new. No one had any idea how to proceed.
We moved to the Alexanderplatz in East Berlin, to a charming Socialist building, and
worked in offices where there were two or three or five or ten of us, with no facilities
whatsoever, no phone, no fax. This was a fascinating, pioneering time because we really
worked hard; we were convinced we worked for a good idea, for a good goal, and we were
convinced we would accomplish our task.
Eight months later, we have 2,000 people working for us. We have moved to a new
building, which was built by Goering, the Nazi minister. Afterwards, the Communist
government resided in this building. We are the first immigrants to work there. So, first we
had to democratize the building, and then all the rest.
The question is what role does the Treuhand have to play in the transfonnation from
a socialist system to a social market system. Many books have been written on how to
transfonn a capitalist system to a socialist system, but there is no book to give us any idea
how to go the other way. So, again we had to begin from nothing. We are learning by doing,
which is exciting, but includes the risk of making some mistakes. The Treuhand is probably
the world's greatest industrial holding, but there is one difference from all other industrial
holdings. We want to become smaller, not bigger, every day. We own about 9,000
companies, which is equivalent to perhaps 50,000 western companies. There are huge
conglomerates which have to be split up. Our task is to privatize, to restructure, and to close
those companies which have no chance in the future.
The politicians founded the Treuhand because they saw that the people who had to
make those very severe and painful decisions should be far away from politics. This is why
Treuhand will never be popular. Whatever we do- whether we privatize, which to a certain
extent always means rationalize, whether we restructure a company or close it down-many
people will lose their jobs. There have been too many people and huge bureaucracies in the
companies. People who lose their jobs very easily forget that this is a consequence of 40
years ofdictatorship, ofsocialist economy. They believe the Treuhand to be responsible for
the problem. That is a reason why we will never be popular.
Under these conditions, the Treuhand has done quite a good job. We have at least
done a job that no other administration in the world could have achieved, nor any
government. We have sold 2,000 companies. Right now we are selling about 300
companies each month, which means 15 companies each working day. At the same time,
we have sold about 20,000 retail shops, hotels, pharmacies, cinemas, book shops, etc. We
are very keen on finding new owners, because they are the ones who bring new technology,·
new management know how, new ideas, new investment. The contracts we have signed
f
f
i
~
~
with those 2,000 buyers include promised investment up to 60,000 billion Deutsche Marks.
We still have about 2,000 buyers waiting to conclude deals.
More or less all of the companies we are responsible for are in trouble. They have
been cutofffrom world market conditions for 40 years-probably since they were founded.
And suddenly they are part of a world-wide competition, and have absolutely no idea how
to handle it. They have never heard anything of prices. So, the first step was to develop a
global guarantee program to help all of them, because we couldn't test 9,000 of them in two
or three weeks. All of them have very heavy financial burdens-100 billion D-Mark worth
of debt in those 9,000 companies. There are also ecological burdens and social burdens.
None of these companies has any liquidity capital. So they have no chance to survive
without any help.
We are now prepared to test companies individually, and detennine whether they
have a chancefor the future or not. We have organizeda very complicated setofregulations.
We test the plant investment, the 'business strategy, the net asset value, and many other
things. The companies have to deliver a Deutsche Mark opening balance sheet and their
business plan. We have some companies which really impact all the people living around
them. For example, there are shipbuilding companies employing 50,000 people that are the
only employers in the area. We know that the employment in these companies has to be
reduced by 60 to 70 per cent at least. The same is true for such industries as chemicals,
mining, and textiles. Whole populations are in trouble when one of these companies closes
its doors.
What can we do to help? We believe that the important thing is to attract investors.
And that includes foreign investors.
Why should a Westerner invest in Eastern Gennany? First, Eastern Gennany is in the
middle of Europe. It has a lot of knowledge about Eastern markets. For many foreign
investors it's the entrance door to the European market. And it has a qualified labor force,
though without any familiarity with modem machinery. But they have technical skill, and
they can learn very easily and fast.
Investors will get grants of up to 50%, tax advantages, long production runs, and
skilled labor, which has been cheap but won't be much longer. Those who invest will
probably add value to their companies by organizational experience, marketing know-how,
sales and distribution networks, and cost management skills. I admit that whoever decides
to become an investor must be for quite some time to come a pioneer, because the
infrastructure is in very poor condition. There are still few telephones. But the situation is
fast improving.
Helping Eastern Gennany, integrating it into the European Community, is not only a
question of money. In that regard, Western Gennany can help. It is not only a question of
technical advice, and it is not only a question of giving administrative assistance. It is very
much a question of human capital, and of changing the mentality of the people there. They
have been living under a dictatorship for 40 years, in which it was dangerous to develop an
initiative, or to dare to take risks. The people have to change their attitude toward life. We
shouldn't forget that, in their lives, everything has been changed, the tax system, social
system, insurance system, school system, health system-all in weeks or months. And all
the same, I believe more than 90 percentof the people living in the East are more than willing
to be successful and to be part of the Bundesrepublik and the European Community.
We are often asked what we believe the economic prospects are. This is very difficult
to say. The construction industry is on its way. The automobile industry is on its way. The
service sectoris quite successful, because there was no banking, no insurance system, hardly
any tourism. All this is growing fast. Even though I believe that the economic prospects are
55
56
positive and perhaps will tum around by the beginning of next year, we will still have many
problems with the labor market for a good deal longer.
All the same, it is very necessary for us to find new investors, to attract people to
come and see. If you want to become a pioneer investor, go East.
Discussion
An economic overview. In a lengthy intervention, a German speaker elaborated on
the course of his country's economic reunification thus far. The introduction of the D-Mark
to East Germany last summer, before political reunification had taken place, had been a
political decision, not an economic or monetary one. In a way, the D-Mark was the vehicle
for political reunification.
But few people in East Germany were aware of what it meant to change in one day
from a highly controlled, protected socialist system to an economy open to the world market,
without protection, with a currency internationally convertible. The result was that almost
all East German state-owned companies were no longer competitive.
The economic consequences of this were very different from those in other Eastern
European countries. In countries like Czechoslovakia, for example, the currency had been
devalued and real income had declined. It was the other way around in East Germany.
There had been a dramatic increase in unemployment, up to 30 or40 percent. And industrial
production had declined by 50 percent.
Nevertheless, real income had increased in East Germany. This had occurred
because of tremendous transfer payments-this year about 140 billion D-Marks, about two-
thirds of East Germany's GDP. Even with this improvement in their income levels, East
Germans were uncertain and frightened about the future.
The high level of transfer payments had caused fiscal problems in West Germany,
and it was a concern that the East might become a region that would rely permanently on
various types of transfer payments, as was the case in Berlin.
However, there would be regions that would develop faster than others. Berlin, for
example, was fast becoming the main metropolitan area for all of Eastern Europe.
This year, the worst was yet to come, but, looking ahead to next year, there might be
some improvement. Yet it was an illusion to expect, in the foreseeable future, that the East
would catch up with the West in terms of living standards. There would be for many years
to come a significant differential in income and in living standards between West and East.
Thus, there was a risk that the movement of people from East to West would continue.
Moreover, it would be the young and educated who would continue to leave the East,
causing additional problems for the region.
Yet, one should not be either too pessimistic or too optimistic. With the rightpolicies,
there was a good chance that East Germany would have a bright future.
Western experience in EastGermany. Several participants who represented compa-
nies doing business in East Germany spoke of their experiences there. A Briton reported
that his company had had a mixed experience in establishing a newspaper in East Germany.
The company had installed high technology printing equipment in its new plant and had
trained East German workers in the U.K. These workers were both keen to learn and
technologically adept. But their attitude toward work presented a problem. They would do
nothing unless directed by authority, and, even then, they would not do much. Their
resentment of bosses was a hangover from the days of Communism and would have to be
overcome before productivity improved.
A French speaker said his company had had similar experiences. It had found East
German workers to be responsive to training, but it was difficult to get them to take any
initiative.
Positive experiences in East Germany were cited by two German participants. One
said that the productivity ofhis company's EastGerman workers was rapidly improving and
would soon be up to West German levels. Another German, saying that "a German
mechanic is a German mechanic," revealed that his company's East German workers had
already achieved the same level of productivity as those in the West The key was proper
training.
The human element. A number of speakers emphasized the importance of address-
ing the human side of the reunification process. A German opined that the psychological
problem was worse than the economic problem. The "cleavage that (had) evolved over 40
years was much deeper than anyone thought possible." It would take years, perhaps a
generation or two, to overcome. '
A countryman agreed with this assessment, saying that Germany was now one
country with two societies. One major factor that heightened the sens·e ofestrangement and
resentment of East Germans was that they were paid less than West Germans for doing the
same work. This was a problem that ought to be dealt with quickly.
Several Germans spoke about the role of the media in exacerbating East Germans'
feelings of resentment toward West Germans. Certain publications in East Germany were
"creating an atmosphere of hatred," said one speaker.
Said another German, the answer to these problems was to be found in leadership.
When West and East Germans worked together as a team they did so very successfully.
Obstacles to outside investment. It was generally agreed that foreign investment in
East Germany was very important, not the least because it symbolized the region's having
rejoined the world. But several non-Germans expressed concern that the best investment
opportunities were reserved for West Germans. An Italian said his country's industries
viewed East Germany as a great investment opportunity, but their experience had been that
it was hard to get the good businesses.
A German's response was that the Treuhand was keenly interested in attracting
foreign investors, and did not believe that "the Eastern part of Germany should be a closed
German shop." One explanation of the problems referred to was that there had been no real
international marketing due to the fact the there had been virtually no information available
about East German companies. Only recently had the Treuhand been able to produce a
multi-lingual catalogue of the various companies available for investment.
Other issues. A variety of other questions were raised in the discussion, including
these: Who managed companies in the transitional phase? Were the old managers kept on?
How were the deficits covered? Was anything being done to stimulate the purchase of
companies by East Germans? Was new economic activity being created to compensate for
the loss of jobs in areas dominated by one or two employers? What was the impact of
unemployment? How great was the migration to the West? Had Germany done anything to
reduce subsidies to certain areas of the West that had traditionally received them, so that
they could be allocated to the East?
A German speaker offered these responses: In many cases, the old managers were
kept on, because there was simply not enough managerial talent available. Efforts were
made to keep out those who had been involved with Stasi, but this was difficult in view of
the alteration and destruction of records and files in the final months of Communist rule. In
the transitional phase, the Treuhand began the restructuring process and covered deficits.
But it was working very hard to privatize companies as quickly as possible. There were
some instances where East Germans were buying into companies. About 50 percent of the
57
58
workers in East Gennany had lost theirjobs due to closing and restructuring companies, but
new jobs were being created in various sectors; about 1.5 million had been created in the past
eight months. As to emigration to the West, about 10,000 people were leaving per month.
But many were starting to return, as the opportunities improved. Efforts to reallocate
subsidies from the West had not been successful.
In response to questions raised in the discussion about the state and outlook of the
overall German economy, two Gennan speakers had this to say. The first called Germany
"a weakened nation." There was no more talk about the German economic juggernaut.
Germany would remain weak for a number of years to come, and would be a high deficit
country. The other speaker saw the situation as improving in the next few years in the
economic and social sense. It would take much longer to successfully deal with the
management questions. The Treuhand would continue to work hard to achieve success as
soon as possible. This was important not only to those in East Germany, but to the rest of
Eastern Europe as well.
***
The discussion of the Treuhand experience generated considerable interest among
the participants. The obvious dedication ofthe speaker, representing the Board ofTreuhand,
was acknowledged with a round of applause.
V. THE PRACTICAL AGENDA FOR THE ALLIANCE
Introductory Remarks
I.
Harold Macmillan once remarked that Adam said to Eve, as they left paradise, "We
live in an age of transition." Things haven't changed all that much; the characteristic of an
age of transition is that some of the traditional concepts have to be adapted to new realities.
When the Atlantic Alliance was formed, it was supposed to deal with a number of
issues: the Soviet threat; how to relate Germany to the West; how to create a political and
security framework for North American participation in European affairs, and how to create
a security framework for Western. Europe. These issues involved all kinds of political
assumptions which, in the late fifties, led to the conclusion that detente and defense were two
of the main elements of NATO policy. But now, in the period of the nineties, we live in a
clearly changed environment, with different problems and different solutions.
One issue is the future of the Soviet Union, concerning which we in the West are
getting ourselves into a quandary. When the Soviet Union was strong, we said we had to
make arrangements with it because it was strong. Now that it is weak, we say we have to
make arrangements with the Soviet Union because it is so dangerous when it is weak. Are
we therefore to assume that the Soviet Union is pennanently dangerous, whether it is strong
or weak? And how do we adapt our relationship to it? We need some precise conception of
what it is we are afraid of that the Soviet Union might do. When people say that there are
tens of thousands of nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union, what precisely does that mean,
and what can the Alliance do about it? Most of the arms control agreements are marginal in
relationship to that problem, even if they reduce the stockpile by half.
Secondly, we have the problem of how we affect the dilemma of the Soviet Union
between democracy and disintegration. Is there a solution to this problem? And how can we
affect it? It is possible that it cannot be dealt with as long as Gorbachev is around, because
he seems to have a mesmerizing impact on all the leaders he has met, so that they are making
it a personal issue. But the domestic impact of the Soviet evolution in the various countries,
and the temptation ofmany countries to do something spectacular with the Soviets to relieve
domestic problems, may slide us into a situation in which the fundamental realities of the
Soviet Union are not fully faced.
Whatever happens to Communism in the SovietUnion, it can be said that the Russian
Empire under the Czars and the Commissars has a number of fundamental characteristics.
One is that it has always had an army larger than any other European state, and larger than
any rational consideration of its defense needs. Secondly, fo~ several hundred years the
Russian state has involved itself in a series of international interventions more consistently
than any other state. There was the Holy Alliance, there was pan-Slavism, there was
Communism. The Russian state has cited some universal principle which justified its
actions, and it has taken many international actions in history which could not be justified in
purely national interests. Therefore, we must ask ourselves if we can conceive ofa structure
of the Russian state that would, for the first time in Russian history, focus Russia on its
domestic problems. This may be possible in light of the fact that nuclear weapons give an
assurance against foreign invasion that no previous Russian state has had.
Some Alliance conception of what it is that we are trying to achieve in the Soviet
Union is of great importance. We don't seem to have anything except ad hoc institutional
59
60
frameworks, which deal on a tactical basis, in which suddenly the attendance ofGorbadiev
at some summit becomes a matter of tremendous controversy. We need to have a larger
concept.
There is also the question of what is security right now. Clearly the original security
function ofNATO is no longer the same. The SovietUnion is 700 miles further back. It may
be less likely to permit its army to be used abroad, but it still will be the largest army in
Europe, and it will be a huge nuclear arsenal. It is wrong to think that the Soviet Union is
forever, or for the foreseeable future, incapable of military action abroad. Between 1904
and 1910, Russia was in terrible shape, and yet, by 1913, the German and the Japanese
general staffs independently had come to the conclusion that, within five years, the Russian
Empire would become an unmanageable threat. They may have been wrong, but they were
professionals.
From the security point of view, there are a number of realities. One, Germany will
need American support for the indefinite future, because it cannotacquire nuclear weapons.
It is therefore most subject to nuclear blackmail, if the Soviet Union exercises its nuclear
potential diplomatically. Therefore Germany will always have an interest, if it pursues a
rational policy, in an American connection. The French also want an American role in
Germany, as a safety net both against a Soviet threat and against unforeseeable contingen-
cies in Germany. And Britain would always be more comfortable with an Atlantic
connection.
So the security basis for the Alliance continues to exist, but it needs a new institu-
tional definition, which is somewhat complicated by the emergence ofa European identity.
On the one hand, it makes absolute sense to say that a politically unified Europe cannot
forever renounce a military role. On the other hand, perhaps the biggest long-term problem
in the Atlantic relationship is the definition ofEuropean identity. It is obscure at the moment
because there is no real outside opposition. But it will emerge.
The problem of the European identity, as it has been defined by France especially is
that, while the United States can negotiate with national governments at all levels, and there
can be a process of forming a view over an extended period of time, in dealing with the
European community, the U.S. is dealing with an instructed representative, who presents
conclusions after they are already achieved, and who has no flexibility after the conclusions
are reached. That is a new procedure, which in the security field, will be unacceptable to the
United States in the long run, especially when it is supposed to be residuary guarantor.
Therefore the question ofwhether there should be European autonomy in the military
field, depends crucially _on whether a consultative mechanism can be developed in which
there can be a formation of views and in which the United States can participate in the
formation of views when they are still being formed, rather than being confronted with a fait
accompli, either for acceptance or rejection.
This depends also somewhat on the notion ofEurope that will develop. What is this
Europe? Is it the Europe of the twelve? Is it Europe including the Eastern community? Or
is it Europe including the Soviet Union? And how is this identity to be achieved? There are
some ideas, primarily in France, and in some circles in Germany, in which the United States
is viewed as a balance against the Soviets and, to some extent, against the Germans, and the
Soviets are used as a balance against the United States. This is expressed in such ideas as a
Europe from Vladivostok to San Francisco. America will notjoin such a Europe. A Europe
in which everybody is allied to everybody means nobody is obliged to anybody. It is really
a prescription for nationalism.
The world into which we are moving is, in some of its aspects, more like the 19th
century world on a global scale than the cold war world, in the sense that there will be a
number of power centers. It is therefore necessary to construct various equilibria by which
security and positive goals can be achieved. The two strongest nations in the West,
Germany and the United States, have no great nationalist problems with such concepts. The
United States emphasizes collective security and world law and world government. Ger-
many practiced nationalism mainly between Bismarck and the end of World War II.
Germany has spent more of its history getting unified than in developing a concept of what
to do with its unity. So these are two nations that have an intellectual problem with
nationalism.
On the positive side, the problems we face are good problems to have. They result
from a collapse of Eastern powers that nobody would have foreseen. But we require some
more precise definition of how we view the evolution of the Soviet Union and, unless we
develop some concepts and institutions to address these problems, we are going to be
absorbed mostly in tactics. The solution is largely up to us.
Introductory Remarks
II.
The problems the West faces are real, but they are all manageable. There is no doubt
that the Alliance at this moment is changing tremendously. We are adjusting to new security
parameters by changing everything: strategy, force structures, composition, command
structure, borders, infrastructure, logistics, and political tactics. The astounding thing is that
in this revolutionary change of the Alliance, the unity of the Alliance, the ability of the
Alliance to move together is unmatched.
It is important that while some things are revamped, reorganized, and rethought, we
are clear about one thing: NATO is not a temporary proposition. It is relevant and its
relevance will even grow. It has not been tarnished by the talk about a European security
structure. Indeed, we have seen the Alliance strengthened by the talk-sometimes loose
talk-about the emerging European security identity.
Its relevance is of course multiple, and we are moving much more from a combat-
ready instrument to being the great stabilizer of Europe. This comes at a time when it is
particularly needed. The text in which the Allies have just again confirmed their enduring
basic missions describes the basic mission as "the maintenance of the military capability
sufficient to prevent war and to provide for effective defense when needed".
These same documents cover our need to maintain a strategic balance in Europe,
which means our ability to set off the conceivable military potential ofothers. Added to this
perennial task is the management ofcrises which affect Allied security. The documents go
on to include a search for a new cooperative approach to European security through
dialogue, cooperation, support for democratic reform, peaceful dispute settlement, institu-
tion building, confidence building, etc. What emerges from this list is that our key task is to
define a relationship with the Soviet Union and the new democracies in Central and Eastern
Europe, emphasizing a constructive partnership. These missions translate into a broad range
of practical tasks: the reorganization of our internal activity; the accommodation of the
emerging European security; redefining the place of America in an Alliance where its
military pre-eminence on the continent is no longer the prime indicator of the US role; the
future potential and task of conventional arms control; the need to design a new public
dialogue on defense; the public information challenge; the need for efforts in the field of
arms control.
Four items are of particular importance: first, the new crisis management task;
second, the relations with the new democracies; third, nuclear matters, which somehow
seem to have disappeared from the scene; and fourth, overcoming out-of-area problems.
-~~~,--.-,--~·"""?.~~-4 ~m:;;;;;nou;, .... ,,.-g«, _, ,;; Wt\ :C&u,M!tit:d.:t:m:.O!fA'J1,,"""-IBCIJ>%L&"'" ._.,,)',Jlt'l-Oti,fr-.?.i ,.,.,\-,,db. :ptc,,r;c.< _,JJiMRiiiM'J~Al'm&---·· ,,JWW:::W
61
Regarding crisis management, security is less than ever purely a military matter. We
are more and more coming to a broad, comprehensive security approach with a novel mix of
military, political, and economic strategies. This approach requires a great amount of
rethinking. NATO's emerging strategy stresses military roles in peace, in crises and, only
as an ultimate means, in combat. This means that new crisis scenarios have to be thought
through, new plausible, generic military roles must be studied and learned, and a new
catalogue of possible escalatory and de-escalatory measures must be worked out and
carefully honed through planning, staffexercises, operational rules and new crisis manage-
ment procedures. In an increasingly war-free security environment, the categories of
probable crises are as yet unexplored in terms of time, space and intensity. The crisis
management path is uncharted, and the political and military requirements undefined. Crisis
care as a mixed political-military task will make it necessary for the political and military
establishments to permeate one another and in NATO, the international civilian staffand the
international military staff should be soon merged.
In the area ofrelations with the new democracies, and also the Soviet Union, last year
NATO boldly approached its erstwhile adversaries with the offer of cooperation and
diplomatic relations. This offer has borne ample fruit, but the job is only half done. Giving
the new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe a new political home, while not pushing
the Soviet Union over the rim of the European plate, requires both courage and a departure
from past ways. This week in Copenhagen, NATO has amplified its offers and confirmed
its strategic interest in the undiminished security of the new democracies. Contacts,
briefings and visits-all part of this diplomatic business-are valuable and unfold dynamics
of their own. They provide reassurance to the new democracies and reach beneath the crust
of old political and military thinking in the Soviet Union, thus accelerating a learning
process. But they are not enough to underpin the confirmed security interests of the newly
won partners. Full NATO membership for the new democracies is a tempting option, but it
is not a cogent one. And it is not a great power war that is threatened. Formal security
guarantees accompanying full membership in NATO does not meet the primary need of
these countries. An interim solution is needed, in which NATO is transformed into a two-
tiered structure, where the new democracies would form partofthe instil.utional framework.
They would participate in most of NATO's political activities and attend committee
meetings, including the NATO Council, on a regular basis, while a separate council and
committee would be maintained for the current membership to administer matters pertain-
ing to the mutual security guarantee of the treaty to the integrated military system. Such a
two-tiered institutional approach would require no, or only marginal adjustment to the
treaty. And the CEE countries would then also establish permanent missions in NATO
headquarters, like the traditional members.
Nuclear weapons remain indispensable as the ultimate guarantee ofpeace, including
weapons stationed in Europe. NATO must remain the venue and provide the collective
support for the primary nuclear roles of those allies who possess them. Yet a scaling down
of nuclear holding to a different, lower order of magnitude is urgent. We must get away
from the absurdities of decades of past nuclear policy predicated upon the prospect of
multiple nuclear exchanges, multiple targeting at a gigantic and self-defeating level, and the
levels of weaponry that went with this philosophy. The perspective of more than 25,000
Soviet nuclear warheads in a crumbling empire, with the prospect of decade-long turmoil,
should provide enough of a challenge for rapid and drastic new arms control proposals
dwarfing the limited and essentially outdated approach of START. Nuclear arms control
must become the vehicle towards the creation of a new, stabilizing nuclear order, based on
cooperative approaches, taking the confrontational sting out of nuclear weapons which has
made their public acceptability increasingly precarious. Minimum deterrence, with a few
hundred or thousand warheads in both the Soviet Union and the Western military system,
mutually stabilizing and compatible, is a goal post that should and can be reached in this
decade. In the meantime, advance targeting should increasingly appear incompatible with a
European security landscape in which all sides have solemnly declared that they are no
longer adversaries to one another. The role of nuclear weapons in our security must be
reassessed. Their ultimate peace-keeping role is undiminished, but any prospect of imme-
diate deterrent use mustbe reduced, and any prospect ofactual use mustbe infinitely remote.
At the moment, nuclear matters have virtually disappeared from public debate in Europe,
perhaps carefully suppressed by Governments, as inconvenient or untimely. This is
regrettable. Through such a lapse, the rationale for maintaining a nuclear based posture will
increasingly slip from the public mind. It will be difficult to revive. Nuclear matters must
remain on the agenda. A new, imaginative thrust in nuclear arms control can provide the
vehicle for publicly substantiating the need for the requisite nuclear arsenal of the future.
Finally,there is the matter of out-of-area problems. If the pattern of the future is to
move from conflict to crisis, the Gulf event was atypical. Major war is as improbable
outside of Europe as inside. But there will be untold crisis situations, where the military
roles of individual allies or groups of them would have to rely, as in the Gulf crisis, on
NATO procedures and logistic support. And, increasingly, in an interdependent world
which underlines the accompanying fragility of the world system, the security of all allies
will be challengedin such crises. Future extra-European crises do not challenge Article 5 of
the NATO Treaty, which is the security guarantee. They provide new applications to Article
4, the future consultation and cooperation pattern. The task is to deviseprocedures by which
the Alliance recognizes overall security implications for the Alliance of new conflict
potentials and risk situations and makes, as a matter of well-practiced routine, logistics,
communications, intelligence,infrastructure and cargo capabilities available to those Allies
who take on military crisis roles, peace-keeping functions and humanitarian tasks in the
wider world. The challenge thus is not to change the NATO Treaty or to assume new
collective responsibilities, but to make regular and rapid use of Alliance resources that are
permanently available anyway and can be used in situations of collective risks.
Discussion
NATO andWest-West Relations. It was the view ofa German speaker that, as great
as the changes going on in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were, no less important
were the changes taking place in West-West relations. Certainly it was desirable for the
West to try to assist the process of change in the Soviet Union and to work for the stability
of the new democracies in Eastern Europe. But there were limits to what the West could do;
the best way for it to cope with these changes was to put its own house in order.
NATO needed to do more than adjust its policies here and there, continued the
speaker; its "very fundament" was in question. How was the Atlantic relationship to be
retained in the future, when military issues were no longer central, when troops were no
longer the glue, when military integration was no longer the most obvious symbol of the
relationship, and when American dominance and leadership--once natural because of "the
sheer relationship of forces and the security requirements"-was no longer natural? The
Alliance was changing into something other than a security-focussed one.
The relationship between the U.S. and Europe was of central importance to both; it
was necessary to adapt to change by seeking a rationale for preserving it beyond the military
one. The Atlantic nations ought to focus their cooperation on a wide spectrum of issues, and
accept and adapt to changes in the relationship.
63
Endorsing these remarks, an International speaker said that the cold war had come to
an end precisely because NATO had had a clear vision of the future. What was needed now
was a new vision, which accepted the desirability ofchanging the structure of international
relations. Europe and the United States had to share that vision, or NATO would ultimately
come apart. Central to a changed structure of international relations was the goal of
European integration and the development of an equal partnership between the U.S. and
Europe, in which each participated fully in the decision-making process.
Several participants spoke about the need for closerconsultation between Europe and
the U.S. An American agreed that it would be desirable for European countries to learn
about the internal discussions between the White House and the State and Defense Depart-
ments while they were going on. The same sort of input ought to be given the U.S. in
European discussions. What had to be avoided was one side presenting the other with fait
accomplis, achieved entirely by domestic procedures.
A number of European speakers voiced the opinion that the restatement of NATO's
strategy that had just been concluded in Copenhagen had been too much carried out in
accordance with the U.S. agenda. It was imperative for the U.S. to decide what it wanted in
the way ofa second pillar of the Alliance. American confusion on this issue was clearly seen
in the Gulf crisis, thought a Danish participant. On the one hand, the U.S. had wanted
stronger combined European action. On the other, it did not want a united, fixed European
position inside the Alliance.
It was a view widely held among American speakers that public support for NATO in
the U.S. was not something the Europeans should take for granted. Referring to comments
made about a possible nuclear-free zone in Central Europe, a speaker said that U.S. public
opinion would not accept a security strategy that shifted the risk of nuclear conflict to the
U.S. More important, American public support for NATO and the strong commitment of the
U.S. to it could be eroded by a perception that the threat had diminished and that the
Europeans were not doing their fair share. At a time when domestic U.S. military
installations were being closed for budgetary reasons, said an American, it would be
difficult to maintain public support for the presence of U.S. troops and bases in Europe
unless it was clearly enunciated that a Soviet threat remained.
The continued needfor security. A number of speakers addressed the issue of
maintaining NATO as a security alliance. A Belgian said that, at the top of the Alliance's
agenda, was the need for "continuing to defend the same principles and ideals we had been
defending for more than 40 years." Our security needs had changed, but not our need for
security. The Soviet Union remained a superpower on the European continent, and the
situation in Eastern Europe remained uncertain. Thus, NATO's defensive role should notbe
challenged.
An International participant saw NATO as "more convinced than ever about its
future purpose." The security premises had changed, but security remained very important,
and the Alliance was adapting. There could be no security without a strong military element,
and the stability and security that the West had enjoyed was due to the integrated military
system of the Alliance. This had to be maintained.
It was natural, in the view of an American, that, when an institution had succeeded,
there would be talk ofadapting its role to take on new tasks. The problem with this was that
the institution might not be particularly well-suited to the new tasks, and might "retard the
emergence of new institutions better suited." There was a danger of losing sight of what
NATO was still necessary for. So, rather than try to assign new tasks to the Alliance, it
would be better to preserve it for its intended purpose, at least until we had a better sense of
the dimensions of the residual Soviet threat.
r
In the view ofan International speaker, that threat remained considerable. The Soviet
military had agreed with Gorbachev on the need for change, but they expected that the
military structure would not materially change. They have since found it difficult to live
with change and they have been trying to preserve as much of the military capacity as
possible. This had been evident in the various arms control talks, where the Soviets had
fought to keep as high levels as they could get They still had 13,000 tanks and at least 45
divisions available for a European conflict Thus, NATO still had to think in terms of a
military response to the threat.
Other participants expressed concern about the size of the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
Whether it was in a process offundamental change or not, the Soviet Union still maintained
enormous destructive power. A Greek speaker suggested that desperate Soviet, or Russian,
leaders could, in a possible future scenario, use their nuclear arsenal for economic black-
mail.
The continued presence of nuclear weapons and the need to negotiate major reduc-
tions was cited by several speakers as another rationale for the maintenance of a strong
NATO.
Western policy toward the Soviet Union. An American speaker offered this
appraisal of developments within the Soviet Union. There was a dilemma between
dissolution and unity. It was unreasonable to expect the nationalities to live contentedly
under the Soviet system. Yet there were some "rather extreme examples ofnationalism," of
attempts to break up a "potentially promising economic cohesion of the area." In any event,
there was no possibility of preserving the Russian-dominated union; to do so would cause
the nationalist pressure to "tear the country apart." The only kind of solution that was
possible was one in which a different sort of union was created, one which the key
nationalities considered it in their interest to preserve. This was a problem that Western
policies could not solve, or even do much to help them with. Our policy should be hands-
off, with the exception of the Baltic states, which, for legal and historical reasons, were a
different case.
In addition to the nationalities dilemma, continued the speaker, the Soviet Union was
faced with the dilemma of its emphasis on the military. They simply could not continue it
without exacerbating their other problems. They were faced with a stark.choice. If they
sought to preserve their military capacity, their economic system would fall apart. This and
other pressures suggested that the military threat would diminish.
A Dutch participant argued in favor of a two-pronged approach to the Soviet Union.
First, we should recognize that the political and military threat could once again become a
problem. Hence, we had to continue with NATO. But we should also move toward the
integration of the Soviet Union in Europe. This could not be accomplished in a short time,
but we could start by developing trade relations, possibly including inclusion of the Soviet
Union in GATT, and other specific forms of cooperation.
In regard to the matter of integrating the Soviet Union into European structures, an
American argued that this would be a mistake, and the West should clearly differentiate its
approach to the Soviet Union from its approach to the East European countries. These
countries should be moved toward Western Europe, he said, and, in so doing, Western
security would be greatly enhanced. But, countered an International participant, we ought
to avoid isolating the Soviet Union and increasing their already great feeling of humiliation
at having lost the former Warsaw Pact countries.
65
66
VI. DO WE HAVE THE INSTITUTIONS TO DEAL WITH THE AGENDA?
Introductory Remarks
I.
The transatlantic relationship brings together the world's two largest trading zones,
the two principal centers of democracy and liberalism, the two principal exponents of
transnational cooperation and integration, the two regions with the greatest global outreach
and sense ofglobal responsibility. Therelationship between those two zones, the transatlan-
tic relationship, is the central axis around which the international system revolves. The
management of this central relationship, the depth, the intimacy, the functioning of that
relationship, is decisive for the development of history. And there is one very simple fact
that we should not lose sight of: ifEurope and North America stay together, they decide-
or at least influence to a large degree-the course of history. If they break apart, they have
lost the game.
The next fact: against any superficial evidence, interdependence grows. The
Europeans need the Americans, today as much as yesterday, and tomorrow even more.
Why? First, the military reasons, which are not the most important, but they are still there.
Ofcourse the drastic threat has receded. But looking at the map, at the military potential of
the Soviet Union, whatever happens there-even if they would split up and end up with a
Russia-it would still be the dominant military power of the Eurasian continent. So history
tells us there is a need for strategic balance-in political terms as well. Europeans alone
cannotdo it. Second, Europe needs the political presence of the United States. The Eastern
European leaders are especially aware of this. Even Gorbachev has said Europe needs
American presence in Europe. He may have different motives, but the result is what counts.
Looking at Western Europe, the moment the Americans would withdraw politically
from Europe, the old power play would restart. Unfortunately the Europeans have not yet
reached a state where the process ofEuropean unification would go on as itdoes without the
firm political commitment of the United States to Europe. The moment the Americans
disengage, some will feel the need to control the Germans. And the Germans ofcourse will
react. And other alliances will form: alliances, counter-alliances, and so on. The dynamic
of the European process of unification, which the Alliance supports, might not continue
without the presence of the United States. So the question for the United States is to
disengage or remain here, firmly committed.
The Americans also need the Europeans. Luckily enough, the Americans are now
really the only remaining superpower. There can be no world order without a world power
which firmly commits itself to that international order. But the United States alone cannot
do the job forever. They need the Europeans; they need this other power center. (And, they
need also more responsibility taken by the Japanese.)
The fourth reason why interdependence grows is tomorrow's global challenges.
Neither the Europeans nor the Americans will be able to solve them alone. So we need each
other, and that means that this relationship remains decisive.
Who organizes that relationship? Who manages it? It is the Atlantic Alliance. Who
could replace it? Where is there another institution? This is really the main reason for
NATO's existence-to manage these trans-Atlantic relationships. We are not looking for a
new enemy, a new role, and so on. The role is there. NATO has always been much more
than a purely defensive and military alliance. During the cold war this was overshadowed,
but it was always a political alliance, and it is even more so today. It is a community of
values and of destiny.
r,
i
t
I
,,
j
'I
l
!
I
I
l
\
··-"''_..,,:J..,,,>t~l".,.:-,
If you don't understand that, you don't understand the profound rationale for this
alliance. Ifyou want the Americans just to protect the Europeans-a kind ofumbrella which
is only used when you need military assistance-that is not the vision of the Alliance and
you won't keep the Americans here. They have to have their political influence, their
political share.
NATO's primary rationale now is to be the anchor of stability. In the face of
transition, where instability is natural, where do you find stability? The Japanese Prime
Minister has said that NATO must be maintained; it is the global factor of stability. That
means ifyou want to have something which gives you stability in the process ofchange, you
need this alliance. That's one rationale.
The second rationale is combined with two processes which we see unfolding at this
very moment, and which this alliance has to support and promote. So we see ourselves as
not only an anchor of stability, but as promotor ofchange. These two historic processes are
West European integration, the creation ofa new security structure for the whole ofEurope,
including the Soviet Union.
It is not true that the United States or the Atlantic Alliance is against European
integration or against the process ofa common foreign and security policy. The U.S. needs
this as much as the Alliance needs a strong Europe, a united Europe. Only the modalities
have to be established. If that means that the Europeans get together, and form an opinion,
and then say to the Americans "take it or leave it", we will destroy the Atlantic Alliance. So
it has to be a process where they agree. We have just had a very successful meeting in
Copenhagen where we agreed on the framework, setting out the core functions of NATO,
clearly stating that NATO remains the principal forum for consultation and decision, clearly
supporting the process ofEuropean unity, including European security and defense. So the
way for the Europeans is open.
What we ask for is not rhetoric. What we ask for is contribution and shared
responsibilities. Itis up to the Europeans now to decide. We have defined the core functions
and we have clearly stated the complementarity. Now let the Europeans make their own
decisions and fill the framework which we have just set up.
Regarding relations with the other countries ofCentral Europe and the Soviet Union,
we know the differences between the Soviet Union and the Central and Eastern European
countries. We have to try-and that is what we are doing-to offer them cooperation in
order to build a new security structure together with them, not isolate them, not to put them
out ofEurope, not to create a very dangerous situation, knowing that the relationship will be
a complicated one. You have to balance them on the one hand, to make sure, by your own
defense posture, there will be no temptation to use military force. Buton the other hand, you
must build on that; offer them cooperation; take them in. That is the process in which we are
seriously engaged. It may fail; who knows? That is why at present we are not offering
membership to the Central and Eastern European countries in NATO. Some of them would
like to join. What we offer them is liaison-broadening and deepening. What we offer them
is the building of the CSCE institutions which they know cannot replace the stability of
NATO.
We have gone one step further in Copenhagen; redefining our strategic interest and
making it very clear to the Soviets that this undertaking really rests on the assumption and
condition that they establish friendly and good neighborly relations and do not try to re-
establish a zone of influence. As soon as they try to do so the cards will be newly shuffled.
That means all our options are open. They have an incentive to build up a constructive
relationship with Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and so on. And we will try to help
them. Our duty is to try to create this kind of a new Europe based on a framework of
interlocking institutions. That is why NATO is trying to strengthen the CSCE process. That
is why we are encouraging European unity.
58
In summary, we are trying not only to provide stability, but promote change, and we
can only master that gigantic task if the Europeans and the Americans stay together in this
unity of purpose. So we are profoundly transforming our Alliance, not only in strategy, not
only in structure, but in the vision of the future.
Introductory Remarks
II.
It is unlikely to be true that Western institutions created decades ago to respond to a
divided Europe, East-West confrontations around the world, and a proximate Soviet
military threat on this continent, are exactly right in every respect in mission, in member-
ship, and in practice to deal with the transformed world in which we now live. In other
words, change is necessary in the institutions.
Bad national policies will quickly infect Western institutions. Or put differently,
Western institutions-no matter how ably led-cannot transcend myopic or wrong-headed
policies in national capitals.
Regarding adequacy of our institutions, in the security dimension, NATO has
responded rapidly and artfully to the new Europe, and it is making good progress towards
redefining itself in ways that continue to capture public support.
As for the CSCE, it has made three important contributions to Europe since its
inception. It allowed the West in the early 1970s to persuade the Soviets and the rest of the
Warsaw Pact to begin the conventional arms control process, which produced the CFE
agreement. It gave the West, in the 70s and 80s, a forum to highlight Soviet and East
European human rights abuses. And it provided, in July of last year, at the NATO summit
in London, a crucial element in Gorbachev's decision to acquiesce in the unification of
Germany within NATO.
However, I think the CSCE may have already had its finest hours. It may already be
an aging, formerly notable player on the European stage. With its rule ofconsensus, its lack
of military capabilities, its diverse and divided membership, its frail institutional capabili-
ties, it's no wonder that the East Europeans who were mesmerized by the CSCE a year ago,
as the future security architecture of Europe, have now come to the sensible conclusion that
only NATO can fill this function. Thus their desire to join the Alliance.
The CSCE will sputteralong causing no particular harm, but to change the metaphor,
it is not a plank one would want to put too many bricks on any time soon.
US-EC political consultation remains largely unsatisfactory. Unfortunately we have
not made very much progress in this regard since the Davignon committee and the Year of
Europe. This is largely because of the French concern that an intimate consultative
arrangement with the United States will shrivel EC integration.
Concerning the WEU, the Administration's response was overly negative to the
initiative which was at play at the time. But it may be too harsh to put the entire burden on
the United States for the prospect that a WEU independent force is now dying of its own
weight. As someone once said, the WEU is a princess that has been kissed many times, but
never awakened.
Regarding the European defense identity, even the most ardent US supporters of
European integration and the second pillar will worry that the unsatisfactory pattern ofUS-
EC political consultation for about twenty years would carry over in the US-EC consultation
on security matters. So it seems natural that Americans would be concerned.
Although it is indispensable for NATO to maintain a military capability we all know
that many of the international problems of the 90s are unlikely to have a military response
..,.....-
as their answer. In this re·gard the GulfWar is likely to be the exception, rather than the rule.
Those moral enthusiasts who wish to see Western military force used to sort out each and
every human rights abuse around the world, are going to be disappointed. Instead, Western
governments will mostly ignore these situations, unless they occur in areas important to our
interests. Instead we are going to spend our energy on prevention and crisis management,
rather than military intervention.
Since issues of political economy are going to be important in the international
environment in the 1990s, and decisions by Western governments with regard to the
international environment will often be dominated by political issues, the G-7 is a prospec-
tive institution made to address many of the problems of the next decade. It has the right
membership; it includes the EC commission, which is crucial in the building of the new
Europe and in the matters at hand; it is small and allows-even encourages informal
discussion in ways the larger institutions do not-an inclusion of the Japanese. That is
absolutely crucial, as we look to l!he 90s, that the Japanese acquire the benefit of Western
strategic perspective and analysis, and get a sense of participating in Western strategic
decisions. Putting it differently, allowing the West's relations with Japan to be dominated
by bilateral trade issues has had a predictable and unpleasant consequence, which may well
get worse after the cold war unless we do something institutionally about it. And do we
really wish Japan's view of the future of the Soviet Union to be entirely dominated by four
small islands? Though they have resonance in domestic politics, they will have little to do
with the future of Northeast Asia and the Soviet Union's relationship to the West. And we
need Japanese resources to meet the challenges of the 90s. Only the G-7 provides a suitable
forum for this intensified Japanese strategic involvement.
With respect to the agenda itself, it seems many of the issues aren't being discussed
in a strategic way anywhere. Western economic aid to the Soviet Union, the relationship of
aid to the Soviet Union and that to Eastern Europe, Western policies toward China, toward
South Africa, toward North Africa, all are matters the G-7 has dealt with before. The
environment, terrorism, aid to the developing world-these matters cannot be decided in
NATO. There are some mechanisms to discuss them th((re, but they are not going to be
seriously discussed in NATO in a comprehensive fashion, and certainly decisions on these
aren't going to be made in NATO, because they are "out-of-area". The US-EC consultative
channel remains impoverished on these strategic matters. So let me put a proposal on the
table for your consideration: the gradual evolution ofthe G-7 into a much more formidable
institution, with a Secretariat, a G-7 institutional site, perhaps in Brussels, G-7 permanent
representatives, along the lines of the NATO council, regular and frequent meetings of G-7
foreign ministers. These matters are too important to only be left to our friends in G-7
treasuries. All these innovations would be appropriate to the strategic challenges the West
faces in the 1990s.
Such innovations in the G-7 would not be a cure-all, obviously. They couldn't
overcome misguided national policies, and they could in no sense replace NATO's func-
tions. But these innovations would recognize how different our world is, now that the cold
war is over, and would recognize the importance of Western instruments of political
economy in managing the international environment of the 1990s.
Introductory Remarks
Ill.
NATO's core function-defending our area-needs no new institution. There is also
a second function ofNATO, and that is ofarms reduction on the European continent. In fact,
6'
NATO is an organization which provides the framework to translate political aims into
specific possibilities, and then to put common decisions into practice. The third function of
NATO is confidence-building, a prerequisite for achieving results we have agreed upon
already, and to achieve new possibilities.
As for the Alliance in its broaderpolitical concept, no new institutions are needed, but
a political will to use the mechanisms. It is the responsibility of the countries working
together in the Alliance to bring the Uruguay Round to fruition in the next six months. How
could we lecture Eastern Europe on a market economy, if we ourselves are not able to
achieve free trade? The Alliance must also deal with arms control on a global scale:
biological, chemical, nuclear. It is not only an East-West problem; it has become a global
problem. The fundamental problem of the proliferation of nuclear capabilities could be the
new threat.
Another example is Western out-of-area operations. They could be possible in the
future, and we have to act as united as possible. NATO itself is not the vehicle for out-of-
area operations. But at the same time we have to be as realistic, from the political point of
view as from the military point of view. The Alliance provides the political basis for
communication, as much as possible based on the United Nations Security Council.
The European Community is changing and developing; we are working now on a
political union and a monetary union. The political union aims to strengthen the democratic
aspect of Europe and to broaden the community's reach from the economy to other areas.
Among these is the foreign policy. The foreign policy will be partof the political unity. But
this raises institutional questions. What will be the role of the Commission? And, in relation
to that, what does it mean for the European Parliament?
As to foreign policy, which cannot be separated from security policy, here we touch
on the relation of the European Community to NATO. The debate is still going on, but there
are likely to be three new elements in the political union. First, certain topics will be part of
the union and its normal procedures, such as arms export policy, defense industry, and the
European stand in non-proliferation questions. Second, security policy in its political
dimension will be part of the treaty, with a special procedure. Third, there will be in the
future the possibility of a defense organization, but not until the second half of this decade,
when the WEU treaty expires.
There is no disagreement among the member states about these elements. Firstofall,
everybody understands that it would be stupid to jeopardize NATO. Secondly, capitals-
especially London and Paris-are certainly not prepared to bring their capabilities into an
integrated European defense system. Third, foreign policy is influenced by developments in
the Eastern European countries.
The WEU may be a sleeping princess, but it is a nice princess, and an excellent
organization playing traditionally a very modest role, which is good. For example, it was
useful as an instrument to integrate Spain, and especially the nuclear policies of Spain, into
the NATO concept. More recently, it has been used to coordinate European efforts out-of-
area. It is a structural coordinating mechanism for a European out-of-area rapid deployment
force, which should and can only function in close coordination with the United States.
Regarding the CSCE and the larger Europe, there are three baskets. The first basket
is human rights, democracy, fundamental values. Here we have the link today to the Council
of Europe, a very important institution, with more and more East European members. It
provides an opportunity for many initiatives having to do with the so-called social fabric of
society. The second basket is security, arms control, arms reduction, confidence-building
measures. etc. The third basket is the economic basket. First of all, the European
Community should open up its market completely for Eastern Europe, without dragging our
feet any longer on textiles, steel, etc. Secondly, the mechanism to make it attractive for
r
companies to go East should be stimulated by the European Bank for Reconstruction.
Thirdly, we should facilitate integration by efforts in selected areas, .such as energy, the
environment, and infrastructure, especially transport and communications. In this approach
it is partly a question of private business and partly of public utilities. In this way, we can
channel knowledge and management skill to Eastern European countries.
You do have to make a distinction between the Eastern European countries and the
Soviet Union, not for fundamental but for practical reasons. We face a double challenge as
Europeans. We need an integrated vision of Europe; to help East European countries to
become effective members of Europe, to develop initiatives like opening up our markets,
and other types ofeconomic assistance, and finally the practical day-by-day work in politics
and private industry. This is an integrated vision; it would create a European continent in
freedom in accordance with the values of the Alliance.
Discussion
The role ofNATO. A German speaker began the discussion with some remarks on
the role of the Atlantic Alliance in a changing Europe. NATO was "the most successful
alliance in world history." Its problems stemmed from its success, but they nonetheless
were problems. The role of NATO was going to change drastically; in the future its task
would be "reinsurance and reassurance" more than anything else. The transatlantic
relationship was important, but NATO would not continue to be "the central axis of that
relationship."
NATO, the speaker continued, could not be the manager of the transatlantic relation-
ship, of East-West relations, of North-South relations, and of world trade. Nor could it
monopolize security matters. Here, there was a role for a more distinct European defense
identity and for an expanded security role forthe CSCE. NATO's initial reaction to the end
of the cold war had been a distrust of these elements. Recent NATO decisions also indicated
that it was tr;ing to "save the threat," which, politically, did not seem to be realistic.
Several speakers emphasized that NATO was not, and had never been, strictly a military
alliance. It was, said an Italian, much more than a security alliance because the Communist
challenge was a global one, with ideological, social, and political, as well as military,
dimensions. But those other aspects of the threat had collapsed, and only the military threat
remained. So the political goals of the Alliance had to be redefined. The risks it faced were
different, wider risks, some of which were out-of-area.
A Spaniard argued that we should not be in a hurry to make changes, because
circumstances were changing so rapidly. There was a danger that, if new strategies were
decided upon too soon, they might prevent "the normal evolution of European political
integration and the construction of a European security element."
The European pillar. A number of speakers saw the further development of the
European community as being a key element in the strengthening of the European pillar. In
the past, observed an Irish speaker, the Iron Curtain had paradoxically provided a certain
stability for the development of the EC in the sense that it had indicated clear boundaries
within which development could take place. True neutrals stayed out of the Community,
and the limits ofgrowth were reasonably clear. Now the Community faced both widening
and deepening at the same time. It was important for the EC to define for itself a role in
defense, or it risked excluding true political union in the future. This was because the
widening process would produce new membership applications, and some of them would
contain caveats about how far members were willing to go in the context ofEuropean union.
Thus, it was crucial for the EC to develop goals which included security and defense.
71
72
A Germ.an agreed with this assessment, saying that there was a danger in the EC
enlarging before defining its political identity. The result would be a "diluted community."
The integration of the Eastern European counUies was supported by several speakers.
Said a Briton, they should be integrated into the security and trading future of Europe as
soon as possible. By bringing them into NATO, said another speaker from the U.K., we
would be giving them a "sort of security guarantee which was not a security guarantee."
The West-West link. The link between Europe and the U.S. and the American
presence in Europe were seen as continuing necessities by a number of participants. An
Italian saw a close link between the U.S. and Europe as being "a crucial element of stability
in the world." Said a Spaniard, the link must be permanent, even if the Soviet threat was
reduced. To view the development of a stronger European pillar as a threat to the
transatlantic link was mistake. Whatever European security dimension emerged, it would
have to be complementary with NATO.
An American speaker characterized the importance of the U.S.-Europe link as "the
only way to prevent the re-emergence of the struggle for dominance among European
nations in both the security and the political areas."
The dilemma facing Europe, said a Briton, was to erect a strong pillar without giving
American voters the impression that a U.S. military presence in Europe was not necessary.
A Dutch speaker agreed that Europe should not appear to the U.S. to be going its own way.
Several American speakers warned that it was not a foregone conclusion that the U.S.
would always want to provide the umbrella for Europe. Their willingness to do so, saidone
speaker, "depended on what happened under that umbrella." Said another American
speaker; the U.S. understood there would be change, but it wanted the right to be part of the
process.
A final participant from the U.S. observed that there was an emerging American
attitude, resulting from the decline of U.S. economic predominance and the apparent
lessening of the military threat, that questioned the traditional commitment to European
defense. The Europeans, meanwhile, had become so used to American hegemony that they
felt free to make proposals that appeared more forward-looking than the American posi-
tions. In this new atmosphere, it would be well for the Europeans to be careful of what they
recommended, as the U.S. might accept it.
--
vn. ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL THREATS TO THE ALLIANCE
Introductory Remarks
I.
The populations ofour counUies will lead in time rather than lag behind the military
reality. In the U.S., for example, there will be at least a 20 percent reduction in defense
spending. And that is the absolute minimum decrease that is possible. It was negotiated in
last year's budget agreement, and that was one of the reasons why President Bush signed
onto what proved to be a very unpopular-especially in his own political party-budget
agreement. He wanted to make sure we had a floor under defense spending. It is important
to understand that this floor exists only for the next three years, and that the notion of using
the remaining defense budget as a bank to fund other things has been rampant in the United
States for some time. Working out a sensible military and security strategy with the United
States has to take into account these economic and political realities. It is important that
people have that in mind in Europe when they talk about where the security relationship is
going.
The perception of a decreased threat will generate much more pressure to redefine
national security as economic security, and national security threats as economic security
threats. To some extent that is legitimate. Threats to each or all of our economies' growth
and the ability to provide rising standards of living to our population are certainly threats.
Threats that would hinder our economies in such a way as to threaten our legitimate national
security capabilities are also certainly legitimate threats.
It is likely that we will see a resurgence of economic nationalism that will lead to
increasing pressure for protectionism and far greater trade conflicts, as security and stability,
which have been the hallmarks ofdefense and foreign policy posture, increasingly come to
be defined as protecting the economic status quo ante. This includes entrenched economic
interests-the existing firms at the expense of new enUies into the market, current technolo-
gies over new innovations, orkeeping new technologies off the market to protect the owners
ofexisting ones. This kind of incipientredefinition ofeconomic security, which already has
a small but vocal minority force in the United States, is very costly and very dangerous
economically,and it is one of the legitimate threats to the Alliance.
The notion about where the international economy is going tends to evoke in people
in foreign ministries desires for new institutions to manage it. That is something that most
economists, regardless of their ideological stripe, tend to recoil from with horror. Because
a large part of the natural evolution and growth in our economy will proceed naturally if we
keep our markets open and well functioning. The single biggest economic problem we are
going to confront, and the kind of thing that is likely to cause problems for our foreign
relations and our military relations, will be substantial deteriorations in our economies. This
may take the form of something very dramatic and abrupt-a severe world-wide recession,
for example-or the threat of a gradual but inevitable loss of economic vitality, growth and
productivity. Some have alleged that this is inevitably the lot of the United States, that we'II
be surpassed by Europe and Japan. Ifeither of those things occur, they will put into place a
great many types of forces which could pose a threat to our alliance.
As a general historical statement, international economic cooperation in the last two.
or three decades has been far greater than it was in prior decades. And it has been generally
successful. So, we now ask what can be done to assist Eastern Europe, and also the
developing world, because many potential problems are coming our way economically and
politically from the developing world. The very simple answer is that the single most
73
74
important thing we can do, which will dwarfany conceivable amountoftechnical assistance
or direct financial assistance, is to sustain economic growth, and maintain and enhance and
expand the openness ofour economies. The real threats to these countries, as they develop
and try to make these transitions, really is the threat to our own growth and openness.
We have all been far too complacent about economic growth in the advanced
industrial economies. Perhaps that was because we had a very long economic expansion.
There has appeared to be the assumption in the OECD that the movement toward a more
integrated market in Europe would simply guarantee robust economic growth, not only
through 1992 but thereafter. 1992 was deemed to be a panacea, a magical elixir for
economies. And while undoubtedly much ofwhat goes on in that process will be good for
Europe's economies, especially for the poorer of the European economies, such as Spain or
Portugal, it is important to understand that there are no guarantees in the laws ofeconomics
and the nature of economic events. Governments have not been able to come up with any
foolproof insurance policies against major economic problems. Neither 1992 nor the North
America Free Trade Act ncir a successful Uruguay Round are guarantees. They are
important steps in the right direction for the nations involved; they will lead to progress; not
doing them would lead to a great deal of acrimony and a possible severe downturn in the
economy. But it has usually been almost impossible to foretell where the next world-wide
economic problem is going to come from. So the threats to growth and openness fall into
several categories, some of which are obvious and some of which are not.
First, bilateral trade frictions continue to be of concern, and there are an immense
number of them among all countries included in this room and many others, backed up
against a successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round. If the Uruguay Round fails, there
will be a substantial amount of bilateral trade friction, much of which has been put on hold
pending a successful conclusion ofthe Round. But it is also important to understand that the
Uruguay Round is not the end of that process. It is one more important step-a large step if
successfully done-a process in the right direction. But that will not be the end of concern
about growth and openness and trade friction.
Second, there is an anti-growth mentality ofpeople who believe that the status quo is
preferable to growth. This comes from a variety of quarters, and is most obvious and
extreme in the environmental movement, whose leaders think ofgrowth as antithetical to the
values they would like to impose on their fellow human beings. While an improved
environment is not free, it is costly. We can have sustained economic growth and a sensibly
improved environment, and there are ways to make the costs of a sensibly improved
environment bearable for our economies. But there are, in each ofour countries, some real
extreme environmentalists who really want to totally stop growth per seas a value in and of
itself. At times those particular groups have had some substantial political influence and
may again do so in the future.
Third, there is a fear of technology and innovation in relation to possible short-term
displacement and reallocation of existing labor. Despite the current recession in many
countries and despite the fact that much of Europe has a very high unemployment rate, we
are going to see in the United States, Canada, and Western Europe over the next couple of
decades, a demography that suggests it is going to be very difficult to have rapid labor force
expansion unless people work much later in life than they are currently choosing to do. That
is going to mean either substantial pressure for immigration, or pressure for labor-saving
technical change, and it is going to mean that the onus of economic growth is going to be
placed ever more on capital formation, innovation, entrepreneurship, and advanced technol-
ogy. We have seen specific episodes of this in various quarters, but it will become more
intense because we are approaching an era in which the elderly portion ofthe populations of
Western Europe, the United Sates and Japan, is going to grow very rapidly in the next couple
r
of decades. That will also put interesting pressure on public social insurance programs, on
capital markets, on saving instruments, on private insurance programs, and on the structure
of families, which increasingly will see four generations alive simultaneously. And that is
going to create strains on many ofour existing institutions.
As these different types of changes occur, one of the great lessons of economic
history is that mankind is adaptable,and has been able to take advantage of technical change
and innovation to create substantial improvements in standards of living. There is a great
temptation to resist that and to set up bureaucratic organizations to try to manage things.
Sometimes this is for noble reasons, and sometimes it may well be necessary and desirable.
But we should try to realize that internationalization and globalization of the economy is
primarily a good thing, not a threat, and should be allowed to proceed at its own pace.
Regarding Japan, we have a great stake in an outward-looking, open Japan. It is not
easy to negotiate with the Japanese, and there are some serious bilateral frictions we all have
and we all work on. But it would be a tremendous threat to the world economy and world
stability if Japan turns inward and isn't integrated into the greater global community,
beyond just exporting its products.
Thee are two other things worth mentioning. One is the oil market. It seems to be
quiescent at the moment, but one could conceive of a time a decade from now when there
would be another massive disruption in the Gulf. For the very foreseeable future, for the
nextquarter century, oureconomies are going to heavily depend on oil from the Gulf, where
two-thirds of the world's proven reserves are. Even if we all decided to go much more
rapidly than our populations seem to be willing to allow us in nuclear technology or
something else to generate our energy, we are going to be relying heavily on oil from the
Gulf for two or three decades at least. So the Gulf is one area where there could be threats.
We did very well this last time around; hopefully that could be done if something happened
again.
Turning to the U.S. economy, which has been in recession, there is a good likelihood
that, in the technical sense, the decline has ceased and a rebound has begun. Only time will
tell. It is unlikely to be robust for many reasons, including continued problems in the
availability of credit, partly due to the regulation ofour financial institutions; an impending
large fiscal drag coming from our state and local systems, and so on. Much more a matter
of concern is our long-term economic growth, our productivity growth. While the U.S. has
the highest absolute level of productivity and the highest standard of living in the world, its
productivity growth rate has notbeen all itcould or should be. Without a renewed emphasis
on the factors and forces that lead to enhancing economic growth, some of these concerns
about the U.S. looking over its shoulder at Japan will begin to influence our population and
enter into our foreign relations much more than they do now.
Much of the rest of the world is also in recession. It is doubtful that several other
economies in recession willbe out as soon as the U.S., and there is likely to be a substantial
slow-down in some of the countries that are still doing well.
Introductory Remarks
11.
As far as economies are concerned-economic policy, fiscal policy, and particularly
monetary policy-cooperation amongst the members of the Alliance has very much
improved over the last 17 to 18 years. since the break-down of the Bretton Woods system.
The G-7 was established in 1973, and among the finance ministers involved were two who
went on to become leaders of government. They continued the G-7 cooperation.
75
76
As far as today's financ~ ministers are concerned, the cooperation is still very close
and has much improved over the years. We do not need an institutionalization of the G-7;
we should leave it as it is, as far as the G-7 finance ministers and central bank governors are
concerned. We have enough institutions in the field of economic and fiscal and monetary
policy.
First of all we have the IMF which, after a long period of stagnation in the 70s, has
become, together with the World Bank, the leading international institution for coordination
and cooperation. There are now 55 countries under IMF programs, so the IMF is a kind of
world government. It plays a very helpful role in the coordination process to prepare the G-
7 meetings.
We also have the G-10,which does notplay a very significantrole as far as the finance
ministers are concerned, but plays a very useful role amongst central bankers. The G-10
central bank governors meet every month; and cooperate very closely. But it is not in the
press; it is in the background, which is appropriate. The G-10 has played a very useful role
in the last 10-15 years in many areas. For instance, when the debt crisis started in 1982, it
organized a bridge credit for Mexico within hours, juston the telephone. The G-10 is a very
efficient group. One very recent example is the capital adequacy rules which were agreed
upon.
What we need is close coordination ofour policies. Coordination does not mean that
everybody is doing the same thing at the same time. This is especially true with respect to
the very recent dispute on interest rates, which was no threat to the Alliance, but caused a
little tension within the Alliance. It is widely recognized and acknowledged that different
circumstances need different policies.
The United States is still in a recession and it wants low interest rates. Germany, on
the other hand, is in a completely different situation. West Germany, which is 90 percent of
united Germany, economically speaking, is enjoying a very strong boom, with four or five
percent real growth. Germany has a dramatic increase in its budget deficit-up to five
percent ofthe GNP this year-very unfavorable rate settlements, and inflationary pressures,
so it would be inappropriate to lower interest rates. Germany has few problems in exchange
rates. We have seen inconvenient volatility in exchange markets over the lastyears. But the
dollar/D-mark/ECU exchange rate is not of the same relevance as it was in the 70s. In the
dollar area, and in Europe, trade within the area has become much more relevant. In the case
of Germany, for instance, almost 70 percent of foreign trade is now within the EEC. The
instruments to hedge risks have been developed to an extent which makes it much easier
today for businesses to cover this kind of risk. Europe enjoys very stable exchange rates
within the Europe market systems, which is good news.
The only bad news in this context may be the GATT negotiations. The European
position seems to be rather protectionist and not very much in line with the liberal traditions
we have developed in some European countries after the war. This is particularly true in
agriculture. It is very positive that we were able to keep markets-open after the breakdown
ofthe Bretton Woods system in 1973, in spite oftwo oil crises, in spite ofthe debt crisis, and
in spite of many other tensions. On balance, world trade amongst the developed countries
has developed quite favorably, and there is no reason why that should not be the case in the
future.
The economic and monetary future ofEurope has developed much further than most
people are aware of. This is certainly the case if we look at the markets. The markets are
more important than the institutional changes which are always in the limelight. The
markets in Europe have developed very well towards economic and monetary union, the
classical definition of which is a region without any restrictions on the movement of goods
and services, people, and capital. This is one element of an economic and monetary union:
I
I
I
!
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
\
absolute freedom oftransactions amongst the members. The other elemenrofan economic
and monetary union is fixed exchange rates which, in the last stage of an economic and
monetary union, become irreversibly fixed. This means that the national currencies are
becoming substitutes in a system with universally fixed exchange rates; i.e., the French
franc is the same as the D-mark, etc. From there it is only one small, but very far-reaching
step, to one single currency.
Ifwe look at the markets for goods and services, it is veryobvious that there are many
restrictions left within the EC. The 1992 program will remove the last restrictions which
still exist and lead to a more level playing field. This doesn't mean everything must be
harmonized; the markets can do the job. But we have to make some progress. As far as
goods and services are concerned, we are moving very fast towards a single market without
restrictions. As far as people are concerned, some but not all countries have agreed to
remove all border controls.
The third element is the monetary integration. There also we have made enormous
progress and are very close to a monetary union amongst a group of countries in Europe,
where changes in exchange rates for the foreseeable future are not envisaged. This is very
close to a monetary union. This group ofcurrencies is becoming larger and larger in a fixed
exchange rate system, starting with those who had narrow margins amongst their currencies
from the beginning: France, Germany, the Benelux countries, Denmark, and Ireland. Italy
joined the club of narrow exchange margins more than a year ago, and has so far been able
to defend this narrow margin. On the other hand, Italy is still a little bit out of line as far as
inflation is concerned. Their inflation is significantly higher than the rest ofthe group. And
Italy has the highest budget deficit of the group (more than ten percent of GDP), which
makes it more and more difficult for Italy to stay in this narrow-margin group without losing
competitiveness.
In a second group are Britain and Spain, which have a wider margin, so they can still
use the exchange rate instrument for adjustment of imbalances. Then there are two other
countries which do not participate in the exchange rate mechanisms: Portugal and Greece.
Portugal willjoin very soon. There is also afourth group, consistingofcountries which have
linked their currency to the ECU, or to the D-mark: Austria, Sweden, Norway, and Finland.
So the EMS, the fixed exchange rate system, is becoming bigger and bigger, and more
important for world trade. This has some relevance for the future of international monetary
systems.
This will continue, provided we can maintain the standard ofprice stability in Europe
which we have achieved. This, and the convergence of economic development among the
countries with narrow exchange rate margins, was and is the basis for the functioning ofthat
system. This refers directly to the D-mark, which has provided an anchor ofstability for the
system, and cannot be taken for granted. We have to try very hard in Germany to provide
this anchor in the future. The preconditions for that certainly are becoming more difficult,
with the budget deficit, trade surplus, etc. The Bundesbank will do everything it can to
maintain this role as an anchor of stability. But there is always a risk in all countries that, in
such circumstances, the central bank monetary policy will be overburdened. We can decide
only on interest rates and liquidity, but not on fiscal debts and wage settlements.
There is a second element, which is the institutional side. That is what is negotiated
in the intra-governmental conferences on political union, defense, and the creation of an
economic and monetary union. What we are really trying to do in these conferences is to
create the institutional and legal framework for common decision-making. The real issue is
that decisions not be taken by national institutions but that we either create institutions to
take common decisions or move the decision-making process on the national level up to the
community level.
77
78
This means that the participants have to be ready at one point in the process to give up
very important rights, including the right to decide-in the case of a monetary union-on
interest rates and liquidity, which has consequences for fiscal policy in other areas as well.
The Committee of Central Bank Governors has finalized a very far-reaching proposal for a
statute for such an institution, which would enable the European Community to make
decisions in monetary policy on a common community level. It remains to be seen if the
governments and parliaments of the European states are really ready to give up these
sovereign rights to a supranational institution. It is a long process. It was already decided
that this would not happen before the end of this century. So we should not expect common
decision-making in monetary policy very soon. The new institution, which shall be
established on January l, 1994and which may carry the name European Central Bank is not
the institution for common decision-making. It has already been decided that this institution
will not have the rights to decide on interest rates, etc. It is only an institution which is
responsible for the coordination of monetary policy.
There is a final aspect we should have in mind when we talk about the future of
Europe and which will finally change the face of Europe very significantly. That is the
widening ofthe EC. Austria will soon be the next full memberof the EC. There will be other
countries. Some have applied, others will. The most important question in this context is
what are we going to do with the countries in Eastern Europe: Poland, Hungary, Czechoslo-
vakia. We should not try to block the membership of these countries. They are European
countries and the European Community is not a West European Community, it is a
European Community. Countries like Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia are old
European countries. The EC will change its character, and we have to think about what kind
of Europe we want We will have to include all European countries. Even Turkey is
applying for membership, but there is a question of whether Turkey is a European country.
The EC will have to become much more federalistic, and we may have .to envisage different
degrees of integration.
Discussion
The role of the G-7. A number of speakers addressed the recommendation of an
American that the G-7's role be expanded to deal with the whole range of issues facing the
developed world, and that this role be institutionalized. An important rationale for this
proposal, said its author, was that the G-7 already addressed the full range of geopolitical
issues, economic, political, and strategic.
But, said a Dutchman, we already had suitable institutions, including, GATI, the
IMF, and the World Bank, among others. To some extent, they were being weakened by the
G-7. ·It was the view ofa Briton that the G-7 should not be made responsible for the totality
of problems facing the developed world. There were simply too many problems to be
included on the G-7 agenda.
Yet one ofthe reasons put forward in favorof the G-7, namely the inclusion ofJapan,
was compelling in the opinion of another speaker from the U.K. Because of the risk of
Japan's turning inward, there was no alternative to using the G-7 for political and strategic
consultation. This could be done without setting up new secretariats or institutions. There
was a real danger of serious Japanese resentment at constantly being asked to contribute
financially to international activity, peace-keeping, and Third World development, while at
the same time being blocked from full political and strategic consultation with the West.
GAIT and the multilateral trading system. The successful completion of the
Uruguay Round was seen by many as being crucially important. An Italian expressed
f
l
concern about ·what he saw as a potential for regionalization, as Europe increasingly
focussed on trade with Eastern Europe, the U.S. on North American trade, and Japan on
trade in the Pacific area. We could arrest this tendency toward regionafization by finishing
the Uruguay Round as soon as possible so as to strengthen the multilateral trading system.
An American agreed that regionalism was a concern, but he commented that U.S.
fears of a "Fortress Europe" had been largely mollified. The intention of the U.S.
government in seeking a North American free trade area was to expand openness within the
continentand certainly not to decrease it between North America and Europe or Asia. It was
intended to be complementary to the expansion and liberalization of multilateral world
trade, not a substitute for it.
Speaking from the European perspective on this issue, a Gennan said that the same
kind ofintegration was going inside Europe. We did have to be careful not to create either
aFortressEurope or a Fortress America. Europe, in the speaker's view, had avoided this risk
by liberalizing its capital markets. ,
It was a Briton's particular concern that, in spite of its benefits, international
competition could have consequences that were "profound and destructive" to working
people. It was reasonable for those who had to pay the price of this to expect their
governments to pursue policies which fairly balanced interests. Too often, governments did
not do enough to achieve free and fair competition.
In this vein, an American argued that free trade relationships had to be managed in a
way that was "less destructive to working people." He cited the Multi-Fiber agreement as
an example of this that, while not perfect, had been fairly effective.
This touched off a debate about the pros and cons of the Multi-Fiber Agreement. A
speaker from Ireland called it "one of the most perfidious mechanisms in the world of free
trade." It had not served developing countries at all and had denied them access to the
world's richest markets. A Briton countered that the Multi-Fiber Agreement "had not
intolerably restrained competition." Rather, it had made competition more fair than it would
otherwise have been. The speaker commented that "its sins (were) nothing compared to the
Common Agricultural Policy."
That remark prompted several interventions on the Common Agricultural Policy. A
Canadian opined that agriculture was the most importantissue at the Uruguay Round. Much
progress on a variety of issues had been made in the negotiations, but it was in danger of
being lost unless we could "get over the hurdle of agricultural problems.'' The cost to the
OECD of agricultural subsidies and support has been $300 billion. A Gennan commented
that Europe's agricultural policy was becoming unsustainable because ofits great expense,
which amounted to two-thirds ofthe EC budget. It was also not sustainable because the need
for the EC to open its market to agricultural products from Eastern Europe, where agricul-
ture was particularly important, though productivity very low.
On the broader subject of trade between the EC and Eastern Europe, an American
observed that the value of this trade was currently around five percent of total EC trade and
was predicted to rapidly grow to 25 percent. This reorientation ofEastern Europe toward the
West would be at the expense of the developing world and posed a problem for the West that
would have to be addressed. A Gennan agreed with this, saying that, while the developed
countries had enjoyed many benefits of the increase in world trade, the developing countries
had been largely left out.
Widening the European Community. Several speakers expressed support for
widening the European Community by admitting, as rapidly as possible, the other countries
ofEurope, including those in the East This prompted a British participant to warn that such
widening "should not be at the expense of deepening." It was important to push ahead with
the adoption of measures to make the EC stronger, such as completion of the monetary
union.
79
0
In the context of this part of the discussion, the issue was raised as to whether Turkey
constituted a European country, which certainly had a bearing on its application to join the
Community. A German suggested that the issue was complicated by the fact that Turkey
was an Islamic country. A Turkish participant responded that, "ifTurkey was good enough
for the defense of Europe, then it was good enough for political and economic integration
into Europe."
The U.S. economy. A Canadian voiced worry about budget deficits and debt in
general, and of the U.S. in particular. To what extent did the alarming growth in the U.S.
debt and its apparently out of control deficit undermine its capacity to lead the West?
To an American speaker, the problem was not so much the size of the deficit as what
the money was being spent on. Because ofenormous expenditures on such things as health
care and interest, the U.S. was not investing in the future, and thus faced the prospect of
falling behind competitively. Another American warned that American voters were
increasingly asking why more of the nation's budgetary resources were not being spent on
the domestic agenda.
Responding to these questions and statements, a third American argued that there was
"an immense misunderstanding of the U.S. deficit," and that, for a variety of technical
reasons, the deficit situation was not as serious as many believed it to be.
* * *
At the conclusion of the discussion, a Canadian participant offered the following
poem, by A.P. Herbert:
MUSINGS ON CURRENCY - 1950
Will nobody ravish the dollar?
Why from rape should the rouble have rest?
Is there no wily Turk who will carnally lurk
And seduce a piastre with zest?
Must the pengo remain unpolluted?
Is all lust for the lire quite dead?
Will none for a lark take a mark in the park?
Or debauch a fair dinar in bed?
Perhaps I am speaking too frankly,
But why should Britannia be mocked?
By pesetas and francs lying virgin in banks,
While sterling's continually blocked.
!
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
I
I
I
VIIl. CURRENT EVENTS: SOUTH AFRICA
Introductory Remarks
I.
Millions of South Africans, black and white, are no doubt staying home waiting for
Mandela and de Klerk to send them direction, peace, tranquility, economic security-free of
racial tension so they can get on with their lives. My suspicion is that Mandela wakes up
many a night and longs for the solitude and confinementofRobin Island, and de Klerk, from
time to time, probably wishes they were cellmates.
My first trip to South Africa was in 1976, a month after the Soweto riots. I went as a
Director of the Xerox Corporation to see for myself and to test my views on disinvestment.
What I remember most about that memorable trip was my first encounter with the South
African government in the person of the customs officer who asked, as I passed through, not
whether I possessed guns, ammunition, explosives, or drugs. He asked me what books was
I bringing into the country.
My last trip there was as a memberof the Secretary ofState's Advisory Committee on
South Africa, when I was met by a high-ranking government official, taken to the VIP room,
and treated as if I were coming to a Bilderberg meeting. On my first trip there in 1976 I met
with low level government officials who were barely civil. On my last trip, I met with the
head of state, the secretary of foreign affairs, members of Parliament, and was cordially
received.
In direct response to internal and external pressures there is no question but that South
Africa has changed and is changing, but there is the nagging question as to what the end shall
be. Government by its very nature is a responsive-reactive process. The reforms in South
Africa, informal and formal, are not the result of government initiative, but are responses to
the outrage of the world community and domestic pressures to begin a process of righting
historic wrongs.
Last year the South African Government repealed the Separate Amenities Act. This
year it has repealed the discriminatory Land Acts and Group Areas Act. Dialogue and
negotiation have replaced persecution and repression as government policy for resolving
South Africa's many problems. The government ended the State ofEmergency last year and
has permitted free political activity and an open press. The government has had consider-
able progress in releasing political prisoners and arranging for the return of South African
exiles. Nelson Mandela and Oliver Tambo are the most celebrated examples of these two
government policies.
Although formal negotiations have .not yet begun, de Klerk, on February first,
endorsed the ANC's call for an all parties conference to discuss how to move into
negotiations. The timetable for beginning constitutional talks is unlikely to begin until the
second half of this year. The ANC is working toward an August date for a Patriotic Front
Conference for opposition groups, and it wants to draw other opposition groups into the
process to work out common positions. The Inkatha Freedom Party, led by C]liefButhelezi,
has agreed to take part in the all parties conference. The Pan Africanist Congress has hinted
that it might participate.
Clearly, violence between the Zulus and the ANC has severely tested the peace
process. On April 5th the ANC issued an ultimatum to the government on violence and
demanded that the government take a number of actions by May 9th, or it would break off
negotiations. The ultimatum by the ANC may have prompted the government to speed up
the release of political prisoners and to intensify efforts to control the violence.
81
82
By the end of May, de Klerkreached agreements with Mandela and Buthelezi. The
government agreed to phase out the all-male township hostels, often used to house Zulus
outside of their native Natal province. It agreed to insure police impartiality and to ban the
carrying in public of traditional weapons.
In response to progress in the peace process, the European Community has lifted its
bans on new investment and on iron and steel and gold coin imports from South Africa.
Other countries in Europe, Africa and elsewhere have taken similar moves to loosen
restrictions on trade and contact with South Africa, some publicly, some not.
The United States is bound by the provisions of the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid
Act of 1986, which sets five conditions for lifting sanctions. The government of South
Africa has met the following conditions: (1) the unbanning of democratic political parties,
(2) agreement to enter into good faith negotiations, (3) lifting the state of emergency, (4)
repeal of the Group Areas Act. The government must still release all prisoners persecuted
for their political beliefs or detained unduly without trial. And it must repeal the Population
Registration Act. If these conditions are met, the US legislative sanctions automatically
terminate.
Thusly, the following issues are raised by the progress that has been made:
I. South Africa's 30 million black majority could only vote on the parliamentary issues
of reform with their feet-their blood, sweat and tears ofprotest, because they cannot vote.
2. The reforms track almost exactly the preconditions listed in the U.S. legislation for
lifting sanctions--a response to international pressure.
3. Has implementation of these reforms been impeded by tactical stonewalling by the
government? Have complex and laborious bureaucratic obstacles been established to block
full implementation? For example, in repealing the Land and Group Areas Act, the
government is permitting local communities to institute their own "norms and standards"
which would carry the force of law.
4. Are the reforms geared toward breaking the isolation imposed by the international
community, while conceding as little as possible on the ground? Is the goal here to abolish
apartheid while maintaining white power-to liberalize without fully democratizing?
5. How strong is Nelson Mandela physically and politically? Has Winnie Mandela's
conviction eroded his influence? If he gets sick or dies, who becomes the symbolic and
authentic leader?
6. How will the anti-apartheid movement resolve the issue of leadership between
returning exiles and those leaders who remained in South Africa?
7. How will the reforms affect the momentum of the international anti-apartheid
movement, and what form will that momentum take? Will it go the way of Reverend Leon
Sullivan?
8. Can ways be found to stimulate the South African economy-the key to the
economy ofall ofAfrica--0n the theory that good economic times will facilitate the process
of change?
9. Is one-man, one-vote possible in the new constitution, while protecting the rights of
the white minority, or is some form ofpower-sharing the answer, short term? Is the deal here
to trade what has so far been a white monopoly of power, which can no longer be
maintained, for a white veto over how power is used?
10. And finally, will the international community assume that the reforms are enough
and go back to business as usual, or will it stay the course until change is complete?
I do not have the answers. I doubt that Mandela and de Klerk have them all. Answers
notwithstanding, there is freedom in the air in South Africa-freedom for blacks and
freedom for whites. And the leaders, de Klerk and Mandela-if they win, South Africa
wins, and ifthey lose, South Africa loses. And if they in fact really lose, then God help South
Africa.
~
Introductory Remarks
II.
I am basically optimistic about South Africa, and my optimism is based on three
things.
First is the quality of leadership. It is a mistake to impute motives to de Klerlc on the
reason he is dismantling apartheid. No one should underestimate the great courage that is
required of him to do this. It is not only the repulsive system of apartheid that he is tearing
down, it is the entire history of racial relations in that country. In the 350 years the whites
have been there, there has not been any institutionalized system ofracial fairness at all. The
closest that they seem to have come to it is the attempt at multi-racial democracy under
Buthelezi's inspiration in KwaNatal. And we shouldn't lay all of this on the Boers. Even
otherwise distinguished English governors like Milner and Rhodes were, in this respect, not
distinguished at all. '
Mandela is equally clearly a very widely and justly respected leader. He has borne up
with a great stoicism under his unjust imprisonment of 27 years. But like anyone who has
been out of the play for so long, he sometimes seems like a gramophone record stuck at the
point he was removed. Some of these dreary platitudes of his about nationalization of
business and his protestations of friendship for Castro and Kaddafi and the IRA and Arafat
really sound like the utterances of a Flat Earth Society. He is a sincere moderate, and de
Klerk wants to help him prevail on behalfof the forces of moderation within the ANC, who
are being sorely challenged.
Buthelezi has equally been persecuted by the South Africans for refusing to become a
sort of Uncle Tom, and for declining to negotiate with the Pretoria government while
Mandela was incarcerated. He's been reviled by the international left for imposing
sanctions on the so-called arms struggle. He is a very distinguished leader of a very strong
group.
The second reason for optimism is a matter that has been commented on throughout
this Bilderberg meeting in other contexts: the decline of the international left. There surely
is a good deal of suffering and misery in the black townships and squatters' camps in South
Africa. But there are still large numbers of people pressing against the borders of South
Africa, seeking entry. They are fugitives from the shambles of some of the front-line states,
self-professedly Marxist, and the impending likely victory of Savimbi in Angola (a victory
that might have occurred many years ago if the United States Congress had not pulled the
rug out from under Henry Kissinger and the President he served). These facts have not gone
unnoticed by the black population of South Africa.
The third and most important reason for optimism about South Africa is that the
principal political and sociological fact about that country is that it cannot be governed
without the two strongest groups in its demographic patchwork: the Afrikaaners and the
Zulus. And the Afrikaaners finally have renounced their attempt to impose a system based
upon racial arrogance. Neither the Afrikaaners nor the Zulus will accept a system of the
extreme left. In those circumstances, the pathway towards a regime of reconciliation and
moderation is not clear and certainly will not be easy. But the extremes, for those reasons,
will be avoided.
No one should underestimate the tenacity of the Boers. They are not like other
European colonists in Africa. They have been there for 350 years; they embarked on their
great trek in 1838 in part because they declined to live in a British Empire that had abolished
slavery. When the British Empire tried to gather them in at the end of the last century, they
produced a war that lasted three years, until the British injected one trained soldier for every
man, woman and child of the Boer population. They burned all the crops and fields, and
83
84
herded the whole population, or practically all ofit, intodetention centers. The Boers are not
less tenacious now, as far as can be judged, and they are, in African tenns, a military and
police super state. Fortunately, this power is being directed in a very positive direction, for
motives that are credible, at least for the present.
A few predictions can be made: First, the Inkatha party of Buthelezi, and Buthelezi
himself, have to be recognized. It is all very well for the ANC to invite him to a patriotic
front meeting and give ultimatums about the disanning ofZulus, because they happen not to
be in their homeland of KwaNatal. But the fact that Buthelezi has been systematically
denied-not by Mandela, who appears to be well disposed towards him-but·by the more
extreme elements in this fissiparous monolith of the ANC. He has been denied his rightful
status as the third player in the political stage in that country, and this should stop. A good
deal of the violence in the townships would cease ifthe ANC would cease this pretense that
all tribal and political movements have been subsumed into it
As to the ANC, it is coming up to a conference, and we will have to get some
indication from them whether they are moving to the left or staying somewhat in the center.
It is not clear. De Klerk would certainly like to help Mandela and the moderates within the
ANC, but it is absurd for the ANC to advocate retention of sanctions, while advocating
increased investment and job creation. It is absurd for the ANC leaders to advocate
sanctions while they can be seen every night on television being conveyed around in
elongated late model Mercedes-Benzes. It is absurd for them to pretend to have any capacity
to conduct an arms struggle or any disposition to do it. In twenty-eight years, they haven't
blown up one bridge; they have killed a couple of settlers near Botswana. They are not an
effective military force and we should perhaps be thankful for that.
On the question ofsanctions, beyond this point and beyond the definitive dismember-
ment ofapartheid in a couple of months, they and the continued quarantine ofSouth Africa
do not punish the racially offensive people. They punish those of every group, and every
ethnic group, who have courageously torn down apartheid. And that surely is not the
purpose of sanctions.
Finally, what about the constitution? De Klerk has said that he plans a huge
devolution of power to the states. So it will be, to the maximum degree possible, not ethnic
groups being governed by other ethnic groups, but self government at a local level. The
central legislatures will have two houses: one man/one vote, and the other supposedly
modeled on the US Senate, having equal weighting for each so-called culture. Now that will
have to be very delicately defined not to replicate some of the evils of the previous system.
But it is not just for the protection of whites. The East Indians are frightened of the Zulus,
the Xhosas are frightened of the Zulus, the whites are frightened of the Xhosas. The Zulus
appear not to be frightened by anybody, but don't much want to be told what to do. The
system is not one man, one vote. It is, in de Klerk's phrase, a vote of equal value for
everyone. And, on such a system as that, it would be the most exemplary democracy in the
world, except for the countries represented in this room, and not more than ten others.
The polls now show 40% for a united ANC, a little under 30% for the Nationalists-
the governing party-and 15% for Inkatha. And de Klerk and Mandela are running
approximately even in the whole country as the most esteemed politicians in the country.
This is a remarkable ac-hievement for all of these people.
For Mandela to be there at all after what he has been through, and for Buthelezi to be
so close to holding the balance ofpower, considering how he has been reviled by the foreign
and domestic left; and de Klerk to be even with Mandela as the most respected politician in
the country is certainly more progress than one would have dared to hope for when we last
addressed this subject at Bilderberg in Gleneagles in 1987.
..--
Discussion
Current developments in South Africa. An American who had recently returned
from a visit to South Africa was impressed by the progress being made toward real refonn.
It was his fifth visit during a 20-year period, and he had found, for the first time, a "positive
face on people of all walks of life within the country." For the first time in South Africa's
history, all the various groups were participating in the government and were working
toward a mutually agreed upon constitution.
To get to that point, many steps remained to be taken. First, arrangements for a
constitutional assembly had to be decided upon. Would the participants be appointed or
elected? In any event, there was no doubt that there would be a constitutional assembly,
probably later this year.
Meanwhile, of course, there were serious problems to be overcome, including the
violence in the black townships, the poor economic status of the blacks, the high cost of
housing, and a great deal of unemployment.
At present, the Zulus, led by Buthelezi, appeared to be working closely with the
government. The role, and the future of, the ANC was something ofa question mark at this
point. How much did the ANC and Mandela represent black opinion? To what extentcould
Mandela lead, and who might his successor be?
With all of this uncertainty, there still was great reason for optimism. The various
groups were in a mood to reach a constitutional settlement. There appeared to be a
grassroots level government developing in the townships and municipalities, separate from
the national government, but working well with it. This presented great hope for the
development of a multi-racial government in South Africa.
Several speakers commentedon the ANC-Zulu situation. ACanadian pointed out that
it would take a long time for social customs to change. There could be no quick fix. It was
clear that the Zulus would not let the Xhosas, who mostly made up the ANC, dominate the
negotiations. It was an Austrian speaker's view that the West should not favor Buthelezi and
be more sympathetic toward the Zulus because they appeared to be more moderate. We
should not contribute toward tribal rivalries. We should and must accept whatever was
designated by the majority of blacks and their tribal representatives.
In this regard, another Canadian agreed that we should not reassert tribalism, but we
should not pretend that it did not exist. It was an important part of the make-up ofthe people
of South Africa. We should not forget, for example, that Buthelezi was not just a political
leader; he was also a tribal chieftain. As to the ANC, the speaker continued, de Klerk was
wary of its connection with the South African Communist Party.
An American voiced the opinion that Mandela and Buthelezi would be able to find an
accommodation. On the question of Mandela's links to people like Castro and Arafat, it
should not be forgotten that these people were his friends in his years in prison, and it was
understandable that he should acknowledge that friendship. On the general situation, it was
true that de Klerk had shown great courage and leadership. But leadership without
consensus would not get him far, and courage without support would lead to defeat.
The role ofsanctions. An American raised the issue ofsanctions and the role they had
played in influencing reform in South Africa. What lessons had the West learned about the
use of sanctions in support of moral values? Certainly, human rights was a growing part of
the West's policy agenda, and economic sanctions were a legitimate tool in seeking human
rights aims. In the case of South Africa, sanctions certainly played a role in bringing about
change. It was the banking sanctions that were the most effective, because they impacted the
South African government's ability to deal with internal problems. They were effective
85
86
because they were multilateral. The unilateral sanctions were not· particularly effective.
They did not stop the flow ofgoods to South Africa. As far as the U.S. was concerned, they
were mainly a matter of U.S. domestic policy. Certain other countries, notably Japan,
declared sanctions but then circumvented them through various subterfuges. In general,
when applying sanctions, it was necessary to have a high degree of solidarity among
countries. Otherwise, sanctions would not be effective.
A German speaker elabOrated on the role of banking sanctions. They had had a big
effect on South Africa as far as credit flows were concerned. But the end result was, in an
ironic way, favorable to South Africa. Without !"MF bank credits, South Africa had to
pursue "prudent and restrictive policies." It was forced to repay its debt, and its debt level
was thus substantially reduced. It had pursued a tight money policy, so inflation, while high,
was on the way down. Capital inflows had started again; interest rates were lower than in
most developing countries, and, in general, the financial outlook was favorable.
Even ifsanctions had had an uneven economic effect, said an Austrian, they had had
a great moral effect. South Africa had felt excluded from Western society, and this sense of
moral ostracisms had had a profound effect. A Canadian agreed that the greatest impact had
been on the pride of South Africans, but, at this point, we should perhaps bear in mind the
comment of former Prime Minister Thatcher about "making things better by making them
worse."
Said an American, the debate about sanctions should be put behind us. We needed a
debate that went beyond sanctions, beyond apartheid. There was not a great deal of time, as
South Africa was nearing a "tipping point" as regarded violence. The real question for
Westerners was how to convince South Africa to move toward reform, rather than how to
push them toward reform.
A speaker from Canada argued that "the punitive approach had become outdated."
Now, no single factor was as important in bringing about reform as economic growth and the
development ofa prosperous black middle class. The West should abolish what was left of
sanctions and encourage investment as well as sport and cultural exchange. The support of
the international community was essential for de Klerk; he could not achieve his goals
without substantial foreign aid and investment.
Developments in the rest of Africa, and beyond. A Portuguese speaker said that
South Africa could not be isolated from all that was happening in the region of Southern
Africa. There had been a weakening ofSoviet influence in the area. The achievement ofa
peace settlementin Angola had been made possible by cooperation between the U.S. and the
Soviet Union. This was important to the whole area. Another factor influencing the region
was the policy of South Africa to destabilize its neighbors, which presumably would now
stop.
Other speakers felt that developments in South Africa would have repercussions
beyond the region and on the rest of the continent. This, in turn would be important to
Europe, said a French speaker, as the fate of Europe was closely related to that of Africa.
The reform process in South Africa could also have an important influence on the rest
of the continent.
IX. CURRENT EVENTS: YUGOSLAVIA
Introductory Remarks
I.
There are nine different players on the political chessboard in Yugoslavia: six
republics, two autonomous regions, and one central government. The six republics are
Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia/Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia, and Macedonia. The two
autonomous regions are Kosovo and Vojvodina. The central government has the reputation
of being a government without a country.
The inter-relationships between those various chess players has been historically
complicated. Serbs and Croats are the main antagonists and, even in this century, we've
seen a lot ofatrocities and terrorisin carried out between Serbs and Croats-carried out by
military or para-military formations on either side, on the grounds of strict nationalistic
approaches. We have seen pictures and TV reports showing people in uniforms not
belonging to the military or the police. Those are historic uniforms of the military
formations of traditional nationalistic groups of both Serbia and Croatia.
So far, the one and only politician who succeeded in establishing political unity in this
melting pot was Tito. He did that on the grounds ofa common enemy during World War II,
namely the German army, which the Yugoslavs, led by Tito, fought in a guerilla war. He
succeeded in establishing unity based on the Communist party, and on the grounds of a
police state order. After Tito's death, disintegration started~ slowly and gradually, but with
no turning point so far. Disintegration has been fostered by a silly political rotation system
that Tito left to his successors. This system meant that in the so-called State Presidium, the
chairman should be changed, and had to come from a different republic, every year.
This rotation system has led to political paralysis and ultimately to economic disaster.
The Slovenes and the Croats are the driving forces behind the will to change that multina-
tional system, with the chiefaim being to reach independence from the central government.
The Yugoslav Central government is often wrongly thought by outsiders to be the
same as the government of Serbia. This is probably due to the fact that the capital of the
whole country is Belgrade, and the capital of Serbia also is Belgrade. So when one speaks
of Belgrade, one does not always distinguish between the Serbian government in Belgrade
or the Yugoslav government in Belgrade. This is very important, because many people
think the Slovenes and the Croats wish to get away from the Communist government in
Belgrade.
The government in Belgrade is a Communist one if it refers to Serbia, but it is not a
Communist one if it refers to Yugoslavia. During the last two years there were free
elections. Only Serbia and Montenegro went on to have Communist majorities. The
Communist Party decreased to marginal importance in Slovenia, Croatia, and even Bosnia.
More disintegration continues.
So what are the prospects? First, Yugoslavia in its presentform is probably not going
to continue. There is no indication thatSerbs and Croats can agree on a single item about the
future. There are no indications that they agree on anything. Slovenia, on June 26, will most
probably declare independence. When Slovenia declares independence, this will be a
crucial development in terms of how the other republics react. The Slovenes definitely
would ask for recognition, and for economic and financial aid and support, because they are
a country ofonly two million people. 65 percentoftheir exports go to Yugoslavia so, if they
get out of Yugoslavia, most probably those exports won't continue any longer.
IfSlovenia gets out, the question will come up immediately: what is Croatia going to
do? And Croatia is a much more complicated republic. Slovenia's population is made up
87
38
mostly of Slovenes. But there are some 800,000 Serbs living in Croatia. And the Serbian
President, Milosevic, very frequently has declared that he is not going to let his Serbs go
away. And when it comes to Bosnia, many more problems would come up because, in
Bosnia, there are not only Bosnians, but also Serbs and Croats. These mixed populations
greatly complicate the issue of independence for Yugoslavia's republics.
Westerners generally have the view that Yugoslavia shall stay together. That is
probably no't going to happen, at least in the present form. More recently there seems to be
a slim hope that they may sit down and negotiate.
So for the immediate future there are two main points: first, to avoid economic
breakdown; second, to avoid any kind ofphysical, military, or police intervention, either by
the central army or the police forces of the republics. These goals are very much
complicated further by the confusing process that is going on with respect to nominating a
state president. Under the rotation system, the Croat representative of the State Presidium
should take the chair. But, for some reason, they have decided to change the rotation system
by not only naming the man, but also voting for him. And there is a stalemate in the State
Presidium with the Serbs and the Montenegrans on the one side, and Slovenia, Croatia,
Macedonia and Bosnia on the other side. This appears to be four against two, but the Serbs
nominated a representative of KosovoNojvodina on their own behalf, so it is four against
four. This stalemate means they cannot agree that the Croatian representative should
become president.
There is one more point, about Kosovo. Kosovo is an autonomous region in the
middle of Serbia. It is inhabited mainly by Albanians. The Serbs claim that the Albanians
bully the IO percent Serbs in Kosovo and, therefore, the Serbs have deprived the Albanians
of any democratic rights. There is more or less a military or police occupation. This is a
CSCE matter, because of the violation of human rights against the Albanians.
Introductory Remarks
II.
More or less everything in Yugoslavia is pointing towards disintegration. The first
question is why are we not accepting the reality of letting Yugoslavia go towards its future
of splitting into six or more republics? The answer is very simple, because it is clear what
the consequences of such a disintegration would be. Internally the risk of civil war will be
very, very high. A direct external consequence is that the disintegration of Yugoslavia and
establishment of a Serbian state with hegemony in Kosovo and Vojvodina will bring
immediately the risk ofa clash with Albania. There are also indirectexternal consequences.
There are many people in Bratislava and in the Baltic republics who are waiting to see what
will happen on June 26th in Slovenia. Ifthings continue on their own, the risk ofa negative
example spreading all over Europe could become very high. There are also people waiting
in Moscow. The army, for example, is looking to Yugoslavia and wondering if they will
face a similar situation. For the Yugoslav army would be obliged to intervene in cases of
civil war or unilateral secession. And the external reaction will be to say if it is possible in
Yugoslavia, why not in the Soviet Union?
For these reasons the European countries, and the United States, have to try to deal
with a very difficult political situation. The European factor is the only one which can be
utilized to influence integration and not disintegration. One thing is clear in the public
opinion: they do want to join Europe. That is true for the Slovenes, the Croats, and the
Montenegrans. And so we are trying to utilize this political weapon. To send the message:
if you want to join Europe you have to stay a united and democratic Yugoslavia.
We have tried to make clear to public opinion inside Yugoslavia, taking into account
the fact that this message is not very popular, especially in the northern part of Yugoslavia,
that united and democratic would mean also a different Yugoslavia. That means we are in
favor of an institutional, constitutional change. We may never see this kind of Yugoslavia
for thesereasons: ifYugoslaviaremains untied without constitutional changes, it will not be
democratic. It will be a Serbian-hegemonized and not democratically centralized govern-
ment. If it remains democratic, but without constitutional change, it will not be a united
Yugoslavia. The leaders of the republics do understand what could be not only the risk, but
also the consequences of a unilateral move towards disintegration.
The EC sent an important, extraordinary mission to Belgrade a few days ago. It was
the first time we have sent a mission chaired by the president ofthe Community-the Prime
Minister ofLuxembourg-and the President of the Commission, Jacques Delors. They not
only repeated the message, but articulated it. The Council ofMinisters totally supported this
position. That means not only that we are still more than ever in favor of united and
democratic Yugoslavia, but we also are ready to make the message specific. First of all, we
want respect of human rights. Secondly, we want respect of the existing constitution
framework, including the location of the Presidency. Third, we warned against any type of
violence. Fourth, we warned against transgression of internal borders.
Jacques Delors has clearly said that the Community is ready, in the case of a peaceful
and positive settlement of the problem with constitutional change, to extend strong support
to Yugoslavia. This would take the form of starting negotiations for an association
agreement similar to the agreements we are now negotiating with Poland and Czechoslova-
kia, and also extending directly or indirectly, through the international financial institutions,
substantial economic and financial support. Although there has been no formal decision in
the Community, Delors spoke of a magnitude of four or five billion dollars.
The result of the last meeting of the six presidents of the republics in Sarajevo was
that, for the first time, there was agreement, at least in principle, to examine a proposal for
staying together. This proposal addresses the Serbian position in favor of the existing
centralized Yugoslavia and the positions of Slovenia and Croatia, which say they could
accept only a very loose confederation. The intermediate position is labeled a "closed
confederation", a union of six sovereign republics agreeing to stay together, and giving the
confederate government responsibility for currency, foreign policy, defense, and so on.
It seems that there is still a possibility that peaceful negotiation will prevail. The
position the EC has decided to take is to give a clear message to the Slovenian leaders that
the European Community will not accept a unilateral declaration of independence. We will
repeat this again in the next few days, and next week a written document will be approved,
warning them that, two days after the 26th, there would be a European summit, where the
leaders of the European Community will tackle this position.
At the same time,we are trying to deliver a similar strong message to the Serbian
leadership. Because we have made very clear that if the Serbian leadership were to continue
to block the appointment to the Federal presidency, it would create a situation in which all
the other European states would see no other possibility than to support the Slovenian/
Croatian position.
One cannot be sure about the outcome for a very simple reason. Our moral suasions
and our political messages can work with respect to the leadership of the republics. But
nobody really knows what could happen with the public opinion at large; in the villages
inside Croatia, inside Bosnia and so on. The strange mixture of democracy and heritage of
the past could bring very negative results.
89
90
Discussion
European policy toward the Yugoslavian situation. A Greek speaker led off the
discussion with the view that there was no justification for Europe to support the breakaway
ofany of Yugoslavia's republics. The situation was very different from that of the Soviet
republics, because they had been united by force, while the association of Yugoslavia's
republics had been voluntary. Yet what happened in Yugoslavia would greatly influence
developments in the Soviet Union, particularly in the sense that the Soviet army would be
influenced by whatever action Yugoslavia's army took with respect to breakaway republics.
A number of speakers, referring to both panelists' opening remarks, expressed
concern that the EC was taking a position that it did not think would work: to try to prevent
disintegration when it felt disintegration was inevitable. And if it was inevitable, asked a
German, what was being done to prepare for the inevitable? What were the European
options, asked an American. Were more interventionist options being considered?
A Belgian speaker saw the situation as the first time the EC was faced with dealing
with something unforeseen. What was its capacity to act, to back up its words with action?
To what extent could it support the credibility of its position? What were the options in the
security area, asked an international participant.
Other speakers raised questions about using various European institutions to deal
with the Yugoslavian crisis: NATO, CSCE, thePentagonali, etc. An Italian speaker felt that
the situation was outside of the purview of the Alliance, that secessionist governments
would have no right to appeal to NATO. As for CSCE, the central Yugoslavian government
would have to approve, as it, and not the republics, was the signatory to the Helsinki
Accords.
The Pentagonali did have a possibility ofexerting some influence.
The problem ofself-determination. A number of speakers underlined the practical
obstacles to promoting self-determination in Yugoslavia. A Greek speaker expressed
concern about a rekindling of the old Macedonian problem. Another Greek pointed out that
Kosovo presented a particular problem, because its majority Albanian population were
deprived of rights by the Serbs and because, as the cradle of Serbian culture, it was as
important to them as Jerusalem was to the Jews. Mixed populations in most of the republics,
pointed out an Austrian speaker, made the problem of self-determination a difficult one.
In general, the discussion of the Yugoslavian question raised more questions than
answers, but the consensus among participants in the discussion was that it was Europe's
duty to try to prevent the disintegration of Yugoslavia.
·--
!
CLOSING
In closing the conference, the Chairman, Lord Carrington, observed that the issues
dealt with at Bilderberg meetings for many years aiose from a "very cold world climate,"
which was expected by most people to. go on indefinitely. But the world climate had
changed, and could now be considered not exactly hot and sunny, but "unsettled with sunny
intervals."
This change in the world climate had been very much reflected in the discussions at
the present Bilderberg meeting, and the debates had dealt with the problems of change. It
was extraordinary that distinguished people today were questioning whether there was any
longer a credible threat from the Soviet Union.
With regard to the Soviet threat, the Chairman advised that we be cautious about
discounting it. History showed that we should be prepared for the unexpected. It was a far
longer process to build up forces than to reduce them.
Finally, Lord Carrington expressed his thanks to all those who had contributed to the
discussions. And, on behalf of all the participants, he thanked the German hosts, Hilmar
Kopper, Christoph Bertram, and Otto Wolff von Amerongen; the conference organizer,
Giinther Dicke; the staff of the Steigenberger Hotel Badischer Hof; the security staff; the
Bilderberg Secretariat, led by Maja Banek; and the Honorary Secretaries-General, Theo-
dore Eliot and Victor Halberstadt.
91
