BILDERBERG MEETISGS
..
SALTSJOBADEN
CONFERENCE
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R..H. THE PIU.SCE OF Till NtTlWU..H<DS
IIONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL IN EUROPE:
E:sNST H. VA.'l PER Bt:t:c,H
HONORARY SICRl:lARY GENERAL IN HIE IJl'<ITED STATES·
Jost:PH E. JoH!'\ON
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL IN EUROPE
Alt,"'OLD "L LAMi'L'It;
AC!tESON. DeAN
AGNUl.l. GIOVANNI
AN"S!M1X. HU&EIU
1\JH.!OTIS, CrtMilES c.
Awu."'G, SvEN
fi,Ul, GEORGE W.
BAU~GARTNf.R, WJUR!D S.
BELL, ELUOT V.
Bm<~:>~fTI, fREDFRJC
BERG, flliTZ
B!R(;l, M. NURI
BLMSSE, PWTilR
DOll!;.\.IAN, ERIK
Bow:•w, Rlc.1lAII:D
Bov£~1. WALm E.
llRAl'E1!. MAX
CAnor, Louts W.
CAVLNDlSH-8£NT!NCK, VICTOR
•
• '
UNITUJ STATES
iTALY
BELCIIJM
G!IL.ECE
Sww~.,.
\.J'11TEll Sr.>.rES
hANCf
UsnED Sr.HF};
UNITED KISGDOM
GERMANY
Tun:r.v
NtTHElltANDS
SW1'nEN
UNlrED STATES
SWITZERUND
GfJIMANY
UNITED Su.TES
Usrrr:o KiNGDOM
J
Cou.AI><l, i:M1l.Jd (,,
Cmmu:n, A~DRL w \X'.
DAVlD)ON, IAN
D:u:uc~. PrutkL
Ut:;-.l('.\0<, jA.\if'. S.
EcKARDT, Fn1x n>:-<
ECZAUi!ASl, :'\l).H F.
EtUI!<DFll, fAG.E F.
EH.J::il.. Furrr
F...YAT, fb::-;111
ro~n J~. (;!-_~AIr> R.
GUJIR. A~:-;;:
(.;LAl!WY'< LMD
Gc.u~>IN>, Sn1. CotrJN
Gc:o;nrv. GuiutJAr.
HARSCH, j(>~HH C.
lt:\Lt;l, GAUIIIU..
1-IL\ILY, De•m
HECKSC!HII, GL:-.NAR
!lEENEY, ARNOJ.l) D.P.
H£IN7, HL'ikY J II
lliwrrr, \VrLL!AM A.
JIOEGH, Lhlf
jACXUl.'l, CHAIILL'> /).
KATZ, MlU\)N
KtlliTL'iS, E.!L•;o :-.:.'-'AN
KoHNSTAMM, ~hx
KRA! r, Ou: B.
LAMa:., Gc••NAR
LANCE, HAtV.\ltll
loUDON, joNliJ:IUR jOlt:'< H.
M.U-ACQD[, G!OYA:O.:'<l
MAnnA~, MAI!:UtW G.:-.i.D.
McliFBY, RousH D.
N£L()tslNE. GtOliG£
NYKOPP,Jm!A.N
OHLIN, Burru.
PAYNE, fREDLKICK B.
PJID!Nl, MA1110
PETITPI!iR.IlE, MAX
4
():-..-nED Sr.nH
U'.nr.n STATES
CA:'<Al!A
fiUNCE
CANADA
G!:R.\U:'<Y
TL~!Uo'Y
Swt:ms
Gr.R.\O.NY
HH.GW.\1
l:o;nr.D STATL>
SwwL~
C."ilffD KP>i<.;LICM
cMTf!) Kll'H,DOV
IcnLANATJON.4t
l:NJTfD SrAT.ES
t:,mru ScuH
t__;':-;uw K.JNGDOM
SWliJEN
CA:·BJJA
Cr;tn,o Sr.H.ES
lJNHill STATE
NPRWAY
CNrlTD STATU
LiNfffill STATES
I:-.-rr:;'lAHD.'IiAt
lNTLkNAT!ONAt
DENMARK
Swtntr.
N0itWAY
:-.itTHtllL'\:--ID'>
ITALY
p,)JITCGAL
C:->lTW SrAT.U
U-.;rn::u SB.lB
fl:-.'l..\--'0
SW!JJD.I'
C:'<lTED SBTt~
h.HY
SW!T/lJ!.tANU
QC.\RONl. P!ETIW
RocKLFfllXI!, D1nn
SAMILUUE,, lvo
ScHMID, C.~RUl
S··wY ~T n'OrPl:Ells. llARm;
Sun.:>'>, JouN M.
SrRATVS, CHJUS"!OfQRt
WAllLSllERt.;, Muc;,:~
Wtllil"!XR, CHARLI'$ R.
WILCOX, fra-11as 0.
W!H.OCH, KAARE
WiLSON, HAROLD
WOl-FF \ON AMLIIONt;rN. Orro
Wl!!STON, WAITER B.
2JMMLU-LHWAN;o;, GwKt:
IN ATTENDANCE:
lf.R.H. i'RINCHS BEATRJX
Br>cHE, l-h;m::Rr DE
GR.\.'-InAY, EDW-\ll.D
Lm;os-~ortTVU), l.hnou E:ux
RoY, Bnnu: H
Scnt:tENll\fliC, F.lll£DRJCII W. Ga.u vo"i D!:R
! rAlY
U!oi!n-O STATE\
NHHERI.A!\0\
GrRMA~Y
fiHCll'M
U-.;rTE!l Kt!IIGDOM
G~llCE
SWF.DU:->
Ct-;JHJ) KtSCOO.\l
C'Mnt> ST.\ru
Noaw.\Y
Vsrrt:u K1:-.cooM
(;IJiMACi'Y
Umrtn SnTh
Acsn!A
Nnw:RL~NtH
SW.EI}f'l
DEu;JL"M
SWtDE.X
NrTHERL\NDS
GERMAYY
j
INTRODl,JCTION
It ll aot rhe purpose of the BJdcrbcrg Mcetmg1 to attempt m nuke policy or to
rox..munend action by govcrumenn. The 'ole objeH of the mccting!i is ro rc;~fh a better
undenunding of prevailing dilference:; between the Wcncrn countries J.nd to srudy
those fidds iu which agrecmt"nt nuy be wught. ln order to attain thi~ aim, men of
uutsunding qualities and influc:ncc are brought together in circumstances where di~
ctmion:> can be frank and where argument~ not always used in public debate can be
put forward.
The d.iS£;ussiom are so organized .u to pernut a brood and frank exdunge of\'icws.
They uc hdd m conditiom of strict privacy and neithe::r the press nor observers are
admitted. No re~oluciom are passed ;md no ~tatenunN haw w be approved by the parri-
cip:~nts who are&~-.:: to draw the!r own condusioru from the dis.::usriom.
l110se invited to attend the Bilderbtrg Meeting> arc cho!>Cll from different nanons
and from ~11 fidds of public activity and include po!iricUm and $btcsmen, diplumao,
businessmen, inrd!cctuah and leaders of public opinion. All participants attend these
mcerings in a purdy personal capacity and the views they cxpresl arc cheir own md
do not necessarily represent those of the organizatiom or paniC$ to which they belong.
The various items on the agl'llda are mostly intrmluced by rapporteun who have
prepared p;opcn_ Q;!l the subjects. The documents arc JJl f.ar ;tS poss1blc circulated in
advance ofthe m~gs.
THE MEETING OF SAL TSJOBADEN
The eleventh Btldcrherg Conference met at Saltsj;ibadt'll near Srockh.olm on 1S, 19
and :10 M.ay 19().:. (t \\t;lS rlw fl.f>t timt'" the conftrC"n<c wa~ hdd m Swed<:n. The previous
mcetin~ luvc been held in the :--lctherLmds. France. Gcr:tuny. Denmark, l:nitd Scares,
Italy. the U11itcd Kingdom, Turkey, Sw1r.tcrLrnd and CJ.nath. Scventy-sevea per;ons
from seventeen COU!lttl~ a.ud intcm.acio11.;~.l organiu.cioui :mended.
The agenda of chc Conference was composed as follows:
I. TI1c political 1mplicatmns for the Athntic Community of its members' p,)hcir~
in the t:nitt·d Nou:iollS:
a) concerning reb.tinns with the dcvdopmg countries
h) concerning: possible changes iu cln: mle and authority of th<.' United ;-.Jaciol\5.
H. Implications f<)r the Atlantic Comnmmty of prospective dcvdopmc.no:
.:~.) in the Europcm Common M:ukt:t
b) in cl1c Organization for EconmnK Coopcn.non and Dcvdopmcnr.
In the following text, the introductory reports and the vtcw' o:pn.~J durmg the
debates are summarized.
7
POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
NTIC COMMUNITY OF ITS MEMBERS
POLICIES fN THE UNITED NATIONS
..,.,~'""'" NG RELATIONS WITH THE DEVELOPING
UO'P1~'1'·U IES
~uaaid wa! kid tor disawion of this Item by the issue of two introductory
;:jllcp~~mtn:spcrovdy by :m Americm participant and a Belgian mpporn:ur who
to attend the meeting.
prcam!bJe. the AnlCticm r:apporteu.r indiated the Iimtts within which he in-
wtth his subject. He bad decided ro cae ~ American position u a
for his cx:unination, as that embled lum ro nuke spt<:ul reference to
on ~hich that country's policies lud alread~ conlbcn:d with specific in-
liiiCICUrcs. He endc:tvouml ro restrict his an.Uysu ro the contemponry wodcl
a the spnng of 1¢,!. He clea.lt mainly ~.-ith the repercussions ofthe decoloni-
kflliW.I:IISCCI!utiruting tltefocal pointofcurnnt United Nationsactivities
rcncmbc:rcJthJ.r theAdaruic Commmuty is bm one offive intcr-<ontinen-
within whtch the $Dtcs of Western EuroJX and North America pby a
I'Oie. the: Others being the United Nation.!, the Commonwe:tith, rhe Org;m.i-
Ametian ~u:s and chc complex ofagreements by wh•ch France is linked to
A6:ian Statr.S, not to mc:ntion certain global interett.S of the United States and
Eingdom. This dispersion ofinta"CSts and loy~tics necc:ssarily decncts &om
cohesion which an be attained widUn the Atlantic Community. or :lt any
solidmty - a Eact rd!ected within the Unitccl Nations. That IS why rhe
~'*llllatiicStata have made no a.rrangemc:nts m New York for group coruul-
if':C!IIfCII:o dlcm on the i:uucs raised there, nor docs it seem lik.dy thatsuch a.r:range--
bc m.1de. In tpite of dissenting opinions in various q~W"tCn, the United
.lide:rs dut any cor1unitanc:nt ro 1upporr rhe non-European interests of Its
would to a c:t:ttain extent curb its 0\\-'11 frc:edom ofaction.
lllil110n:uu:~accordcd t•• the d.ccoloniz:uion process is due not onlyto the political
ofthe pcpulatiollJ c:aocemed, but abo to endeavours ro cn.rorc the long-
liiii~Keion ofWotcrn economic intcn:st:s. The unavoidable lr.mSition u eased by
it occurs at a time ofex.onal economic prospcriry.
9
'fhe r.apporteuc then olkd illttcntion In tbc difference between the situation in Asia.
whcce the dccolonization procc:ss if; .almmt romp~ md that ofAf'Dc:l- cspecW.Iy
Centnl and Soudlem Afria - where it is advancing with gWlt ltrides, giving me to
midw} problems such as taritorial temnil!DO. outlying bases and econonllc invdtmmb.
Rdl:rring to the cases of G<n and New Guinea u examples ofconflicts cono::ming
tmilllrial remnants, the ~ oomidc:red tha.t it would be anonulous to let minor
problrms &poil funrre relations with the young nations, unless important sttucgic
considentions were involved. Nerworb of military, Dillnl and air bases lu:ve declined
in importance and an etfon is nttded ro retch~ on eamonUc pmblenu such u
the pooibility offoreign enterprises being expropriated by the new Stires.
The speU.er then reviewed the chmges wbkh billd taken pLace in Amca since 1960
(Morocco, Tunisia. Glwu, Nigeria. Sicralc:one) irukpendmtly ofthe United N~
with the result that, until tha.t date, the UDited Stms could detpense with m African
policy. However, tht nam of 1960 ttouufuuned the situation. The inaeue in rhe
number of Afrian membcn and events in the Congo led to the intervcm:ion of the
United Natiom (in an atmosphere of connovmy) and the United States could no
longer postpone facing up to the responsibility of fOrmulating its own policy rowatl.h
A.6:ia.. This change in Africa coincided with the conccm ofthenew American AdminU-
tntion to formu1illte new lines ofpolicy to leplace the aid cold war formulae ofcon-
tlinmc:nt and OUS5ive retaliation. In the case of AUica. the new American uritude
conceming the Congo was form.ulakd in February 1962. It wu:
(a) to hdp the Afrian peoples Conn societies .and govmunen~ that will be auly
independent and COIISOIWlt with their own coruciences and culturo;
(b) to m;jncin md promote the strong ties of culture, friendship and economic life
dw: ill1ready exist betwccn the new mtions of Africa and the natiom ofEurope and
America;
(c) to co-operate in every way accept:able to both the Afiicam :and ounelvcs u these
new COWltries 5trive to produce the politial mbility, economic progress. illnd 1evd of
educacioa that are c:ssm.tial to ill me society.
The capporttur aBed illtte'l'ltion to the initiative taken at the r¢o-6t &semhly by the
Mricaa and Asiatic States lbemtdves.. It had prevented all Russian intcrvmtion and had
mc:cecdcd in bringing about the adoption ofthe ••Dechrati.on on the grmtin.g ofindc-
peadeacetocoloaial peoples", which stR:sxd that:inadequacy ofpolitical and economic
preparedDelt thould lll:'m tcn'e a ill pretnt fix delaying independence. At the subse-
quent w:aioo.theAfik:mStares de.molutratcd theirdeterminationtoutilizlethem....t.inery
of che Uuited Naticas 10 the utmost to ensure chat che Dedantion did not remain a
dead lacu, &y hniaa; a mmmittre of 17 membm set up to report on itl illpplbtion.
Tbe fxt .... d -..tina <O!oaW probknu hm - h<m brought .ndUn the
purview ol the thUied NiliCicas will oblige the United Sta:ccs md othc:r coumriet 10
.dopcpoHcia wiDdo may...n.w,;a.the.w.m;.,Community 10 g=t immW .aaim.
lO
The rappotteur pointed out, in this connection, that, the Algerian question about
to be settled (unless last-minute complicarions arise lxa.use of O.A.S. resistance:). the
position of France may be strengthened by the support which it hu &om the twdve
Africat Statc:s with which it has maintained and developed rebtiom. This may enable
it to uercise grC2ter infiuem:e in Atlantic councih. A$ for the position of France in the
United Nations, any increase in ib intluencc there is bound up with ib own :lttitudc,
wbidt 1w so &r been restricted beause of General de Gaullc:'a opposition to .my in-
cte:35C in the :authority of supra-JUtional institutions. whereas the A.frit'an n:ations ue
anxious to expand the role of the UN. The resulting oppt»ition between this attitude
:and Fr:ancc's speci:al rdatiom with some African Stares finW: ib expression in silence
during dcbarcs in the United Nations and abm:ntion ar the moment ofvote.
The ext;emion of United Nati.oru intervention in the process of decoloni:ution
neceswily c;auscs the United Kingdom some preoccupa-tion. u it lw not yet cornplctcd
derolonin.tion in all the territories l.lllder it1 control and could find rt:sdfin an awkward
poUrion.Whettas the United Kingdom lw aaomplished the transformation into inde--
pendent Stillo:s of those colonial territories w~ independence brings with it no acute
problem for a settled Europe<m population, it still lw to 6nd a solution for the m<m:
delicate cases of Kenya and Northern and Southern Rhodesia, not forgetting the dis-
content which may be felt in the Arab Stilltes becil!U5e ofits position in Southern Arabia.
In all tht$C cases, it is vital that ttllll5ition Wli be: gradual, peaceful and orderly, and it
is to be fcm:d that United Nations intervention may ex:acerbate the situation to the
exte:nt of precipitillting :m:ned conflict. The United Kingdom lw indicated its willing-
De$$, in principle, to cooperate with rhe Committee of Seventeen. provided that the
Wtu avoids all proced"'" likely to endanger a smooth transirion. However, the Unito::l
Kingdom might wdcomc a United Nations inttTVention if dw: enabled it to dfect
withdnwal in a ~ul nwmer and cspecially ifcertain African State:~ :adopted in thillt
connection a more positive attitude than they showed. to the powers seeking to truti1J..
tain the stanu quo; that is. Portugti and Spain.
'fhe. npporu:ur pointed out dw with the exception of rhose two countria. all
Western roW!.tries were committed to tbe principle of independcnoe £Or tbe African
l""P"'- R.og>nling span. the problemo ofthe SpmUh s.Jwa md u., onda"" offfiU.
Ceutl and Fdilla may be considered illS telidual pwbknu in the sense :already explained.
On the other lund. Ponugal not only denies the United Nations all right to inu:rvene
in the d:ain of its African territories, but also n:jects independcnoe fOr these lerri-
torics u the 6nal objective. This illttitude bas resulted in considerable divetgencles of
view between that country and its Atlantic :allies. Tht 4tt:tT comidered it impolitic to
mppon Pon""' u U., W. ~ Ao=bly, wh<n U., 1.= .Hinn<d oh< rigiK of
the AngoJ.n l""'P"'lo .df~riOD md ....,1 ttfumu fu. U., >«ting up offr<dy
dcaed institutions with :a view to tnnsfcr ofpower. The abstention ofFrance from this
resolution rdlected her doubts regarding the legitimacy ofUnited Nations im:erve:Dtion.
n
but that did not prevent it stmRng its undersbnding of the preoccupations of the
A.fi:ian States. The United Kingdom supported the resolution adopted. but meucd
that Ponugal must be left responribility for the: actual timing of its withdrawal. The
npponettt wondered whether the North Atbmic States should not go beyond thcir
...uu.Je o£guml<d aidcion.
He abo pointed out that the North Atlantic States bad aligm:d rbemsdvet in unison
with the .Afiican stat~:$ in their condcmnati.O!I of the practices of "apartheid" pursued
in the: Union of South Africa. However, they did not go so far u to mppott the Wter
in their insiatence on coercive mealtrm ~ South Afi-ia, cotuisting of both smc;-
tions and expulsion from the United Nations. Tb~ comidered that such measures
would conttitute a dangerous precedent and might have an dii:ct conaary to that
which they wexe seeking. Ju no government other than that of South Africa believes
that .••apanhcid" is a practicable pOOcy for the indefinite future, and this situation is
likdy ., booom< ~ ·~" wi<hout d=e """" my hop< o£ -~
inl:er'Vention. the coo.ne of wisdom for the white popuhtion might therefore consist
of the Atlantic States bringing pressure to be2r on the Utrion of South Africa within
the United Nations.
Turning to the Congo problem. the rapporteur endeavoured to draw up a ha1anct
Wet ofUnikd Nations intcrvt:ntion in that country in n:lation to Western intemts and
unity. 'l1lere can be no doubt that its intervention effectively chc:cked Sovict penetra-
tion ofthe Congo, which wu threatening. and prevented an armed East-West con&on-
wion through the intcnnc:d.iary of the rival demcncs. Even ifthe Congo is still a focus
oft:cuioo in the cold W<lr. that temion now a!SilllleS the rdativdy innocuous form of
rival propagmda for the ruppon ofthe Afiian Stucs. In addirirm, the support of the
Afiiom SD.te~ fm UN action prevented itassuming the :appeu:utce ofnon-Afiicaninter-
vem:ion in 6uthcrance of non-Afuc.m interests, It is aue that Bdgium perbapt exper-
iebced a seme ofhumiliation and bad fl:m~y lost its mili potition and political
intluc:nc:::e. However, the fiagi1ity ofmilitary arnngnnents ~theWest and Amca
is a gcnc:nl phtnomcnon and although Bdgi:m w:momic~ are damaged. du:y
remain potmtWly int:Kt - to the ~ of the Congo, Bdgium and the Westcm
World. In additicm. we hav~ wiatessed a realistic reappraisal ofBelgian policy, rcBecr.cd
in its co-apention wttb the United Nations in connection with thecoming independ-
anreof:R.ttmda, Unmdi.
The UDitled State~ mel the United Kingdom are in a position to have :i marked in-
~ em the coane ofevca11 by shouldering the major part ofthe COlts ofthe opct-
ation. The COIUtlllt UDiced States support for UN interVention has been a ddiberar.c:
act em its part. 'I'he UDited Kingdom only gave its dldonemcnt to the UN action after
............... puti<aluly- <ogud .. ""'pca;b~ """"~""" o£......! --
vmcioa by thai &ody IDd the poaibility of it serv:iDg as a preccdcat whic:b. could be
cited drcwhcft:.
However, concluded the: nppotteur. whatever reservations might be made with
regard to the Congo opcntion. no other mode ofintervention in the Congo would
haTe been practicable without encountering on the part ofthe African States a degree
ofopposition detrimental to the Atlantic Community. No common action by African
aad non-African States is poaible except through the United Nations, and should the
endeavoun of the African States to shape their own regional agency for political and
aUliwy putpoJCS succeed, Europe may well look bad with noualgia to the time when
lhUred Natiom aliOrded the agax:y ofcommon~
The Bdgian npporteur didnot go intodetailsofthe exUting9tnation, butcnume:r.1ted
some typical featum, raised rome questions., and set out 50ille principles.
In our present world, we are conscious ofan impression of Western decadena:, for
which preadcnu exist in history. Howcvt'r, this feding is but a warning which mmt be
f.u:ed up to so that it can be oVttCOrne. In the present rue. the Western r~ly mwt
comist of the formation of an Atlantic and European Community which, though
dynamic. yet respects mditiom.
The antion of the United Natiom: and that institution't evolution constitute an
inevenibk: proce55. Unlike We League of Nations, which was scilla Western machine,
the United Nations lw a universal tuk. Its aim to govern the wodd is an established
&a. ond lw d= """"""'' """"'
Siru:e thecreation o(the United Nations. normalrelations between stateS are no longer
I question of strength and weakness and. finally. domBurion. To--day, theprinciple of
c:ompetitiml of~ hugivm way to competition between values;
The United Nlltions is the mpreme consecration ofthe existence ofa State and ami·
co1ouialism, the guiding principle ofour day, is comc:quently strengthened~
Numerically, the wen is hemming incn:asingly weaker mdtU group, .md mu
wealmeu is ac«nruated by the Eact that it does not. lli the USSR, hide a thim fm
power behind a theory ofvalUC$.
Some oftbae poinu apply to the United Nations »it should be, othc:n typify it »
it is. All are pan of.m inescapable evolution which places the West before both oppor-
.,;,;., ~d poc<n<W dmgen.
Thae facton cannot be nwtnlized m.eu:ly by ignoring them, nor can they be
removed by oppmition; .my such attitude could only result in chaof.. The United
Nations, like all revolutionary asscmblin, will no_t be confmed by statutes which it
has decided to outltrip, and in destiny is to develop under the impctw of iu inherent
dynamism. Whatwill bethe repercussions ofthis inescapable evolution on the Atlantic
Community ? T1W. qutation an be pur in other wonk and in two complementary
fOrms: t) wbatdfect will it have on us? .a) in what way can we influence the situation?
These evc:nt:J have both an agonising and an exalting effect on us. The sprem under
which a .small number of enlightened nations could expect w indicate or dictatr: the
path ofhappiness for the major partofdte globe lud great merit; but itis about to~;ol­
Japse and chat is the agonising aspect ofthe riruation. It is up to the West to csbblis:h a
new concept ofia relations with the so-called under-developed peoples by cradicatiog
all out-of..Gatc methods, and that is the ex:iliing challtngc of the wming yean. The
question is bow to bring rolonialUm to an end, and this is a dil:lK~ problem because
of the: ronromitant upheaval in manna of thinking, ronditiODJ and ~uin:d interests.
It is oomplicated by the fact that the We:stem natiom tackled the problem without any-
~ using contndictory and sometime:~ ant.agonUtic md:hods..
The development of the United Nations is also having tar-teaching ~
on the intenW struCt'tlte ofthe West. It il obvious that the scale ofthe problems whkh
are going to arise in the future i5 far greater than that to which we h:ive been accustomed.
Only very Luge federative and homogeneous usociatiom, such as the United States,
possess the inherent mources aru1 dynamism necessary. The new &cton imply revision
of certain oorn:epts rucb as dut of sovereignty, the natiotl, neutrality or non-align-
ment. The natiorul st2ge $(ClllS to be giving way mon: and more to a collective desire
to live. manifesting iudf by a wider association, tbe •'Community" bringing together
a group of nations on the bms of similar w.lfl ofliving, geographic proximity, com-
munity of interests and especially the need to solve common problems too vm for a
.mg~e ......
The unifying demena smmning from this evolution are already becoming apparent.
For example. the common danger which led to the cn:arion of the Atbnric Allianc.e
for the protection of ia members simuhanwusly brought to light comciowness of :m
Atlantic Community with unlimited possibilities.
To take another example; is it conceivable that the tarible problem. ofhunger c:m be
dved within the =ow framewodt. ofsingle nations? Although the United Narions
supply the: setting for vmjoint aaion, it is no leu certain that an Atlmtic: Community
md. a European Community arc: called for, since only thc:y can supply the: drive needed
to mobilize the nec:cJSar)' resources and 6nd lwmonious and hunune 10lutions for the:
problem ofworld-wide hunger.
In the fidd of accomplislunents, however, alm<»t everything is still waiting to be
dooe. 'The degree to which we ourselves c:m inll\lt':JlCe the course ofevena will depend
on our ability to assemble our scatt.tted forces into a single aru1last:ing irutrume:nt for
futuRo actioD. This in tum calls for collective corucioumt!$$ and a carcfu1 ddinition of
ow: civilization. The West is able, in this conncction, to draw on rhc bc:st of ia put.
scartiag wid! tltc aftirmation ofhuman dignity which led, in panit:ular, to tbt: abolition
ofslanry. feaWe emancipation and tbt: al1innation ofrhc right ofnatiom to be thcU-
own-.
In bD <bing .,.,u, ""'""'"" ~ ""' he lw!p«haf" .bk - the,,.,...,
put to him in a somewhat absttaa manner, &om an over-fina1istic perspective in view
ofme """"' dil6<ula.; miDDg the m,.na.m of rh< ~bk wUh me politia
••
ofthe cum:ndy feasible. In doing so, be wanted to express 1m conviction that neo::wty
..- ohottly """ ""' 'Ph= of!Ouihili<y.
Opening the meeting. H.R.H. the Prince ofthe Netherlands, having thanked the
Swedish boos for the plc:aant !etting which they had chos:n and the excdlent a.rrange.-
mena made, invited the !unerican. rapport~=ur to introduce the di.scuuion.
Having reviewed !Oilte ofthe outstanding points, the latter put forward four questions
to serve as a basis for discussion:
(•) Do""'"""""'.mou~o odopt.d by""' A&o-JWm """ding the P"""' of
adjust:mmt and withdrawal ofthe fonner powc:n permit a mote unified anitudc on the
part of the members of the Adant:U:: Cotnmunity, at least with regard to some: ofthe
remaining problems; many problems having ~y been solved ?
(z) In view ofthe impon:ance to rncmben ofthe Atlantic Community ofinaeasing
stability within the new nations, what form ofaWsbno:: and co-opttation should we
pvc them md ofwhat should it consist?
{3) How may discuaions within the United Nations be expected to evolve, in view
ofthe increasing tendency ofsome ofthese countl'ie$ to take violent action, a develop-
ment which certainly is not in confonnity with the Charter, nor in the intacsts ofthe
peoples thenudves?
(4) To what extent should the: attitude of the Atlantic countries be influenced by
Communist ac:tivities in the countries in question?
In ~ course ofthe ensuing debate, various speakers expressed their views regarding
the daU>hility md pouililiy ofromul'"""" 1>«w«n Admti< .n;,on meprobkm of
~
In the opinion ofa British speaker, "fonnal" consulwion between Adantic allies in
New Yark. within the United Nations. - not desirable as it bad not hc:en po55ibk
to define a common policy on the subject within the Atlantic Council in Paris. It was
true that two ofthe Powm roncerned, fcinr;:e and the United Kingdom, had decided
not to impede deroloniution by force, but the same was not auc of Portugal. a fact
whidt gave rise to delicate problems. Under those conditions. a ronsultation ofAd:mric
allic:s inside the United Nations would be indfectivc and would tend to take on the
appeararu:c ofa provocation - ifnot, as arwther Britishparticipant ,onsidemi,a oompir-
arr· Ott tbe other band. u an Italian spcakc% pointed out,. the principle of110 ~
taClOD whatever on dccolonization between Ad:mtic allies; was dangerous. u theeJICU:-
~ thing was to reach ~~ with a view to improving mutual understanding
inside NATO :md not to disrupt cohesion. although that did not nea::uarily mean
that one must automatically adopt the viewpoint ofone'a pannm.
A Turkilb participant held the view that no disrincrion shonld be: nwie betwcal
Paris and New York, as oomultationbetweenallies wasesse:ntial at both p1aca. Although
the impression should not be given that a bJod: was being formed. there was no oeed
,,
for timidity in calling attcntion to NATO; after all, as had been pointed out by the
European rapporteur, that organization repmented the de&nce ofvalues ofwhich there
was no u«d to be ashamed. The most healthy concept of oomu.ltation ooru.isr.ed of
hoomly ..dcing poina of._ ...! dWg=nctt...! doing <=y<bing poinble
to minimise the damage caused to one's partners whc:n one was not in agreement with
<hem.
Whilst m:ognizing. lli the preceding Britith speaker. that unanimous agreement
had not been teaehed within NATO 0t1 the principle. or ev= the rhydun. ofdeolloni-
zation. a Norwegian speaker ncvcrtbdess coruidered that it would be valuable to have
coomltatiruu in New Yor.k. (and not in PaN, because the discussiom should be followed
up day by day), so u to prevent over-spect.acu1ar exprcssi0t1, in the roune of United
Nations debate$, ofexisting disagn:cmena. Nevertb~ any $\Kb ronsultatiom mould
cake plaa: without formality or publicity and should not be announced as comult.atiom
within NATO. lu NATO countries funned only a minority. the comuhations should
not be exclusive cither, as conuets with the other groups, (Latin American aud Afro-
Asiatic countries) were highly dcsir.a.ble. The speaker's views regarding the rorm of
ronsultarion desirable were fully shared by a Canadian participant.
An !uncrian speaker sr.atcd that the consultations between Allks would. be llli)fe
dfective if they all adopted a mOU" re1axW and dc:tached attitude to the ronflku; pre-
occupying the United Nations A»embly. He felt that his own country took an ova-
rigid ..uitude in debata, thus wcakming its leadership,
A spcaler &om the Netherlands pointed out that CUJ'TeDt efforts within the EEC to
reinforce its wUty were sucb as to facilitate c:omulrations between allies; they could
therefore take plaoe within that institution, which might be :a mott appropriate one than
NATO for dealing with such problems.
Aa Italian participant felt that the framework, pkce and method of consultation
betweenalliowere oflitde importance, hut that ~ should be no beriwionin deciding
to coordinate voOng in the Assembly, so as to exacise a real influence on the policies
drawn up then:.
Several I)JC:lkm reverted to the divetgencie1; between mem.bets of the Atlantic
<Am""""'r~ !he""""" problem ofd<col<miurion. On< ofthm<di~
rould be cotUidcn:d as of major impolt:lllCC; it was that opposing Portugal and iu
pumers ott dte very priDciple of dccoloniz:rt:ion, whereas the differences of opinion
betwt:at. the ocherallies concerning ounranding colonial problems 2ppeared to be much
las Indy, dpt'Cially as Frmce seemed to be on the point ofsetding the Algerim pro-
blem. 'I1:te diS'e:n:ua:s in opinion really centred. around the speed and IIWliiCt in wbic:b
ovo~.-.......w ""pi=
On !heq - ofGoo...!, W.. in!he- W.. ofAngola...! M=mb;qoe,
a Poltuguese partidpaDc ~y defended his country's policy. Recalling the
conditiom under winch vudy aupcrior lndi:an forces bad invaded Goa. he tegtettcd
••
that the American rapporteur had not condemned, in his paper, the agrcssion which
bad occuned in violation of the United Natiom Charter and the principles of intet-
n:ationallaw (this point was also raised by :a puticipant &om the Nedu:dands). ~
}wi been no movemmt within Goa in support ofur.aclunent to India and it wu striking
that Mr. Nehru bad made no refemtce to self-determination within rhat territory.
R£guding the more "realistic" attitude ofFtance to its Indiansettlements, the speaker
pointed out that the treaty providing for their ceuion had never been wificd by the
Frrocb parliamc:nt. and signaM'e had apparmdy only taken place after various pressures
bad been exerttd on fo~ of the territories, India having simultaneously rejected. the
principle ofconsultation ofthe population! concerned.
The huge territory of Angola still did not pt:l5SCU sufficient tn:ltUrity and leaden for
sdf-govmuncnt and.. from that point of view, Africa should not be COU5idered as :a
single entity. Even in South America. the proc:Lun:triom of indcpendc:ua: bad been
spread over almost a century. There were three pomble solutiom for A&ica, South of
theEqu:atof: inverted. racisin, pcactised by nations such as Ghan:a and Guinea.; predomi-
nam:e ofthe white ~ as in the Union ofSouth Africa md the concept ofa multi-racial
society adopted by Porrogal. If the white m.m were chased from that continent. the
result would be an "Asiatic" Atiica.
A Brirish particip:ant who w.lS opposed to the usc offt:ltCC in Goa, said !hat the Wnt
would be in a 5trong« position if it supported India's right to mobillie intcnational
opinion in order to acl!icve irs ends pcu:dUily.
Several partici~ts r:aiJed the question of rdarions ix:twc:cn the ex-wlonial powers
and tbcir fOrmer colonies. An Amt::rican $peaker bdd the view that the: United Natiom
could conlribute to the C$1:lbli.shment ofnew relations, provided the parties in question
accepted their good offices. Agreeing with the rapponeur. an Italian participant pointed
out dut the countries which had accepted d.xolonization W not automatically lost
their pOO.tiom in their former territories. Quite the oppotite. However, the NATO
countries: u $ucb were not expected to h:ave a policy wwards other rountries. Co-ocdi--
nation ofthe assistance giv= to such countries, particularly to bdp tbc.m. in assuming
the responsibilities ofindependence. could take place within NATO conccming cert:lin
fields. and within the UN in respect ofothtn. k would also be pcmilile to share respon-
sibility on a goograpbiW basis; grouping the American States and Amccia., A£iica
perh:aps with Europe, not overlooking the pouibiliries offered by the Commonwe:altb
and the EEC. The furm of assistance should not be solely 6nmcial. :as dw: perhaps
s.macked too much of neo-colonWism. More uxful :and disintae:Sted aasiatmcc: might
be given in the field of c:duation, the building up of cadres and the anining of
tochlrician5
Dccolor.Uzation also meant aco:pt:mce of neutrality on the part of the c:ounma
ooncemed. It wu not the equivalent ofa pr~RusRan :att.irude, but expteaed the dc::sft
ofsw:b rountries to tadde their problems in their own way.
A.nother Jtalian participantexpreucd mwbr viewt. In fut~tte rdatiom with the fOf'liler
colonial countries, care had to 1x talen not to impo$<! the Western way ofli6:; only its
juscice: and DtO.Xal. principles had to be safeguarded. The latter point W2J wannly sup-
potted by several speah:n at various ~ In addition, one ofthem poin~ out that
the speeding up ofdecoloniution was not an end in icsdf. The eurntiaJ thing wu that
dccoloniarion should always be guided by a feding of respomibility. A Swedish
participant expressed the same ideas. quoting the example of Ruanda Urundi, where
seriolll dUordcr was to be feared after the first ofJuly r!)6z, the date on which that
territory would become irukpendant.
These ~tionsled sevenl. participants to rd1cct. .u the rapporteur had rcquetttd,
on the appropriate mnd ro be taken in the face of the extremist anirudcs adopted_ by
tome countries within the United Nat.iom. and the violcndy subvenive dvities of
the Communist block in the developing countries. A British participant fdt that the
Western ooUIIttics dtould ~the violent resolutions proposed to the United Natiom
and. ende:avour to show how inoperative they wen::. This opinion was endorsed by an
American speaker who stres5ed the need for the countries concerned to safeguard the
goodwill towards them of as many other countries as pomble. The 5a1'J1C speaker
recalled that it was the aim ofthe United Natiom to oppose the use offorce. Although
Soviet propaganda held that '"wan ofliberu:ion" did not conform tO that principle and
the 1Jnited Nations 50metilno appeared to fullow that path in a somewhat irresponsible
nw:mc:r, there was no need to endone that principle at all costs. UN policy_ did nut have
to concur automatically with the views ofthe new States. It was true. as anothcT Ameri-
can p;articipant pointed out, that the Russians. who had made tactial errors at the be-
ginning. had u-.quired great Wll in h~nd.ling the Assembly, but the &ce natlon$ could
and must co--ordinate tbeit action and thUl face up to the cbillcnge.
In fatt. as a Swedish particlpant pointed. out, although some Wem:m eowttries
believed in flattering du: newly-indcpcndc:nt countries by c:ndomng =in extremist
resolutions: proposed to the Assembly, it was quite poWhle that such an attitude could
prove costly inthe long run, when there wu an excessive departure tiom common 5iCllSe
and the provisiocu of the Charta (e.g. when it was proposed tO apply sanctions to a
member oC the Organization). It was aho worth noting, in the same connection, that
many African countries aln:ady had the feeling that in the long run the USSR was not
an ally deserving ofronfidmc.t", as discovered by Guinea wbicll, in spite ofits fn..qllCilt
mpport for Sariet nwOom in the UN, had recently undergone some diWlusion.mmt
tegarding cbe effectiveness ofthat country's assinance.
Diagrccing wicb some of cbc: other speakcn. a British participam pointed out that
some ofthe divc:rpcies between tbc Atlantic allies in tbc Congo affirir bad ultimately
tented the Wesem:a cwsc by preventing the USSR from stirring up the non-committed
counuics apimt the Westas sudt. By forestalling the intervention ofthe Great Powm,
the UnitM Nations actioD lwi bte:ra bcndicial. The speaker warmly insisted on the faa:
,,
i
l
that the United NatiOtU and in debates mfcred an oudet for anti-colonialist fet!lings.
thus supplying a nluabk alternative to violent actiom. Moreover, its cxisrcnce might
discourage certain other ~ groups composed of Europeans. which in some
African countries in the process of decolonization were bringing strong pu:swrc to
best on the mctropolit:m governments and might even be tempted to usc force to
prevent the ~omplishment ofthose proo:ucs. The spcahr also refured to the com-
pi$ overthrow ofo~ government, suc:h as had oe:curnd_ in the Congo, ~
United Nations action could restrict the intervention ofthe Grear Powen. tfthe United
Natiom wcte not there. the problems would not cease to e:rist; on the ocher band. the
possibility ofraching pcacdlll settlements would be greatly dinrinished.
Before dosing discusSion onItem I a) ofthe agcrub. the Chairman gave the American
rap~ an opportunity to reply to the conuncnu which had hem made. The latter
sgrced with some speakers regarding the problem of con&~ ~ allies;
consultation within a group was necessary, but was not an end tn u:sel£ Consultation
00 an empirical, non-institutional basis was developing to a considerable cxtenr and
a~ wcll-mited to providing betterresultsthan formal consultations withina group.
Referring to Goa, he had not wished, in bu. paper, to expreu a penonal opinion. but
nthcr to desaibc a de facto political situation which had arisen in the United Natious.
Many United Natiom ddcgata felt that both tides had nude a serious mistUe. The
Indians bad lost much ofthe moral credit acauing to them as champions ofpeace. and
Ponugal was in a similar position for having refused to negotiate. Such refusal to~
the adjustments necessitated by evolution in the modmt world was dangerollland tt w.u
to be hoped chat Portugal would change iu attitude regarding Angola. as ~ in-
cidents might occur ifit did not do so.
It bad ro be remembered that ethics and. political practice: were not always the same
thing. In the cue ofthe remaining colonial questions, it was increasingly probable that
more or less complete: unanimity would be reacbed in the United Nations and if that
proved to be the case, the essential thing was that the paftic, involved should endeavour
to dca1 with them in such a manner as to do the least possible harm to the cohesion of
the Admtic community. The attitude ofthe Unitc:J States would. ofcourse. be a deter-
mining &aor-. The existing dtanu bad been caused in part by failure to prepare the new
countries adequately for their ~. and it w:u to be feared dw: the world
would Wir:nt:a in the coming years a disquieting increase in the instability of those
couutries. As decolonizarion was int:scapabk, the Western countries dtould do every-
thing possible within the United Nations to promote action facilitating or:Jcrfy progreu.
Thcte WCl'C no grounds for considering the Western position as hopeless. or for under-
estimating the positive role which the United Nations could play. Past achicvcmena do
not in any way exclude hope in this quarter.
Having thanked the speaker for his report md his substantial contribution to the
&tmions, the Chairman mllUll.ari7ed certain of the outstanding points. fk noted
,.
that the bnal optimism expressed by the upporttw" had been con.tudkted by none of
the statements &om participants and that ~ were in agreement in Jtressing that the
major aim ofthe Adanrit: Community was the dcfcnce ofcutaio valoes md principles.
Altbougb unanimity had not been rc:ac:bed on the need for decoloniz:ation. there had
been a pat deal ofagreement on the manner o£accomplishing it and the importance
ofrdlecting on the matter. There had been diverging opinions reg:u'ding rhc value o£
consultations betwtm allies, 50me speakers having pointed out that there was not a
unanimow attitude ·regan:ling decolonization within the Atlantic Alliance; hut the
various u:u:ements $bowed that there was agreement on the &a that everything possible
tbould be done to reach a common point ofvkw and that can only be 2CCOmpl.ished
hy consulwion within NATO and the other Wcmm bodie$, whether formal or
informal. Greater rohnion and co-operation is nccesary amongst us in the United
Nations and elsewhere, because the OJthcr c.unp is united in its actions and is aiming at
WOTld-wide suppression o£ that liberty of whkh we are dcknding the principle on
behalf on the ymmg na.tioru rheJmclva. The Wcmm countria should continue to
sed.: out the points on which they were united and in agrecmt:nt so as to facilitate col-
kboruion.
L THE POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE
ATLANTIC COMMUNITY OF ITS MEMBERS'
POLICIES IN THE UNITED NATIONS
B. CONCERNING POSSIBLE CHANGES IN THE ROLE AND
AUTHORITY OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Disctmion ofthis item was prepued by a report duwn up by a Swedish participant
in the light o!his experience in the United Nations, wh.cn: he represented hU country
fur several yean.
The rapporteur began by analysing the ge:nm..l development ofthe United Nations,
from the rime ofits foundation until today. The two main facton to be underoorcd.
in that respect, m::
{a) paralysis of the Secarity Council by the USSR use o£ the veto, leading to :m
increase in theinllucnce ofthe A.uemblyand a morepreponderant rolefor the Seartary-
G<n=l;
(b) the increae in the number ofMember Swo{originally SI, now 104).
The Auemhly can be ddined as an international confacnce ofsovCTcign $lati:S, ach
of which lw one vote, except the USSR. {three votes. with the Ukraine and Byelo-
russia), important quesciom requiring a two-t:hlnU majority for thcir adoption. The
countabal:mcing force in the United Nations is the Security Council in which five
Great Powers have the right ofveto, and to a smallerextent the mandate ofthe Seaeta.ry-
Genetal. who bas the independent power to call on the Security Council when a crisis
arises menacing peace.
In the minds ofthe founders. the right ofveto wu hued on the supposition that there
would be co-<~pcrarion between the veto powers who bad been world-war allio, but
rhe panlysis of the Security Council resulting from excessive Russian lUI: ofthe veto
1w multrd in increased inBumce for the A»embly, whose recommendations are,
however, not binding on iu members. Moreover, the vague nature of molt of the
n:rommmdations has le£i: the Sccrewy...cenerallecway for his actions.
h a result, UN action in the political field has. on the whole. been Wrly indfcctive.
The cases in which dfcctive xtion did prove possible have been due to a chance absence
ofveto (Korea), to an exceptional community ofviews bet-ween the United StaleS and
the USSR (Suez), ot to a more molute po1U:y on the part of the Sccrewy...Genenl
in the face of a certain inaction on the part ofthe Securiry Council and the &.embly
(Congo). AJ1 this does not me:m that the United Nations lads poliUcal influence. In
some cases. its -.Jebata ~ve rontributed ro solutiom and in others ~ve aggnvatecl
existing Wtfetentts.
/u :a rcsu1t ofthe arrival of the: new members, it can be said that a &i.rly loose parry
system h.u dtvdoped within the AS11!111bly. There is the grnup ofindu.t:rializedWcstcm
countries, which ~ve much in common- except perhaps on colonial qucsti.om - and
which nowadays lw a much reduced voting power proportionilly 1pcaking than at the
ouaet of the UN (about .13 vnta}. There Me the A&o-Asmt countries (about 45 votes)
who frequently coruult each other but do not always vote as a block. There is the Larin
Americm group (:about .20 votes). Finally die Communist group (about t 1 votes, with
Cuba), which has often bttnjoined by Guinea. Mali and sometimes Ghana.
This situa.tiort leads ro varying mljoritit:s. Scruriny of the seale of contributions
revcah that a majority can be fun:ned of Member Stms contributing kss than s% to
the UN ordinary budget and a two-thirds majority of Member States contributing
b than 13% Although only theordic:d, this calculation shOWll the influmce of the
Afro...Asian and Latin Americm grouP'> an inft~.~eD.~:C which is vastly grater than theif
political ami economic importance in world affairs. At the same time, the influence
of the Wesrem European States has constantly declined. :a situation whidt has been
aggta~ by the bet dut JCVcnl ofthem have been Utting on the bench ofthe accused
{in the past. and somctimc:s even now} in connection with the colonial problem.
This has sometimes inclined the United States to go vay fat in order to r:ally the
voces of the ~ uncotlllUitted JUtions. an :anitudc which in sevenl cues has
caused a stnin on tbc: relations between the United States and its European allie.. but
at the same time 1w rometimc! enabled it to exert a nwdcrating in!lut::na: (with the
ruppon ofsome Europem States) at timrs ofextreme Soviet bargaining.
Some words must be said about a dangerous tmdcncy v.-ithin the 5ecrctariat. resulting
&om the growing proportion in size ofthe numbeJ- ofJtaifmemben &om communist
countries or from third countries, who rons:ider lhemxJve, first and forcmou a iepre-
scutatives ofcbcir own countries. This has reduced the indc:pmdence ofthe Secretariat,
in spite ofthe failute ofSoviet :attempts to dt:lblish the ••troika" sym:m and the situation
may get wane at the c:nd ofthe present Secretuy-Genenl's mandate in 1!}63.
the tapportcu.r found it difficult to fOresee the development ofthe UN, a itis bound
up to a very large: extem: with the fUture coune of the cold war. Unless the situation
becomes lea strained. there li'!CJIU little dwta that the Security Council will n:asswne
tbe role foracm for it intbeCharter. The Assembly will continue to play the predomi-
uant. althougb lirnitecl. role and no alteration in this respect seems to be possible or
even detir.able so long u the fundamental political prohlenu in the world have not
reached :a more manageable sc:age.
Curiowly enough. the more tbe colonies reach independence, tbe more debates
jnaeasc: in length and sometimes in acerbity. It: U to be hoped, however. that u more
;md more solutions are found, these debate, Will cease to exetcisc the disruptive infl~
on lhe Atbnc:ic: Cotnmw:Uty which they have had. in the past, and that the closer co-
operation betwttn Western countries whit::h may be expected to result within the UN
wiD be bendicial not only to tbenudves. but abo to the Organization. At the same time,
the lack ofrestraint shown by the Communist countries constitutes a grC2t danger, so
dDt it is important for the Western natioru to have increased inlluencc, at a rime when
a rucccss£Ul proccM ofderolonization is reaching its md. In this connection. the speaker
deeply regretted the virtual ahKnce of franc(, from the debates.
He considered it highly dcsir.r.bk that the Wesrem countries should make a <:onunon
endeavour to put the ~of the UN on :a tounder basit. :md ~ the influence
whkh the United StateJ rould have in that connection. Although tbc: political possi-
biJitie, of the UN appear limited :at present, the oudook with regard to its technical
mist:an("(' activities i1 more: promising, provided that the Sccrctariat can be maintUned
as a body ofreally inremational civil 5Cf'Vant'l.
Although exprest1ng undentmding fur the negative attitude towards the United
Nations which prevails in many Western oountrie$. the r.apporteur thought it
~le that thev should remain active in the United Natiom so as to be U»e to i.n-
flumc:c: pubW:: o~nion. although the institution•s possibilities in the political fidd
should not be overrated.
Before inviting discussion on this item, the Cbainrum gave the floor toanAmcrian
parricipant so that be could present rome introductory remarks from Americm JOUra1
to offict the unfortunate_event! which had prevented the distribution ofan Amaican
report on the wbjca:.
Having pointed out that he wu in no way presenting :a synthesis ofAmerican opinion,
but rather t:aking :as a bam his own experience during a recent United Nations mission
in Palestine, the spctkcr mmtionrd Untly that the mbject: l'lldltioned in the agenda
(wfu»c me:aning was not altogcthet- dear to him) should not give rise to a discussion
on amendment! neededin the United Nations Charter, as thatwould eause insunnomu-
ahle prohtelll!. The most important need wu to discUS$ the e-xecutive role ofthe Unitd
Nations. which had dev-dopcJ considerably over the pm:eding yean and which some
pcrsom wished to extend even further. He mentioned JCVcral cases of dlicico.t work
which had bem curied out without any publicity, or had even beet Wrgom:n. Apart
from the Congo. which had attracwl all the attention, there had been United Nations
mis:sions to Jordan, K.uhmir, kbanon, Laos-, the lsrado-Egyptian frontier and at: all
those places incidents ~ve hem prevented from erupting da.ngetously owing to the
UN presence, an essential contribution to peace which iJ often undcr-dtimarrd
However, theeffectiveness ofthiseverydayaaionhasabohadthedfca:ofincrcasingly
inciting the Soviet block to handicap attioo. by imisting more and IDOre on its "troib"
••
formula, after practically paralyHng the SL't:Urity Coum;il by use ofthe veto and handi-
capping the work ofthe General Assembly.
At the tame rime, the executive furu:.rioru cf the United Nations an: a good thing
and should be maJnrained. It is not excluded, for example. du.t the coming independ-
ence of Ruanda Urundi wiD rte~.:essitate United Nations intervention u was DecdSafy
in the Congo, :md it is quite poWblc that; request for soch inttrVention may come from
the: Af'rian countries, whttc instability rrignt.
It i! therefore regrettable tlw: the financial ronsequeru::cs of t:hU activity are nor borne
by all the allid within the Adanric Alliance, as is :ffiown by the French refusal to p.ar-
ticipate in .6nanci.ng the Congo operations.
The speaker msed three questimu. Should the Atlantic Community promote :ut
t'Yclution towards interventions ofthat nature? Ifso, what llrould be its .attitude towards
the Scc:reuriat? Until recendy, the latter had been directed by Western nationals. but
the ntuation was changing rapidly and in the spc:akcx'J opitmul was doing sa in. a danger-
ous manner, mainly due to the Russian insinmce on taking more and more of their
nationals md the Afim.n desire to find posts for people who are not nec=rily the best
quali£ied. True intt"mational civil servants are becoming increasingly rare md thar i5 .a
disquieting fact. The third question was: In view of the conditions mentioned, should
the fUancial ~uences of the new activities be allowai co guide W cmm clecUiom
as to whether tky should continue or stop? What action is to be taken? The qaenion
does not arise mc:rcly in connection with the current issue of liN shares. There .appears
to he incomplete agreement within the Atlantic Community on ~ quemom.. which
ue ofvery great significance for their relations with the rest ofthe world.
The Chairman then gave the Boor to the Swedish npponeur who, having .affirmed
that we thould use the United Nations imtitutionJ. however imperfect they might be,
strnled that it was dangc:row: to ask ofthe United Nations more than it could accom-
pl:W:L In p.uticulu. so long u the United Nations h.as not found a SOWld fin.ancia.l b.asi!
fur its: :ICtivities. it is doubtful whether the Organiz.ation will be able to tcpw: an oper-
:uiou such as that of the Congo and it would be even more dangerous if it undertook
one withouf bciPg certain ofits ability to cany it rhnmgh to the end. It is abaunl. that
only twenty countries dfmivdy contribute to supporting the cou of sudt actions,
whm all the othen who do not contribute an dictate the line to be followed. It U.
iD £act. the United States which suppons the major pan: of the burden, not only by
its financial pmicip.ation. but also by in indin:ct contributimu to these activities. [t is
viral that the Western counttic:s should make a concerted dfort toby the solid 6nancial
Krundatioas needed fur such activities. The speaker Sal whether the new countries
should not pay at least a symbolic sum.
A treeond. RaiOil why too much should not be expected of the United Nations, is
me _.;.. ol=dy m...t """""""s me """"""offiruh.
Provided a reaJOIJ2bJe Gtude is maincaincd, the United Natiora, although unable to
gu.annu.:e po:.ace m settle majQr problems, can ~lay a ~ci.al mle in ,1pecial c:ues.
The rappormn mded his statement by tegretUng ona: ~the a~non.of~
in view of the great role which th;t country could play m the Umted Nanons m the
intereStS ofthe new Scat:c:s also.
In the su!Hequent deb:ae, Jeveni speakers. especially an Italian puticiJnllt. im.iJted
on the &ct that nowada)'$ any ronffict (paniculatly in connection with the dcco1oni-
ution process) could not be considered as bring ofaloal ~ture, iffor~ o~ ~·
bwlwe the Communists (and others) sought every occauon to explrnt the utuatton.
At the wne time, .any extension of a conHict involved terrible dmgers bo::.ause of the
cxiso:nce of nudar weapon!. War could no longer be consideTed u providing a
solution.
An Am.eric3in spe.aket rdCrred to the impott:mt role which the United NatiotU had
to pl.av, at its meR" presem:e could prevent a conflict between the Great Powm. Ht:
also m~tioned the mediating rok which the United Nations could play in pu:vmting
extension of a conflict. lt waa to be remembered, in that connection. that the United
Nations. by its presence. could fill cen:ain voith. at had been thown by some of the
eX2ltlples alreWy quoted.
How then coul<l the United Nations best fulfill ia necurivc role i Several1pe.aken
spoke about this point in tbe coune ofthe debate. some ofthem rd'etring to the Congo-
ld< pn«<l<nL "d~. • _c_< .L • • •
A Bdgi:w ~ thought it would be: aimcwt to reuuorce me org;uuunon • exec-
utive power md at the same time maintain the sovereignty which the members of the
United Nations wished to uphold.
Regarding the Security Council, a German speaker mentioned the opinion ofcertain
pawns tim the Co1111cil should take its decisions by a rruajorit:y vote, without a_ay ~
rights. However, ifit were so decided and ifa power such as the U~S~ fOund ~m
the rniru:>rity, it wu a:ruin tha.t it would not bow be£im:, the DJ.ajonty and .a choice
would have to be nmU: between the danger of incrcating the risk of war .and that of
losing f.u:e by capitulating. A very dmgeroW~ situation ':ould ~ be ~ ~ any
case. It wu precisely the impe:fectiom in the UN mechanism which made 1t pomble to
disum oonilictt by dHcuision, •subtctfugc' md tbc a4joumment of dc:cisious. An
Itali:w participant expresseol the wne vieW$, pointing out that the ~ Nations now
offtted the only meam of .approaching problew in a DWlJlCT pttduding war.
As mm.tioned by mother Italim participant. the exl$U11ct ofa world-wide parliament
was not enough in ibd£. No great problem could be solved by it unb it mmifmed
a certain degree ofagreement, expressed by a majority. Neither could the creation of
:my other institutions produce solutions by their mere existence. The speaker', views
were endoned by a British participant when he Wei that the Atlantic countries would
have to draw up a gcnenl policy (covering the economic and social fields) which could
be expected. not only to lead co .agree:tnent between them, but abo to have the support
.,
of a large number of Asiacit: and A&ican cotmtrics.. Another British panicipant agreed
with this ~c:r on rhc need for the: Atlantic countries to rome to agrc:emetl( with the
new col1ntl'ie5. If world pexe was in danger of being compromised, it was not the
n:sult of &be ~ on the part ofthe Atlantic States, but of the instability in the new
States. and it would be ne<:a5ary to obtain the agreement and consent ofthOle countries
fOr the United Nations to operate on their tnritorics.. 'fbt. contact was not to be sought
within the framework of the Atlantic group, but by bilateral conract.. Some eomuries
mc:h u the: United Kingdom (through the Commonwc:.Uth rdations), France (in view
ofits links with several Afiican St:lte:s) md the United Statn rould accomplish a good
deal rowards that end.
Nevertheless, a Turkish participant pointed out that the Atlantic label must not be
altogether repudiated. Neither riwst ~ be any fev in combating the demagogy
which Wa5 unfolding over the United Nations because more ~ more third countries
were becoming aware ofit md. might be ahle to dra.w valuable ksaoru.from the Wemm
atrittu.k, Would it not be possible-, as an American panicipant had suggesmi. to make
the new countries understand that they needed the United Natiotu more than did the
Western Powen?
An Atntrian panicipant stated that there wu no point in trying to hide the fiu:t that
sevml new members ofthe UN did not rcspea the Charter and th:tt the disproportion
which bad grown up between democratic md non-democntic counaies might bd
to majorities widely different from the balance originally foreseen in the Charter. He
abo W'<l!ldeted ifthe balance would not be tramfern:d to the dea:imenr ofthedemocratic
world ifthe uoihcation ofEurope resulted in only a single~ being given to Europe
at the world level.
Some tpeaken thought it desirable: not to seek General Auembly majorities on very
precise n:solutimu in onier to leaVI! the Seaetary-Gener.al latitude to interpret rhem.
The Congo affair had shown the impmtutce of a UN military body, u had other
examples quoa:d by seven! speaken. A British and a Nethetlan.<h pan:icipant roo~
pattiadu intc~eSt in that question. Although it was posAble as a long-term plan to
fOn:scc: anautonomous UN force, composed oftroops which had shown allegiance to it,
d:.ue would Cert.inJ.ybe no hope ofputting the idea into effect in the inunediare futwe.
In view ofthat impoMibility. the British speaker suggested that the nucleus ofa military
command might be formed right aw.iy, in spite of the &ct that it was not known in
advanae whichcountries would be asked to supply troops. and that a sort ofprdiminary
pWming might begin. What was wanted, however, said rhe Dutch speaker, wu not
so much a UN pmal sulfbut mbcr a sort ofitnl:rnationa1 rescue brigade. which im-
pti..t d.. -ofp<>IH< ...! civil ~ """'.. Tho pol;a, ~uld "'
mppJicd by the countties wboae: political nature rendered them moa suirab1t: for a role
of this tJatUre. The cxpens should baVI! wide aperience and a sense: of diplomacy so
m.. m.y would"'obk ., ;,p;no m. _..,.. poa;ble ~- nw ide. w m.
..
support of several speaken. in particular of.a Netherlands participant, who reaiicd that
Mr. HammarskjOld had put forwardsimilars\lggcstions in 1m reports for 19(10 and 1961,
but had not received much support from !he Western governments.
Several tpeUen mentioned practic:al means ofinterVention which the United Nations
might use and. most ofthem ufm:ed in that COIIIleCtion to the past. prac:nt and futu~
features of the Congolese affair. An Amc:rkan, a Belgian and a BritU:h speaker made
mervations regarding United Nariom action, especially with ttgard to Katanga.
The latter pointed out the importance of not trying to impose a 501ution, however
harmonious with political morals it might be, ifthe people concerned. in that puticular
case the KatanF• did not wUh it.. As nu.tten stood. if the United Nations left the
Congo. the solution of Congolete problems (and those of Katanga) would not have
advanced. especially in view of the bitterness caused by the affair, quite apart from the
serious dc:terion.tion in the economic and social conditions which had followed. It
wu neverthtJc:ss true, as several 'peakm had ~ out, that United Nations inter-
vention in the Congo had made: it possible not only to prevent a direct con&onution
ofthe major powers.but also,and it was an important point, aggrav:Won ofthe struggles
between Africans in several places. An Italian speaker nevertheless regretted the ~levant
divetgtncies which had occum:d between Western countries, hoping that the wne
siruarion would not arise in regard to economic assist:lm:c.
Extension and improvement of the Secretary-General's actions were cbdy linked
with the certainty of pouessing the necessary funds; which railed the problem of
Western contributions for enraordinary activities. At the $lUm' time, the support givm
ro the Secretary-General should not conflict with Western interests and principles.
These points were elWXlined by sevml speaken, rome of whom established a rdation-
shipbetween.them. An American participant, for example, pointed out that it would be
difficult to secure the funds necessary for the United Nations special bud.get ifthe public
did not have the feeling that its national principles would be respected. Anotht:T Ameri-
can participant called attention to the need to tbow more respect for moral principles,
in both UN and NATO, when cstabli.thing the policy to be fOllowed in the Afro-
Aiiaric regions. Athird Amerkan speakcr could not sec the value ofinddinitly financing
the upkeep offortt~ in certain parts of the world ifdfurt:s were not made to find a
lasting solution to the problems involved. . . .
On the other hand. as another participant pointed out, the counmes m the commurust
block mlght be incited to pay their part ofthe ~ expenditure ofthe United
Natiom by fear of seeing the Western ool!Jlt'ries exert increucd lntluc:na as a result
of their preponderant contribution. A Norwegian participant e'ltpressed the idea that
the USSR's refusal to contribute to the special UN operations might have hem do-
signed to reduce the r.utge c:L aclion of the organitation and limit it to a forum of
opinionslike the powttlessLeague ofNations bdim the war. Thespeaka recommended
as an immediate Slep that the Western countries should underwrite all the shares being
i&sued by W United Nations., but that as a long-term project agn:ement should be
rt:ldted bttwecn the Western countries and other countries intetmed and suflicicndy
rich. mclt as Japan. to pc:nnit a Wr dwing out of dwse rnponstDilitics, as equitable
distribution would make the load c;Wly bearable fur everybody.
An American participant with long experience of UN alfain and the European
rapporteur made some final comments on the points tmder discussion. The former did
not bd:ieve in the possibility ofsetting np a "brigade". Funds would not he fOrtbcoming
and as the poli.tial. si!uarion would be different in each crisis and difficult to foresee
in advmce it would be impossible to know what poJice force was going to be required.
It would abo be necessary to "dmariomlisc" the forces xnt out, but the prospect to
achinrc this did not loolt favorable at this moment. Moreover, it would be a nUstaltc
to under-estimate: the importance of UN "presence" even if dut cotuistc:d of but one
official. when it was a question ofavoiding c:onffict. Thespeaker hoped dw: the executive
power ofthe organiationconkl beincreued and he felt that such a development would
.Ja"Ve Atlantic intemn. Nevmheleu, in view of the curmu devdopme:nts, he had
50me d(mbrs on the ttubility ofsudJ a development.
In closing discussion on thit item. the Chairman stn:sd that, what~=Vtt might be
the individua.l feelings on United Nations action, DO improvement could. be expected
if there was Dot a cum:nt of powerful opinion in eac:h country to support the organi-
:wion. It was tberdOre the duty ofeach one to d.o everything possible to that end.
IL IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ATLANTIC
COMMUNITY OF PROSPECTIVE DEVELOPMENTS
A. IN THE EUROPEAN COMMON MA:RKET
DiKussion ofthis item of the agenda, wa5 facilitated by the distribution of a report
by aEuropean participant belonging to an international orgmization and a report from
A.metic2n souu:e.
The European rappon:eut divided his paper into tbe fOllowing thRc major sections:
A - an analysis ofEuropean experieru:e
B - an analy&is oftbe nature ofthe Atlantic Community
C - an examination ofthe possible role ofthe European Community in an Atbruic
~P·
A. The author began by describing the situation in Europe after the Wt world war,
from which it emerged weakened by wmparUon with the two giants. the USA and
the USSR. accompanied by the lou ofirs world-wide influence and economic coUapae.
The results ofearlla divWODS in Europe were dear, and the need for a unified Europe
became app.umt, even more Kl from 1~7 onwan:ls., through the ManhaU Plan and
the fOrmation of the OEEC. However, at the beginning of 1950, an umatidiactory
situation started to develop due to the f:ranco...Getma rivalry which appeared liltdy
to uUc: as a result ofthe beginning ofGetman economic ru:overy.
It was in this situation dw the then Frmch Forcign Min.Uter, Mr. Robert Scb~
came forwaul in May 1950 with a proposal intended to bring about :~. complete change
in the relations bctwem france and Germany and their European neighboun. It WOIS
no longer Juflicieut, .u in the past, merdy to give evidence ofgoodwill. to bring about
a "dete:ittc:" vulnerable to all changes in the political situation. Problems would DOW
have to be placed within an entitd.y new context in which common rules, established by
joint agreement and fndy acceptc:d. enforced by joint imtituti:oru would guannt.ee
the nations oonc:erned both security and equality of treatment.
It was obvious that this Europe could noc: be brought :about overrught. lt wu in that
5pirit and as a .6rx stage that it was proposed to place ~man rod and ~
production under a common ••High Authority" within the framework ofan otgam-
zar:iou open to other European countria:.
..
Wr: know that afttt the six countria had adopted the COO and Steel Community
~ 1l plan to crea~ a European Dcfmu Co!Dinunity oo the ume basis failed.
But aftawuds. nr:gotW:ions began which led to the foundation of the European
Economic Community(CollUDOn Market) and theEuropean Atomic Energy Commun-
ity (Eumom). These Communitio have irrunemdy stimuWed. Europe'J eronomic
recovery. What is c:vc:n mo«" important. they ue bringing about a profound change
in the rdatiomhip between the memba nations, :as shown by thc evolution offraoco..
German n:hriom.
fhving emblishcd a common matcrW int:crcst, tbe Emopean Commlltl.iti« have
proved that joint irutitut:iolu can function in Europe. Thac new bodies have laid a
roOd fOundation for fUnha progrns tow:ttds union in fields such as defmce and foreign
policy. In the meant:imc. the UK, foDowed by Den.mark and lrdand, has decided to
join, opening new pmpectives at both the European :md the Athntic kvck
B. The idea ofan Atbntic U:lmmunity wu first given concrete form througb the
Manhall Plan, the ~on which was set up to implement it - the OEEC - md
througb NATO. 1."he: common background ofthe Atlantic nations, ~ with the
ronsc:mt threat of Soviet ~on, made them realise tbeic need fur each odtr:r and
gave them the fi:d.ing that tbcir destinies had become irrevocably intertWined.
But bete, similarity with rhe European situation ends. Victory having been a reality
for the United States, it fdt able to solve its own problems. At the end of the so·J,.
the CoMion of the Atlantic Alliance wu the temlt of Amn:ian lcadenhip in both
military and «:anomie spheres. Wbcreu in matteD ofdcfcm:e the situation has remained
fundamentally the same, the spectre ofc:ronomic oolfapc bas been compktdy banished
and Europe is more prosperous than ever.
Neven:bdm. new problems are now arising and it is particululy important for the
Me Wodd to givea meaning to the concept offreedom fOr those wholive in the undcr-
devdopcd parts ofthe world. For them, mat:cria.l progress is 1l prerequisite to liberty.
This task is just as important as was that offacing out own problems fifteen yean ago.
But one nation alone, even a country as powcrlUl md prosperous as the USA, c:mnot
handle it. Only united. action, a conscious merging of c:ronomil: policy, monetary
st:Wility and a sharing ofrhc burden, will give the :ulvauced nations the sttengtb neces-
sary to surmount the problems ofdcvdopment :md defence wbkb now confront dlem,
Tbus. the Unin:d States.. for the first time in its history, 6nds itsdfin a situation in which
it can DO longersolve iQ proble!llll alone. In matters ofdefc:ncc, the Atlantic Community
B still a system under which the burden and responsibilitin rest ro a very~ extcut
on American sbou.klcn. There is DO real joinr elfon. shared to the same degree by all
the participating l:I:MioN.. The Adantic nations tbcrefuK have to adapt tbcir alliance in
order to rc-urodcl it into an eJfcaive instrument for coping with the new problems
wbidt luve ariaen and must overcome tlemiom tnU1ti.ng from this discrepancy bctwccn
ecoaomic and miliwy .kvdopmc:nt as well as diminace the ddc:repancy iud£
,.
C. How should this adaptation be dfected? What form dlould the Atlantic Alliance
bh? Due to tbe United Swcs'leadcnbip.k:uling to de facto hegemony. not wished
by it. an unhealthy situation devdoped from the faa that tbe Amcrinm fdr dtat they
had to carry too much of the weight alone, at the tame time as there wu distrust in
Europe ofAmerican hegemony, mixed witb the converse fear ofbeing left in the lurch
ifthings became really dangerous. In order ro restore the balam:e, the Alliance must be
placed on a new basis.
But bow is this to be achieved? Should dtc Atlantic nations follow the txaD~ple of
the European nations and tramform. thU a.Uimce into a community of the saiW: type,
th:u& laying the foundations (or an Atl:mtic feduation? To do so would be to ignore
1l diltimilarity between the European :md Atlantic situations. Europe needed a dnm.a.ric
break with the past. The United St:itc$, on tbe other hmd, are not prepur:d to accept
dckgation ofsovereignty to the degree accepted in Europe and a parmmhip ofa large
group ofnations. domin:ated by a single power or tied together by rnks :md instirutions
would alway~ be weak and vacillating. Thetc:forc, equal pannenhip between United
Eu~ and the United States is the n«:CSArf preuquisite for the strength and wlidarity
of<h< A<hmi< Al!i.no,.
Tbe rapponc-ur then rea1kd the transformations which had already taken plu:e to
that end in the economic $phc:re, particularly as a rC$ult ofthe tctting up ofthe OECD,
which permitted. moK inremc common action. Progress will depend. however, on the
possibility of mating an equal pannmhip between Europe and America in other
lidds as wdl. The European Community muse not only n:pand geographically (and
here the entry of Great Britain and other CQ1lntrio will constitute very importmt
milestones), but must a1w extend its field of action in political and miliary matten.
Europe mil5t be united as rapidly as pomble in the political and military 6dds..
It would be premature to state what imtitutions would have to be developed and
created to serve this parmenhip. IfEurope and the United S~ develop it ~ from
aspirit ofdomination and taking into account the intercsa ofodten, the day will perhaps
COllle when the Soviet: Union will no longer dream ofworld dom.ination. The process
thus $tOUted will not stop at the borden ofEurope, nor will ir stop at the borden ofthe
Atbntic world. It is the process ofcivilization~~ leading from the law ofthejungle
row.~rds collcc:tive responsibility.
The American report on dtc subject W» divided into nineteen sections:
1. The European Economic Community is developing simuluneoudy along three
separate liru:s:
(a) It is moving rapidly cowards the c:ulmination ofthe Common Market envisaged
by the Treaty ofRo~;
(b) The present negotiations with the United Kingdom, Detururk. Ireland. etc:., uc
leading towards a larger geographical scope and enlargenn:nt ofits hue:
,.
(c) 11M: negotiations among the Stx for a new tn:aty on political and defence co-
operation involve a ~t apmsion in ~ acti~ These three separate plane5
make it much more difficult to carry out a prease .anaJysis.
z. Seven! trends are nc:verthdess becoming clear:
(a) The EEC. ('V('U in its pfesc!Jt form. is tmding m act as a single entity;
(b) The ~ ronclusion of negotiations between the EEC and the UK would
solidify the fun:c ofthis action in the economic sphere. It is premature to aaeu the: dfect
of further co-operation in the political and defence 6clds bctwcm the s~ .and the
United Kingdom, but ifdUs takes place, it would be possible to start thinking offurther
Atlantic co-operation on the: basis ofan incrasingly concerted European view.
l· Despite the UDcertainty ofthe presmr sitwltion, it is urunistUable that the ~s
of Atlantic co-opention in the = ter.m will be the United St:ll.C:!I and the European
entity. This will obviously be eWer in those panicnlar secton of activity wherr the
Jevdopmmt of a European entity it furtbnt adVIInccd. Trade and ronunm.:W polit.oy
fall into this category, agricu!ture runs a doSC' serond. Co-<lpcn.rion in the field cf the
pcacdUl UXJ ofawmic energy is already far advanced.
4. It mutt be rc:alised. however, that then: is stillc:omidenbk rob.tmtive disagree-
IJl('llt among the European countries about tbe form which a European entity should
take. As a rmdt. there is a certain rel~Jctance to "think European" w~ in tum h:u
twO important conaequeDCt:S:
(a) An ~t ofthe extent to ~ cowztties and areas ouuide ofEurope
arc now beginning to think ofEurope :a an mnty;
(b) A &ilW't' to adopt: positions of ronct:rtcd resporuibility commensurate with tbe
new role quickly c:noug.b.
On the other hand. the tmdency outJide tbe Com11u.mity to consider the intcgraOOn
pwceu as being much more ~vanccd, in spite of the factors which may still deer it
or even prevent tbe creation ofan df«tive body.
s. This set of conflia:illg phcnotn.e:rua epitonl.izcs the prnent problenu of further
dcvdopmmt in an Aclantk Community. Europe must acquire a sense of in Utlity,
00mmc:nsunn: with iu new and powed'ul role in world afF.Un.
6. This implies a time lag.
7• However, the very act of crating the DCW entity brings problems in its train
which need to be ~«< in the short term. Moreovu, then: are a number ofm.a.jor
prob1dns in the Free World. which require u..gent solution and in the wlurion ofwhich
Europe must play a rok.
!. The tedmiques £Or procced.ing to m improved Atlantic orgauiution must leave
the EEC countries to COtllttUct an dltity on the ~ base and to extend it to the
politicaland military fidds. But these tedmiquo must also allow du: problem ofthird
COIJiltlict to be met and they must be dynamic.
9- 'l1w: amception ofUJ. equal p;artnenhip between Europe and the United Stares
permits of this. but it will work only to the extent that there il a European partner
ca.pable oftpc:aking and acting :a a single entity. The ptocess would therefore have to be
c:atTied out on a fimctional bam, whet than an imtitutional basis, by developing joint
dfOru where the EEC U able to move ~ :a an entity, resolving problems as they
~.
Tbete U :uaodxr and JttOngtt reuou for procced.ing a1ong functional !ina: » rbe
fact of a amsolidating European Ecoaottric Community becomes fl1f'ther apparart..
and as co-operation among me United States and Europe in the &arnewnrk of the
OECD moves along. ••ddi:suive" n:acriom au to be feaud on me pan ofthUd coun-
lrio (they m .Jrwly - ) ·ThU mggm<tlut ;,.,m,gemplwU lw to h< pl=l
upon the problems of the rest of the world, by using not only rbe existing European
and Adantic orgmizatiom, but also the largeintemation.al oxgmiz:WODS Jucb n GAIT,
the IMF, ett. Third countries must fed rbat an Atlantic pattnenhip it bendicial to
their intemt:s and not contrary to rbnn.
10. By wod:ing toged:ter in thU 11WlllU, the United Stares and the EEC will
arrive at much closer amngcmmts_ opening the way to a new equilibrium and the
considention of further *f!$ which it would not be realistic to try to ddine at the
mommt.
II. The alternative to pannmlUp is for Europe an.d the United States to find an
inc:reasing number ofliDite, present and irrevoabJc solutiOUJ to tbe kind of problems
which arue. There au tende:ncies today to IC$0{ye existing problenu in d:W &shion,
such as nuclear problems. the Nortb-Sourb Axis. ~ !Dr "auociation". Bot
web solutioru to what arc essentially global probkms ca.n only re3Ult ln each side of the:
Ad:mtk being forced into i.atrmpcctioa.
11 Ifthe emerging power axis in the Free Wodd is to be b.ucJ on a bi-polar ron-
apt ofa Europe and America, the solutions to the m.a.jor economic, political and mili-
tary problems to--day should be: geared to this conception. Any other solutiofll will
"'8"<.m po«ibility ofi• h<ing ~
Jl. h is in the: trade field that the European Economic Community lw already
begun to act u an. entity.
J4- The 1D05t important single dement in this fidd .it the levd oftariffS. Treating
;tgrirulture sepawdy, we find that, if the UK and EEC negotiations succeed, dose to
go% of the industrial goods moving in inretn.ationa.l trade will originate either in the
c:nluged EEC or in the United Sates, the only other major exporting countries being
Swedal, Switzedmd, Al15tria. Canada andJapan. This means that as the only dfect of
tarUfs in such a case would be m proccct EEC ~ &om American producm or
American markets from EEC producen, neither the: EEC nor the US could afford
to teduce carift'levd.s Wllnt this be donejointly, reciprocally, and on a most favoured
nation basis, so as not to penalise unjustly small marginal producm. bearing in mind
that tbe developing countries will Deed markets for their products. This means that the
"
reply ofthe United Stata and the EEC to the problesm may determine the orientation
of tbe rat of the world.
The tariiTs level ofthe EEC and the USA must therefore be negotiated between thest:
two to the lowest ptactiable levc:l. in order - md this is pritnordial- 10 allay the fean
ofsmaller third countries. The alternative ofseek:ing bilateral ~ arrangements
can only ICI'Vt: u a brake on the dynunic process in which the EEC Dengaged.
IS· This raises the problem ofspecial r:dati.onsbips esrablished or envisaged between
the EEC and third c:ountric::s: European statc:s desiring ;uaociation with it or seeking
preferential bilateral arrangemcuts and the Afiian countries. The question is whether
lhese cases have to be Dved on a "European" b;asis or ifEEc :and the United State~
dwe the responsibility. The rapporteur consiclcm:i that in view of the lioh betwer:n
the two sides ofthe Atlantic. the latter amwer W2S the COlT«~: one and dw it would be
unhah:hy, in the case of Afria. to pamjt the perpcnwion of a North/South axis in
m excl~ form. Mote:oftr, the cona:ptioa of preferences or sphem of influence is
most dd'eai:ve in those area5 of the world wheR prinw"y responsibilities are nor now
d=ly .Jdmco...J.
t6. Thc:se cotWderat:iom indicate that the United Scates and.Europe have a series of
wh before them which must be resolved without waiting fOr Europe to become- an
en~. ~ in~ dosec policy rdatiombips in the OECD :and a new con«:ption
of aid relationship between the OECD countries and the dcvdoping countJ:ies.. In the
trade field, these tasks ma.y be dacribed as follows;
(a} Lower tariff$ on induurial goods. allaying the fears ofthird countries;
(b) lmpon.tioou from dtffiopmg rounoric (mcluding Indio, Hong Koog. PiliKon
andJapan) so char they can ~ the foreign exchange necessary to meet their require-
menu;
(<) Non-dUainU.wory impom of tropk.J ogri<ultunl J"OO- nWcing diOm
to eliminate price fluc:tuatiom;
(d) A common approach to the problem of t:empemc-zone agriculrural foodstuffi;,
so:kiag Durions on a global basis.
17. ~to solve aD these problems can now be implemented by means of110me
""""" """"""" h<tw= ohc Unitod s-. ohc """s<d EEC "'d ohc principol
e:r.portiDg countries cona:med.
1s. So long u the basis ofthe sruurion is C:SKntially .agreement between the umted
States and the enlarged E.EC. the insrituti.onal fonm:u where this is done are less impor-
tant. Foe tbe time being. every dfort :lbould be made to use the: GAIT :and the OECD
where there ~ appropriate. nd:u:r than estt.blish new institutions.
19- As~ habit: ofw«king in common inaeases,. it will be possible to add new
problems which em be trt:aml on the basis of a single European view. AJ the habit
ofa cxmu~M*t view atmds to the polit:ica.l. and military field.. the system ofpartnenhip
co-opctaClOI1 can be ntruded to fit it as wdL
,.
Before opening the discussion, the Chairmm gave the £lOOT to the author of the
American report so that he could comment on the twc:1 introductory reports.
The speaker called attention to the speed with which science. tlcdmoJogy and military
questions had developed tince theend ofthe war. It was still bard to cona:ivc lbe conJC>-.
q~ of-~ optti.Jly me pombili<y ofph,.,;al .kouu<tioo of""' wodd.
It namrally was not neceaary to adjust Oll:f thoughts with the tame 'peed when evalu--
ating social. and ec.onomic-polirical developments. It would have been difficult to
foraee in 1945 md tg.¢ the tremendous evolution of the world Stuation which had
resulted from the bmking up ofthe rolonial1ystem. the appc:aance ofnew Sates, the
f.Ul of the iron cumin be:tween Europe and the East, and the progress of European
union. even if the latter still appeared inadequate. The vigorous support gi'ft:D to
European union by lhe United States was based on the conviction that the United K.ing--
dom would eventually assocWr iaelf Wrly soon md that a new rdationship on :an
equ.al fOoting c:ou1d then spring up between Aznerica and a Europe speaking with one
voitt. lmtitutional urmgemeots would be Deeded to reach the desired association in the
politial and economic 6dds. Regarding milicry matters. the U!Wd Statdi were
convinced that the defeno: of the free world Wa$ indivisable and that NATO hacl to
continue. That was why, in his opinion, the formation ofa United Europe should not
lead to a military autonomy contrary to the concept ofour common defence. Regarding
the sphere ofeconomics., he rc&ned to the growing succea ofthe work ofOECD.
In order to permit more orderly discussion. the Chairman proposed thatthe following
two points should be discussed separately:
1. Negotiations between the United Kingdom and the European Economic Com-
munity - the repercussions of those ncgot:Wio.m on the Atlantic Community and the
rdui.ons bt:twtm Europe and the United States;
2. Expansion ofthe Atlantic Community and the problems ofneuttal countries.
Several spe:aken discwaed at length the question of the United Kingdom's entry
into the Economic Comnumity.
An &tglUh ~er recalled the obstacles which his country's parliament might raise:
with regard to the United Kingdom's entry into the Common Market. Two other
British participants, both belonging to parliamentary circles, made a comment in dw
connection: in spite of the violent campaigns launched in Great Britain by a a:nain
part of the Press~ the aca::uiOD of that country to the Common Mukc:t (cam-
paigns of whkb the importance ought not to be undcr-ntimated), if it were merely
a qnmioa ofsupporting such aa.:esston. a favourable decision would already have been
taken. However, the final attitude af the Government. u wdl as that of tbc o8idal
Opposition would not be taken until the enct conditions governing admigion were
known. whJc:h - not yet the cue.
Wb.u was the exact dfect ofBritish acccmon to theEEC: One oftheaforemmcioned
!peakcn said that in Great Britain both the Government and the Opposition regarded
the negotiations under way :u being ofan essentially economic nature. The real polirical
oo-Opcrntion was to rake place within the larger 6-amcwork ofNATO or, as regards
military matten, through the Uni~ States of Europe. In acceding to tbe Treaty of
Rome, the United Kingdom did not intmd to aca:pt engagements ofa supn-nariona1
nature or implying a common foreign pollcy. It w:u not, in that particular case, a
qrn:stion of creating the Uniud Stata ofEurope md that point hadto be dearly csrab-
!Uhed to stan with, :u tbe sulniatenc.e of any misundenunding on this point might
result in Great Britain being accused subsequmdy of•'Uboc.ge".
This point was also dolt with by two otherEuropean participantJ; a Bdgian ,peaer
wbu considered that the United Kingdom's mtry into a uni6ed Europe was a necoaity
md a German speaker who pointed out that the Treaty of Rome made no rcfcttnce
w~ to a creatioa of a feden.tion oc confederation, but fortaw amngetnena
cilling for action decidtd upon in common, e.g. with ~ard to economic policy md
the control ofcompetition. and also with regard to the bringing into harmony offiscal,
social and monct~.ry kgislnion. No more was asked of the Britith. lu to the futun!
prospew. in vkw ofthe inherent dynamism of the Common Market, they could not
be considemi in the light ofavailable data.
11l.e main difticuky of the British, 1mt even more so ofthe Commonwealth,u bad
been stressed by variow tpeakm, la.y in the pn:fermria1 trade arrmgemcna between
Great Britain and the Commonwealth countric:s. which wc:re of vital importance for
wme of the countms concemed. That wu why a Canadgn speaker, whik declaring
his warm support for both the Commonwealth and a United Europe embodying the
United Kingdom, oevmhdess n:al1cd that 36% of British exports come: t'rom the
Commonwcalt:h. and 95% of the farm products of New Zealmd (meat and buttrr)
wmt to Great Britain. The same: w:n true ofa third ofthe apom tiom Auatr:dia and
Glwu and of65% ofthe tea exported by India. Quoting otbct CDJDples. the speaker
pointed out that in the c::ate ofhis own country, Great Britain was the main outlet for
its major produa:ions. such as wheat. aluminium, nickel. copper, zinc. cte.
Ho~. problcmi ofthat type did not appear to be insoluble. lu had been poina:d
out by other participants. the thorny question of :agricultural produce could be split
into two pam: producQ &om temperate Commonwealth countries and tropical pfOd..
ucts. The former problem was linked with the common ag:ricultur.al. policy of which
the principle bad just been agteed upon bttwoeu the Six after la.borious oc:gotiatiom.
'l"h< '!""'ionof«n>piW prod""' wulinhd with dut ofw p<di=>a.l"""""""'
which had .already been gnntcd by the EEC to cert:aiD Afiican countries and which,
as a Dutch participant and an_Italian participant bad suggcstcd. might. during a pre-
liminary stage, be extmdcd to tbc Commonwcah:h countries. Whereas an American
speaker had crpz~acd the: wish. app:uendy shared by othc:r partidpana. thatthe lower-
,.
ing ofthe tariffS ofthe European Economic Community should be: cn:nded bnally to
agricultural products. especially so as nOt to encourage indlicimt prod11crion by thc:
cst:ablisbmmt ofurificial prices. a French participantpointed out that this pmupposed
a slow XlCial evolution, which was greatly prekn.ble to a revolution. in the European
countries in question. However, in the long run, u an Amc:rican participant bad pointed
out ~y. it was a question of ensuring equa1 accns for the products of aD
.kvdoping countries and. thus of eliminating prefcreutiall}"tems, which wc:re in any
case cont:rary to the regulaciom ofGATr,
lu stated by a Netherland& speaker, the Brussels discu.uion appeared. to have disclosed
a large measure of agreement. He also mentioned that agreement had been n:achcd
thuc on two points:
- Transitional mcuurd, spread over five m seven yean. might be applied to
Commonwealth exports:
- Solutions were already in view within the EEC for some of those products. for
example hy mcam oflong-term supply ~
1m American spokcr supported that opinion and added that the dynamic cbaractu
ofthe Common Market and the rise in the standm:l ofliving which it would produce
would. probably lead to increased consumption and permit solution of the problems.
In addition, the Common Market ought to adopt a Jibcral policy permitting thc
entry of thc agriculwral producu of oonc:cm to the Commonweah:h. Where they
gave rUe: to cJttrCmdy difficult problems, global solutions would have to be fOund
within the free world and some ofthotc sohuiom ought to be sought without delay.
Although raw producu comtituted most of the Commonwealth exports to Great
Britain. it would be important not to nqJca: industrial c:xpora from the low salary
countries (Pakistan, India. Hong Kong), for which. as the umc American speaker
pointr:d out. special arrangcmcnts would have to be made.
A Belgianparticipantnotedthatas marten alreadystood.mucb ofthe Commonwealth
produce mcrdy passed through London for mbseqocnt re-exportation to Europe md.
that w;cuion of the United Kingdom would not lead to any change in the sit'lw:iott.
1n me ~ ort1m .J<bm, ==1 .,.,.w. - Italim. em.dUn md EngWh - =-
piwised that the qucuion under discussion had more apolitical aspect than an economic
one and that the links nttblishcd wirhin the Commonwealth wcu ofgreat importmce
for the free World at a t:ime when the Communist threat was becoming greater tOr the
devdoping countries. The desire to maintain dtOK' links waJ not Uupimi by a British
hop< of•'wDmmg oo both fronu" ,.J ifm.,.,linh diappo«d dx.e would bo oodUng
"' «pb<e Wm.
Another difficulty (which was dealt with in more dcail during examination of the
problems ofthe neutralEuropean COI.Dlttic!l) w:u mc::ncionc:d by two British participants.
They refcrmi to the United Kingdom commmncnc to all its panru:n in the: Earopean
Free Trade Association, commitments under which it could not go off on its own to
37
join the Common bWkct, abandoning them ro their fate. That &ct would have to be
borne in mind during the negotiations and was recognised by a Netherlands participant.
In view of 50me British haitatiom, a Belgian participant recalled the ~ of
the~ attitude with regard to the Treaty ofRome. Certain safety clauses had been
included in that TreatY ~y in order to meet in advance some hesitation md thus
permit it; raci6cu:ion. Inpractice,ithad not hem necessary to make use ofthose clauses.
Similar lrlcthods could no doubt be applied ruccc:ssfully in the negotiations with the
United ltingdom.
Scv~ spcaken rd'erTed to the French Govmunmt's position and the fears raised
by the: f<wJation of a "Parisjlkmn axis". An Italian participant stated that the German
Go~t's attitude wu somewlut :ambiguous. whereas that o( rhc French Govern-
ment ~ ••roo dc:ar''. Other participants c:xpresst:d their &an with regard to the possi-
bility of an agrec:mmt between tht: President of the French Repu~ ~ the Chan-
cellor ofthe Fcdcal It,.cpublU.: ofGermany, designed to keep the Uniud Kingdom Out
of the: European Cooununity, rhus rompromising the: Adantic association wbir:h was
~ "' <>kc wp<.
A ~ participant thought that mch fears were to a great ~f the result of
misun~ding. E:s:ptt:ssing his warm snpport for the entry ofGreat Britain ?'to~
EEC, he: said that his Government's opposition to certain funDs of mpra-nationalit
Wxdd l'ltthcJ: tmd to favour British accession. Howt:ver, ifit was to be 110lid. the pro-
posed ~ must h< ~panietl by teciprocal saczffice and it was dwsc sacrifices
wbicb ~at the roct ofmany ofthe Wsting dif6c:ultit:s.
A Geanan participant mt:sscd tbt: politica1 importance of the franco...German
fric:ndsbip for the whole of the: West. Care: mUJt be taken to avoid creating conditicms
wbkh V..ould force Germany to make a choice between friendship with mru:e and
£iitndshi.~ with tht: Qtha- Western (;Otmttic:s com:cmed. Another German participant
stated thM his Government had given its delegation, raponsibJe for tbt: Brussek nego-
tiations, insuuctions to make cvay effort to &cilitae full economic :and politkal parti-
cipation by the United Kingdom. He: denied that the Fedenl Chancdlor had stated
that he ~uld pn:fer Great Britain to be an usociate member. It was the opinionof~
German govcinmmr that tbt:rt: would never bt: a unified Europe or a co~ po~
on the C:ontinmt if Britain were not present. The Gennan govemmcnt coasidettd tt
essential to maintain fOOd n:latiom not only with the: United Stata:. but also with the
United ltingdomand France. Another Gennan speaker nwlc a similar ~L .
Ifthe ~ nevertbdc:ssWled, what would be the consequences? This quesaon
was ~ by tevmai spcakcn and produced various answers. Certain ofthem thought
it a h~ ID'llikdy to become rc:ality. Otbcn viewt:d it .u a danger which might
well matmalirc in the near future. ~ vast majority ofthe European spcakt:n and aD
tbt: ~ who ~ on the suiject c:xpcctcd such an event to have disamous
""""!"""""-
,.
As an Italian participant pointed out. if the negotiations &ilr:d, c:ven the: dc:gut: of
European intt:gration already acquired would be jeopardized. There could be no
quc:stion ofreturning to zero .u it would cawc: toO rnuc:b bitterness. Ht: fdt that a great
deal depended on Gmt:ral de Gaulk. Moreover, .uEuropeanand Amc:rican speakers bad
already mentioned, the detrimental dft:cts would suucb to the otherside ofthe Adantic
and that might lc:ad to movements ofopinion against France and Gemwty as those
rc:sponsible fot the failure. Mon: important. theentire policy recommendedby President
Kennedy (and which he would have: gteat diHiculty in getting accc:ptcd by Congn:ss)
would stand in danger ofcollapsing. The bill authorizing the Prc:sident to lower tariffS
• end in parliamentary dc:fc:at. A painful rc:vUion of United States policy might
become necessary at the very time when a cmuidcnble swing in American opinion
bad OCCUfied ~y in business circles, .u bad been shown by the n:porn ofrwo of
the American participant$. Sc:vcral spt:aken from both ndc:s of the ()C(';ll) bad referred
to the momentum wbic:h had been attainc:d and this momentum must not bt: allowc:d
to dissipate.
Ont: British speaker whose opinion on this matter wa notshared by otherparticipants
cxpreued a somewhat less a«gorica1 opinion; warning the Amc:rians againsc over-
optimism rtgarding the imt!ll"diate outcomt: ofthe negotiations. he hoped that the ups
and downs ofthe: discwRon would not be pmentcd to the public as a qlleuion oflife
ot dc::ach for the Wc:st. Even an appan:nt 5Ctback at tbt: beginning would QOt be a
diaasecr•.u it might perhaps ~ dt:legau:s to pn:part: geographically wider solutions,
because it bad to be bornt: in mind that the nri~ problema in tbt: eronomK:~
6dd required world-wide solutions. It would be wUc: to prepare Amerian public
opinion for the poeDbility oflong negotiations.
Sev<nl '!'"""'" ap«WWy ..._ <be t..S.... """""" md lldgWu. poinl<d0"'
mm., """""""" m.. <be <kt=nining u- would h< <be polibal -
ofthe various parties cottemlC'd; none ofthe: tr:chnia.l prohlt:nU whic:h had arisen were
insoluble and sumc ofthem could even be solved in various ways.
The many spcU.cn on this question rdCrred to the need toavoid the formation ofa
dosed and restricted market. An Amt:ricm participant spoke: of his country's concern
(shared byjapan. a Wcmm ally) not to find itsdfin an unfavourable: poUtion W-a~vis
the apanded EEC as a rt:Sult ofprcferential arr:mgemc:nts granted simultaneoudy to
the member countries ofthe European Free Trade Aisociation, the Overseas Cmmtric:s
and the auociated thiN cowrtries. A Belgian participant also IDCJ.tionc:d anxiety oa
that point. On the other hand, an Italim and a Fn:ru:b participant were concerned lest
.an aaempt: to launch too vast .and vague an undertaking, so fat as it;~ rules ofopt:ntion
were concc:mc:d, should lt:ad to dUpt:rsion of dtt: dynamism which bad permitted tbc:
acquired ma:ess ofthe Common Market.
Several speakc:n brought up, in t:hUIXmJlc:ction, the problt:m ofdefence and nudc:at
wcapom. Although there wu tmanimity regarding the indivisibility ofthe: free world's
39
defcnc.e and the role which NATO sboulcl play, some participants thought that the
principle of free parmc:nhip should be enendcd w military marten abo. A. German
participmt pointtd out the potcnrial role of the Western European Union in this field.
Another German participant, exprcaing support fur the idea of very wide Atlantic
aatOciation. nevertheka aJled attention to the danger ofcemib campaigns, conductt"d
puticulatly in the UnUM States. cn:aring the idea thatEuropean aa:omplishmmts with
a view to integration were already out of date and that it was time to build up an
Atlantic supcrsate ofwhich Wuhington would be the metropolis.
Seveul speakers from neuttal European countries explained their probknu and
opiniom during the rdevmt puu oC the debate.
Having pointed out the role played by his COWltty in the political, erouomic, cul-
tural and historical development ofEurope. a Swafuh participant scued tbat tbe neutral
cotlD.tries wanted to achieve some 1011: of synchronism with the development of the
Common Marlet. so that more vigorom ueps could be taken later and that w.as why
they ardently hoped for tbc: auo:eu of the negotiatiom betwem me United Kingdom
and the EEC. especially u tbe Bricilh Government, as bad hem pointed out by other
panicipana.. bad undertaken the previom year not to commit i.tsdf with regard to the
Common Market withom its partnc:n of the European Free Trade !wociation. The
temu of;u.sociarioo should not be dircctrd merely to the expansion oftrade, but should
also pmni.t more encmive common action in scvcn.l. 6dds. A line should be drawn
between provUiom of tbat natllff and those w!W:h. in the Trocy of Rome, appeared
co imply a political alliance incotnpatible with DC'Uinlity. Several event~ had thown,
and were still showing, that this neurnlity was ofbcndit co the: West and that it was
in no ~y rynonymow. with isolat:ioniuu, as had been proven hy the high degue of
integration already accomplished bctwccn the northern oountties in spite of their
diH'ering foreign policy. There was in &ct no question ofSweden and the other neutral
countries enjoying the advantaget of £he Rome Treaty without supporting the draw-
backs and the provisions ofthe Treaty which Sweden was able to acrept were far more
numerous than those wbU:h it bad to reject.
The determination ofthe nwml countries not to W: for a privileged position and to
play an active part in ccrain common tasks w.as 2lso sucssed by a Swisa participant,
who quoo:d. as examples: c::o-opertrion with the underdevdopedcotmtriesand scientific
racarch eapccially in dx 6dd. ofnuclear energy and space rftWclt.
A Fiauisb participant explained the spc:cial position ofhis country as a neighbour of
the USSR mel bound to Drutrality by it:i tte:atie:l with that country whiht depending
for~~% ofitt aaUona1 revenue upoo iu exporu. 10% of which Wdlt to Great Britain
and the CollUilOll Muket countries. Finland was therdim extremely intnmed in the
cum:nt acgotiationa. wiW:h should under no citcumstances lead to the erection of :J
high tariifwall. as dw would conHitute a tmibJc blow for an ecooomy which. in spite
of heavy burdens. had been ahl.c: ro recover by its own elforts after me war, whilst
~ the principk off= """J>'U<.
An AuHrian participant pointed out that his country had alrudy gone a long way in
Europ= ro-op<ntlon wUbout .t.ruloning mneo=lity. The popubrion of A....U
really felt that it bclongc:d to Europe. What w.as required from the EEC (and the Umted
States. by their support.), was a true desire to accept associarion and in the case of the
neuual coUJJtties .a poaibility ofJCaring clead.y during negociations the positions which
they could not am::pt without prr:judia: to their neutrality. T1w: poiru: was also raised
by a Gcrmm. a Swiss and three Swed.Uh participants. There were obviously sectoa
in which it wu a ~ matter to make my distincrion. One ex.ampJe mentioned
lwl """ "'""""" tnde policy. whlcl. .,.. pod«tty ""l"'hk to e=ybody in prin-
ciple but which, in pnaia:, could involve mcuures of economic war which might
drive dx neoml rou:atries much tUrthet than they were prepared ro go.
Sevmd. participants from other European countries took put in the debate. They all
supported participation by the neutral countries. for wbkh the latter expreued. their
gntinuk. Ooe S-wh >p<ol=. bow<vtt. ap«»<d hU am=n wi<h the ~
attitude towards the question ofthe neum.l countries.
The poRtion of the neuual countrin aeemed to dUftt from case to case. An Italim
participant m.ade :a distinction between thme on which neutrality was imposed (Finland
and Austria) and therefore did nor have a very free hand in deciding upon ~
with the EEC, and those: who were neut:r'oll by choice (Swedc:n and Switzerland) :md
were tbud'ore much freer to commit theuudva.
Bearing in mind the:x v.arious faaon, several spaken &om both the neutr:ll and
otbc:r European countries agtt.ed on the neal to .achieve association in the Jong run by
adopting u pragmatic an attitude u poasible on the basis ofthe provisions ofthe Rome
Treaty, without imagining that there w.as only one blueprint fur associarion or- what
was more important - that the plans wne prc-detennined by what bad already been
accomplnhed or envisaged for other t:OUnaies nor bound by a status of ~ty
(fmkq....! G=e;, p>tti<u]M).
The Chairman called en the Eutopean rapporteur to dose the dacussion on that
item ofthe agenda. The 1atttt mentioned that in reviewing the main points ofthe dis-
cussion he would give his penon.al vinv1 and not the opinion of the •'Comltrrc of
Action", ofthe ChidS ofthepolitical partiesand the trade unions. Itshouldbementioned
that many participants did not share the n.pporrem's views.
The spc.akcr then declared to have been strudc: by tbe bet th.at spe.aken from the
patties in power in '¥Uious rountrit:ll had expressed the wne opinions on .molt of the
problmu ....Jc, dUamion .....,.un from the~·
What were the wb of the Atlantic Alliance? Referring ro the SUli1DJMf of ao
Ameri«;m participant, the speaker bad disa::med three nWn ones during the diacuuiom:
{I :'' rrcn::H the: (t>[J W:tf drgeJICT~tlllg int,> a hc't \\.lr.
:.• rnrh .1 :-:~<dm v:vc:-:Ji wlti: r:;..- L~~R wh:,b ~()u;,! 1ulnnpendy lc.hl to:..
!HJ\: )'~Jn"
~u ~nc df(·nic; .!'>l,tJnc~ to th·~ unJa-cl~n~l''F"d <:oumri..-s
·r hcc.: tilrn· dljt\"tlW\ were lll fKr d,'":!:· Enkd ;mC an n~cmi.;.~ (\mJ:tic>n fer d:c1r
Jna:nr:·~:tt \~.1, tb: the IJ"."..-<t 1hc:<ild n:n:Jlll dv,dy :.:u:td. S.:<:h vmty dq<:nJd ,m
a:: pr:n~nb:j' b:·H\<c'<:ll thl" l:nnni 'tJk; :Uhl L'.lropr. :\unr.14 the :~g:r(l"!t:cm ni
upmnn ,,n tha: pn:m. tht' \f'C.>J...cr CXj'fc·l~nl lm mp}>'r: for dH· <~xtemwn of that
'"'F::di:; :.nt<l m::1ran· qt~<."'>Wllh L•ct.Hl'><', 1! thv 1dc:1 ci" :1 tbni i\nce w~> ro bt· njc·ctnl.
It IXFHCj t·· the· Lnit,.(! St.Hc'l Jnd F'
:>lr. !1vd: :u,i ,urd h·::,rc- t.be A~"·'nbly ,,fthe C::J>'ri ufWem::m hlrDf'C, rh.H .1
f.ur,Tl"Al poet ef' tnv ,,·ut,! ar.d ua:ct L_,, rc'J,.bnl ,,·,;.a.::n~ ,::·L·rke nl.ltttn UJ 'o [lr
l-1 :1 rc·:n.1.md ~i"dy Jiu;..c,J with rb,· :\:l.u:n~ Alb.m~\~. '·Sp~ead:r.g of tLe -..nnk'' was
,inlr.thlc. bur :t >fwn:J IWt le.lc! to ~ Jt\ :,;,en ;;) r<.''j'•'f>1bil:ty. ~Jtidtal nc:d,·Jr f~JfCc~
>vert nut .1 od::nnn.
Th,·rc lnd be~:1 mud: Ji\db-wr: J' t<' wh·th~-r ti:c Rome m:d P;;m Tn:·Jti<'$ lh'rc 0f
a puhn,~l •'r rurd;· <>:O:h'n:i•· n.:tnn-. ln t:.d. borh aspccb were ,k>1dv rd.~t..-d.
'!hen· ]u,llxu1 gmerd ag:ecmcnt tlu( dt<: E:EC had tCJ bt· or-:::n r-..' the worlJ am! n"t
dmcci in"'' mc·lf. nnd the ~rca.ka, wh<1 w:n reas,l:-:ab!} optimJStK rr~.mliug ~l~
(l1ln:umr <•t the cbrm,i<Hl> unde-r way Lct'ktcn tSc Ln:tccl Kingdmu .l.tld th~ I·.EC.
The :nor::•nHum .1!'f<'.1rni H' h~vc· hen f:JVC:l :UJC the atmmpha.:o appeared to b: ~
i:.n·ot:nbk (!llt\ es?aul~;- a; '"" t"r.!l of :he pwblnr.> mm;;mding w1thm the E.EC (e.g.
thJ: nl P•'hcv' ~alkd (,,. ~,msd(·7at:.im1 of:h· dc·sirc:. of third .:oumries.lf
""~' ~ho r¢vognccd th,<t th· Fre!; ~,V,,r)d lud w br:ng ab<Jlit f!;fi::awr frectf,,m of t:J.de
and th~t dw \V,·,t i!.lci tn •:pnlltl d<Jnr> ''' dH.o man~.:f..:·wrc.lg:c1l)lh oft:hedcve!optng
rou.mnc·;. T::c nc,e,,J.rv ri.1::; and gWidm:~ pnncipks w.:r.~ bong: dr:nvn up fc>r thc
wudd-11 id" •Jl',:Jnizm;:o:, •ll n:Jrkrts for tPj'IOI pwduno. T!]{'re w;;s t.htlS formed .l ><."t
uf ,,,ndith>m i::;,-,'t:ubk !~'r ~ '"Lv:ton. r<pcci~Ev \\Jth regard tc) th<-" prnb!cnu o( th,.-
Ccmn:onv.ea!th.
Regadin)!: the pw!Jbm .,(the nn:tral emmtne~, lt olio seemed th~t .1grcrment ~as
\!(}!lh/. tu h~ re.1~·hni vn t!w f.tct tlut thc EEC h;;,i a rt'1Thlnsillllitv to th~m, wlH~h
;;,,~);~ evrn b.: cxtcndt>l ScvunJ Et:rop: (q:. hr.1d). Arr~ng:emem~ were therefore
po'>lb],._ rrovided all 1idn rc;,hzed :!ut the EEC mtcnt!cd -,,·rting: np ltrcvGCJ.bk bond~.
'' h-·rta> th· nn;tral c"('tmtrin !u,l cli2:"crc:nt aims. 1t w.11 thl'rcfure ns:nriaL :u haJ been
sbo11ll by ~wn~c·:J. \1!--;ch had (01l~HlcJhl:.- muc·a.<cc: 11.1 c1port to the Cunmwn
•
\1ark('t ,lurin~ the rrn:cdmg: su.; m'•nth.>. !Pt N ra~": pr<!blem> 1n atkam:e, bnt to solve
them~-' ;md whc'!l the:- ar,>;c. A<ltbt wa; nd eA;tndicwry to th•: pnmar:· 0bjunvc;,
wbd: lllthr be tc• ltnl"c· t~1r w<nkl-w;dc wlm.um a::d a >trc:nt-:rhening or" the AtbntK
J.o\nciui,•n. L"nbi.e ••1h1or p~rr1L>p:n::;, dw ~pcakcr did not f¢d t!,~t thae wa; obsrrucriun
from the Pre;1Jem nf the fto:nch Rq.•ublh.·.
11. L\1PLICATIO:-.:'i FUR THE .A. l"LANTIC
C0.\1.\lCNllY Of PROSPECf!VE DEVELOP\-1ENTS
H. 1:-.i I HF OR<~A~lZ:\TIO:\ FOR !:Ct.J.:'-<OM!C COUi'i:.RA rtO:\
A""D !H.VLLOPML;.o.; r
D::i<:ll;,,wll o( ch:, p.rrt '~i tL; -lfc·ndd \\",\, rrc'!';;r,:,! )v enn r, pol!.•. n"·' ,Jn,\ 11 np
111 the Cnird St.ltc> Jll{i twc in F.:n>rc-
T wo ot" theoc nT'':h :'one [fom ~n .'l.mdK.1H and:::.: ,>th:r tfnn ,l Eur''P''an '.umu.:)
,lea!t n'awly With n·omJntu: and iin.t:JCul ~"-•'pn.<tion. <:onr:ntntJ::~; ·>11 a r~vu~ ,,f:l:c
wuri<. a.:hl F""'bdin<.·! uf OECD Wqrfm!! I'Jrt\' _,, whi!~r rhc orber tw<) ,.,bo ti-otn
Anwric.111 Jnd Ellr"l'C:l.ll ,,,ur;:c<) dcvd:c! more Jt:,:nrwn t<l the pwSlon.> ,lf .l>llltanc·e
tn th.: 1;,.,-d,>pm,_; wum:rin.
As th~;t' r~rc'ftl oltL1l c.>Va the \amc wbych, .mel m ••r-:~r co .1vuhl r,Tctm•>n, d:n
w:H b: ;m:murizd hl·n· bricrl\, p:ntKniarlv in o;p f.1r a> tile;-· rcfn Jirc~:ly w the ·'~c·nda.
The Amcr:ca.n rt~•lft. Jev.•t.:.i f<' <'U'fh'J:l:c ;nhl illl:nn.,! c,..._,'Perat::,ll Wlt!un th~
OLCD, bcga.n !h,'CIH[! rbt th· ,~.~L •>f dw n;,Jv;:·n:;·nr, Ill fJv,om of 'nr:cal:ng mru-
penctration of thr \"l:/c,rcm wumno llll!;;lv: bd to J \Uhd1ry wbJ,h c0ul,lnn h~vc
l1ecn dream( ot" m the pasc.
Fn:.>nci~! CU-<'j.'aatinn betW~dl J!l"" Gc·;:;m .1: r:1c Ghi _,f tlw w.1r \\'"th dw Hrd~Gn
w,)ocL C'ni;-rt"l!C~. m l<j.p, 'khKh bl w tb: cc~at:.m oi the lmcm;>ti.m~l .'i.1o'!ICU:;·
Fu:d ~uJ thc \\/r,r[J H.mk. In 19.17 came r!h· :>l.w;h~!l F!:m wh<·h lc:J t,, d1c OLf.C
and btn tu t3e bwadc~-b.1s~d OJ:Cil I\)r t!mtccn vc·.1r>. dh' OEEC, ("'f'~c:alh­
thh~ugh ltl<;h tmt:"umtnts as the· Eur,'pcan l'aym<·nt> Cmcn ~nc! th~ L:mp:'.l!l M.,ncCJ.rv
Agre:·l1JL1:Jt. perm:ttd v::rv crtiu~nr rcgi,,nal (o-<.>pcntion rulmnl.lt:U[!. m 1•)-iS. J:l the
partial ~onvernbiht\· of d1t: (ur:c:1cin •1f 1.J. co~1n:no. ln .\pnl I•J(JI. tJ,~ OECD nta.rc,:
,, >ub-comnmru· h::own 15 •'\)\.' mkm~t P.lrt'· ~ ·•. In ,)r,!cr to .1.dun·c ctiiurncy. member~
>hlp of tim Work:nr: PJ.rty wa~ hnmc,i t•> :IJ,;,~ \Vo{,'nl £;>U1tncs with pnnupal re.,pon-
>lbliry m ir:.tcntJ.tll>U.i! iitnnca] alh.n; ,CJn:..b, L"n1r~c\ Kmgd.An. We,::em (,::rlllJH).',
Sweden. t\(the:l.md:.. Bd~1\m1. lu!v. Fr.mce, ':lwltl~rlJnd a:d the l:nirtd Starn}.
The mppon.::ur stated th.lt t!:.:: prmcpL> g·1ver:unt: till· W PJ.rty were:
(!i f·k·xib.hty of m .tgcnlb '0 a; (\l meet cbng;mg .,Jwrt-nm nm..!iri,>m:
(~; R,·.~tlin& L' rcv1~w d1e mt~rn::t! problum '-'f rh~ nH.:mbn u>un:.n~s J.l thcv :.rl:~·ct
b.Jaucrs of payrn.c:m.
(J) Rtspcct for the constiturio!Ul p=dures ofe;u:l1 member country in the interest
ofmutual bwdits .:md intt.'llllltional solidarity;
{4) Treuuries .:md central banb robe able to deal in each other's currencies so :u to
bolster support for their own monetary unit during periods of bilince of payments
ddiots;
{5) Creditor countries ro rctain the right to de.llWld gold or their own currencies at
the termination of a nme Kheduk or any other agreed upon condition;
(6) Deficit countnes to be able to gain time for payment provided they om ~how the
probability of improvement in their >ination;
(7) Maximum possible limitation of diJfcreuccs in interest ratt"S between mcm~r
countries so as to minimize arbitrage opcrariom and heavy out movement from dollli!StiC
CU!'1'tt1Cics.
The most ddiC<I.te problem for the OECD at present is that of the babnce of paymenr::s
.:md p:trticukrly of the surplus rountri~ particukriy Western GetJUafly. where the
depression of Uttc~ ratc1 coulci only :tggnVlltc in&tionary pr~ures. Conveody,
if the United States, in an endeavour m reduce the deficit, raUed in intrreSt rates. It
would only acrelerak the rare of unemployment.. The rapporteur then quoted examples
of intermtional co-operation designN to solve moru:t;rry problcnu and uk«l what the
United States coulcl do about in bal:mce of payments diletnllla. Both ddlarion and
inflation are accompanied by .llWlY dangeo. It seems more advisable to make maximum
use of cJci$ing irutiturion:s Jnd arrangements accompanied by uniktcral and limited
measures mch, for ~plc, as cutt:iflg back milituy exp.:nditute ove:n<:2S, reducing
duty-free: purchases for Unikd Statts rourisn, :md othcr measures which the rapporteur
listed. Other rem~dio imply a certain amount of C{)w{lperarion from American allies,
such as a better distribution of .ud ~penditnre. However, most of dresc me:uures
beat on the il)'mptonu rather than on the Ousel of the American balance of payment!
problem. The rapporteur therefore suggeru tbrtt major solutions ro the problem, of
which he nevertheless rcc~ the difficulties..
One $0lution would be for the United Sutl:3 to incn:.;ue its foreign exchange holdings;
in other words export more, or import less. However, a restriction of impom would
conflict with trade expansion plans.. Moreover, an increase in expom would mean
production ofa higher order and accder.tted invmmcnt. Since 1955. the amount of the
grou national production invemd has been much higher in the Common Market
oonutries than in the United States.
The second major solution would be to recognise the extr.lordinary nugnitu!.k of
United Sa.tes forcign aid and military expenditure .tbto.td and pe-rhaps reduce that
amount, incrwing the part ofthe burden borne by the W encm countries. The political
urategy involved precludes a decrease in the oven.U expenditure. An attempt might
therefOre be made, in view of the mission now givw. the OECD, to give an Atlantic
community development agem:y responsibility for this aid, whilst rtudying a ponible
redntriburion of NATO military expenditure.
The third S<llution would wnsist of cuing restrictions on C3pitil movemems and
tourists funds to the United States from the other OECD countries.
The bon \)fWorking Party 3 is that Western n:~tions must be mindful of the exter-
nal dfects of their Utternal policy. Internal and e~ n.ttiona.l «onomic policies
must complement e:l(:h other aml no rution em isokte irselffrom world-wide economic
interdependency and a crossed-price rebrion~<hip. If behoves the former debtor natiom
to remain aware of their international responsibility for "good creditor policy".
Working Party 3 must promote pragma.tic co-operation bcrn·een sovereign powen,
but there must be no quesri1m ofcreating ;t block or imf!~Jsing a ringle policy.
The 5ttond ofthe reports on this ~ubject ('!Jticled "A UK view of Working P:ttty J"
began with a review ofS<:Jme general facr:s. Whilit the stetdy growth since 1950 in the
gold and dollar holdings of mmt Eur;opellll countries WM welcomed until recently
as a rcinfon:emrnt of wodd reserves, it has lmerlv been considered more in its other
aspect, namdy that of a deficit in the balance of,paymenn of the USA and thU h.as
served to emphasise the vttal imp<.m:mce of maintaining balance in the international
paymenn ~yuem. Under convertibility movements of capital, whether speculative or
not, may become too big in re6rion to the tC$Ct'Ves necessary to defend the exchange
ntes. ThiJ can ca~ serious difficulties, especially for the "reserve currencies", ofwhich
the principal ones .are the dollar and the pound sterling, in ~w ofthe intern:ttional role
which they play, a role with hittorical, teehnical and political fouruh.tiom. A very hea.vy
burden therefore re5ts on the shoulders ofthe nunagers ofthese currencies. C(H)perativc:
actiGfl it nece:mry, in the face of ..imh2knce" for it U plain tb.ar countries in deficit
cannot, by their own m=, rolve all their problemi, except by a.k.ing radiC<I.i unilateral
measures which risk setting otf chain reactions prejudicial to the whole p11-ymenu
system, such as reducriow in imports, ddhrionary measures or devaluation. This natu-
rally does not mean that the "dcti.cit countriel" can shift their responsibilities to other
shoulders; the only romw open to them io; to adopt sound policies. But it b clearly
essential that the causd of"imbalance", both in surplus and in deficit countries, must
be deteaed and corrected early.
It wai recognition of this principle which led to the setting up of Working Party l
to "analyse the effect of international payments of moncury, fuol md other policy
measures and to c:owuk together on policy measures, both national :md international,
as they rc4te to international payments equilibrium".
The method ro far adopted. by the Working Party had been to make close CX:~rni­
nation of the balance of payments situation in individual countries, w .11 to identify
the forces which nuke for "imbalaru:c". Thi:l hdP' them to reach agreement on the
genenl objectives at which they are aiming md on the responsibility fuf any action
neerled to achieve them. It it mainly the ronJirioru in rhe larger countries which have
to be invcscigued in view of the1r predominant international influence.
The Working Pany Ius so far concentratt'd its attention on the United State'>, Great
Briuin, Gcrm:my .wd, to a lesser degree, on France and Italy. The analysis ofthe sitt1:1.cion
in individual countries is arried out without acrimony md without a desire to put a
country "on trial" :md bds N muuully agreed r«:ommendarioru for ;u:rion. Change$
t:n~cd by tla- national governments do not nceJ prior formal agreement, although
existing policies on be freely criticized, The working party also reviews the df~-cn of
measures adoptnl on its rc:commendariou.
There is already a growing awareness within the Working Party of the value of
co-operative solutions for the problems of mdividual cmmtr:iL-s. A good start has been
made, but moch remains to be dooc.
There is admittedly a certain amount of ovcrkpping with the work of ceruin other
iutermrioru.l irutitucions, but by its mtall and iucituate n.u:urc:, the Working Party am
fuilitate co-ordination. This i~ true in the case of the IMF, which must rcmaiu the su-
preme institution for providing d!ort-tcrm bal:mce of payments ~istance to countriM
in difficulties. Reb.tions with the Bank for International Sctdemmn present few d.iffi-
cu.ltie3:, as inopcrationsarc ofa tedmical!Uturc. Fiually, thereisclearly ac1nc connection
between the Workmg Parry, the M<mctMy Conunitttx of the Six and the board of
management of the European Monet:lry Agrer:ment" It has been posliblc ro co-ordinate
their various activitirt, particularly by overlapping member:iliip. The expe=d develop-
ment! in the near future are ceminly likely to have ~ons on these rel.atiomhips..
Perhaps, when the hhtory <}f OECD :md Working Party Jrtion is written, the hi~
torians will nett the important rnk played by eK'h of them in fighting .against cemin
eurrents which might have led to exr;es$ive regionalism and thu~ to .autonomotu poli-
cies. It is to be hoped. that the Working Party will ..:ont:inue to oper.ate along these
line~ in a general movement of expansion, whatever changes may occur, particularly
as a result of Great Brit:tin\ entry into the CQmmon Marh't.
An iutrodtu:tory report by a Gcrm.au participant set out the main lines of the work
of OECD in co-rn:dinating W o;m:m aid to the developing countries.
The rapporte11r recalled tbe :;cmng up of the Development Am\tance Group (DAG)
which was 5ucceedd by the Development A~sunce Committee (DAC), comisting
of the principal industrialized ctlillltrics of We1tem I:urope (France, United Kmgdom,
Genn.wy. luly, Belgium, the Netherlands and Pottugal) as wellal' the United States.
Cmada and Japm, plus the Collllllimoo of the EEC. The limitation of membership
ro donor countrit'$ facilitated the frank dU.:ussions in m atntosphere of confidence,
whilst giving rise, it is true, to a certain distrust on the part of the developing countries.
So far, emphasis has been placed on exc:hangiog infonnation and compiling com-
parabk statisrio as a basis for the tharing ofthe burden. There have been two problems;
{a) In comparing individu:J contriburioru, should the onlv criteria considered be
gr:mn :md very long-term credits at non-<:ommercial conditi~m. n:prest."Ylring general
budgetary s;;crificcs, or ~hould consideration be given to all contrib\ltioos hrJping to
build up the economies of the developing countries including, for example, privat<'
invesnnenn?
(b) How heavy can .wd should the burden on the indi.,.idnal donor country be?
On the basis of the American proposal to !.kvote 1 ~~ ofthe eombirn:d ~ natio!UI
produru of the industti.ilizcd countries to the under-developed countrie:;, a figure of
about $8 billion was obtained for the West. According to OECD statistio. the toral
(public and private) financul contribucions of all industrialized member countries of
the OECD, including Japan. reached about that figure in 1900 as opposed w only
S178 million contributed by the Sino-Soviet bloc.
A DAC report shows that grann am! loans are COllCC11tuttd mainlyon thnrecnunrria
with which the donor countries have Jpecial politiaJ .wd t'(:Onomic ties. On the other
hand. there is a flow of private capital into certain orhn countries" DAC Ius prcp.ared
.wothcr report on the effects ofassistance on the economic growth of rcupient counttics.
Thi~ shows, amongst other things, that in 1958 the annual per capita income in the great
majority of the developing countries did not even rc:~ch Sz5o. in ~pite of Western
development assistance of ab<lut $.p billion during the period 19S()-58. This study
abo shoWl that the race between population ~ and the growth of per capita
income in the devdoping countries is still &r &om bcing won.
The funru offuture co-•.>penttion raise a scnes ofimportant questioll$:
- Should developing countrie5 closely connected or sympathising with the Soviet
bloc {Guinea and Ghana) receive more or leis aid than pro-We~tem or neutnl colmttie~?
- Should there be a certain geognphical concentration of Western assistance? The
rapporteur pointed out in this connection that such conccntntion would increase: the
efficacy ofdw limited funds available (a method widely used filrthe pditic:al propag.wtb.
of the Eastent block), but that it caused discrimination .agaimt non-recipient counttics;
- The concentr~tion of aid in favour of indivit1ual countries must be distinguished
&om measures to further whole groups of countries such as the Colombo plan, the
EEC development fund .and the Alli.ance for Pro~;
-Should there be :1 "division of labour" (e.g. Europe-Africa or United Stato-Latin
America) between tlu: donor countries:; This C311 give rise to several oljecrioru (the
cm~.tion of spheres of influence would be contrary to the world-....ide inrcresn of the
industrial countries and consider.uion would haV!; to be given to the reproach of neo-
colonialism);
- To what extent should Western aid be granted bil.tterally or through international
organizations? At the pmcnt rime, the gre;tter put (90% in 19(\o) goa to bibtcnl
efforts;
- How is the practical co-ordination of auist:mce to be achieved? Two methods are
47
wed at prescm: the financing of n.ation:U pwg:ramme~ through coruoroa of the donor
countrin and the financing of large ~pcdfic projects by ad hoc financing groups {pro-
jeo: financing);
- Should bilateral aid be ~d ur nor to purchases in the donOl' countries? Soviet aid
has always been tied and the rune has been true of.Umost95 ~~ ofWC$tetn ;1,1d.
The npponeur also kilt with the question of the participation of private enterprise,
which it ofspecial Dgnificance in view of the trends towards State apitaliun in most of
the dcvdoping counmc:s and he listed some of the mtdi.:s carried out by the OECD in
this connection.
The DAC has also formed a pernWlCllt wm-king p:my on problem' related to teCh-
nical assist:~ncc.
Mention must be made of the importann: of mc:uur~ aiming at stabilizing commo-
dity prka and opening markets for agricultu:ral products and m;mufacrured goods
from the developing countries.
Indo»ng his rcpon, the auilior referred also to some meatures designed to !trcngthen
co-operation amon~t Atl..mcic allies within the OECD, but which were not directly
rdatt:d to the subject under di.KUS5ion.
The American report on the OECD and the DAC Wl\S designed to provide an
account of what it being done and what might be done with ~gard to dcvdopment
amstance, on the basis of the belief th.a: it would be po$Sible for the Western nations
to rach an agreement. however imperfect or in(Uillpkrc it might be, on the genen..l
purpose fm giving aid.
The r.apponeur began by recalling the origins of the DAC and the OECD, the first
of which was ~blished in 196o as the rerult of Americm miriarive. He added some
gc:ncnl (;"Ommcnb on the composition and aims of the two institutions. Passing to the
more specific problcnu of dcvdopDI{.""nt assitt.ma", he recalled dw in t96o 8000
million dollars had been supplied by the member countries and Japan, as opposed tom
a\·erage 7 ooo million dolLars from 1956 to 1959 :and 3 500 million dollars from
19~0 to 1955· Of the 8 000 million doll..an., 4-9 were from official SOUI"CC$ and J.l from
private souro.-:s. The flow &om otficia.l sourcc:s, and the proportion of gtanb and loans
on favourable terms have continuallv incrc:ased.
Moo of the o.tlicia.l funds ~orne from the Unitt:d States, the United Kingdom and
France. Most of the granu wd soft loans come from the United States .and France,
and their a.uimtncc U pretty much limited to territories with which they have
special ties. A great deal of United Sures .usittance goes to the countries of strategic
intcmt and to thO$<': with shaky guvcrnmcnu. The aMi.ttance of m0$t other ntcm.ben of
DAC is small and U given under rel.arivdy unfavourable conditions. In addinon, many
of tbc:se countries arc as much concerned with export market! as with development
"""'=·
..
There is growing concem in the United States for trill.' development in the countrio
wh1ch reccive ~t:utce and for the long-term solution of the more cnmplicatt:d pro-
blems. In the rapporteurs' opinion, this pf"C'OCUipation is only partly .and intermittently
mated by the other members ofDAC and the Organization.
The main .aims of the American Government in creating the DAG .and then the DAC
were to increase the total .amount of :aid, to relieve SOtru' of t:he main which American
aid itselflw put on the US ba.lance ofpayments arid to coordinate aid policic,, the last
objective being the moo difficult anJ. important. Success in connection with the lint
nvo aim$ hu w far been wmcwh.at limited .and the Unitt:d States has been obliged to
aruch conditions to its own aid by increasing balan~ of payment§ diffu:ulties.
The main difficulty in co-ordinating aid lies in its extreme diversity. DAChas taken
two sm.all m:ps wwuds putting orcler into rlm chaos in the fonn of.a sysk:nl ofregular
~ports from its mem.bcrs .and. a searching review of each member's policie:l .and. pro-
~mme5. But co-mdination is men: than that: it calli for adjustment of national
programm~. policies and purJX>$0 within the nations conccrned.
DAC conld solve some: of these co.ordination problems if members agrred to tarry
out ajoint examination of their policies and problenu on a basis drawn up byindepend-
ent e:s:pc:ru and to a.rry out the proposed adjustments. Ddegata would ilio lu.ve to he
empowered by their govcmmenr.s to take dccitions.
However, this is but p2rt ofa much wider progr:tmme. Ifthe conntrialmilted .are to
complete their own development in time, it is ascntial to provide dfeaiR and stable
outlets for their manufactures (including incluurial output). For this purpo$(, these
countries mun he helped to divenify their cronomy and this aJso implies adaptation
on the part ofindustrial and agricukura1 countries.
In view ofthe aperien~ which has been built up by the OEEC and the OECD in
dcWng with the probkms of thc:ir member conntl"ie:!, it is to be hoped that the OECD
will he Wle to act constructively in cu-operation with other international orgaruzatioru.
During the discussion, p:m:icip.ants dt'<11t in succession with the problaru of fim:nci.al
co-operation within the OECD .and particukrly the Wvities ofWorking Pl;rty j and
the work which OECD can and must accomplish with regard to~ to the devel-
oping countries..
An Anl.Cric.an participant starml by pointing out that, contrary to the OEEC.
which pr=ded it. the OECD hut few funds av:rilable and no CX«"".ltive power. It
cou.ld therefure only act by influencing the Governments. Although &om one point of
view the economic and financial Uruation is at presrnt Uvourable fOr the operation
of the OECD, iu task may he nude rdativcly difficult in the near future as certain
obstacles ue going to arise in the yean t96o-197Q. particularly on the European side
of the Atlantic, especi:~lly tb.OK of full employment and a lack ofreserves.. In th:i! con-
no:tion, the aim of a so% inaeasc in gtO! national product of the member countrin
..
for the period in question, as fixed by Working Pany 3 of the OECD, appe:m rome-
what ambioous.
The tasks of W0rking Party 3em be split into three major group$:
- Meeting short-term c:tpiul movements by discouraging speculation and main-
uining normal control: dut n, adequate control over the normal 1luctu2tioru;
- Harmoniurion or co-.xolination of nat:Wnal monetary policie'l so as to reduce
harmful arbi~e o~tioiU to a minimum; this involves the question of priorities
betwttll inttmal.mJ e.xterna.l intere1t:s;
• Colbbof<lrion to influence certain sectioru of the balance of payments.
At the end ofhis comments. the speaker ntsed some qu~Ktioru:
-What practical step;; can bt: uken through the OECD to bring about the so%
increase?
- Should the OECD rn:eive exerurive respomibili~ or should it remain coruul-
t:J.tive'
- Are there too many CI)-Opcration bodies, and should mergers be considered?
- How far can voluntary co-operation be talen?
- Are sufficient means: <'lvailable for discoungmg speculation between the major
currencies, or should extra on<'$ be devised?
- How a«' priorities to be established between t'xtcrnal .md intertl;}} measures ?
A British partidp.mt listed some of the favnun.hle monetary devdopments which
had occl.lf'rCd in Europe. Fin.mcial (:{HJpernrion between the continental coontrit:s baJ
made extraordinary progress during the previolll T5 years. In addition, integmion
between Europe and the United Stllt.L"S (.wd c:.uw.la) had \'asdy expanded. This was a
great economic anJ poliriol importance for Europe, ifonly becm$C of the large ddicit
in the balance of American payments which has existed now for some yean. Tim parti-
cip:mt diJ not wish to exaggerate: the effects which the entry of the United Kingdom
imo the Common Market would have on mont':tary rdatioru. Neither did he thin1: that
the creation ofa European currency was .m urgent matter; it would be better to perfect
the working of the e:xisting innirutioru. He felt that they were concerned with a com-
plex ofproblems which Working Party 3 could study mccess£Ully. In view ofthat fact,
.md :u odu:r speaken had also pointed out, care would have ro be taken not to refer
to the Working Party more tasks than it could handle (:u it was merely a forum for
discussion) md to prc:vmt overlapping the sphere of rnponsibili.ty of other institutions
which ~d rnl p<;~wen, luch as the IMF and the Central Banks.
However, as pointed out by a Frencb parricip.wt, who occupies an important func-
tion with an intemarioiUI financial institute, it was interesting to nOte that although
there were organiutioru workmg at the world lcvd (the IMF) and also at the European
level. it was the "Western" (Atlantic} framework which was chosen by prefcrmce to
implement dfc:crive co-opcmion, becaUU' it w:u the most approprWe one. ln fact. the
rountries which played a world-wide monetary role numbered ten and wen: Belgium,
so
Canada. France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland. the United
Kingdom and the Unired States. Moreover, in v:uter organix:ttions mch as the IMF
intimate Co-<lpc:nlrion W:lll difficult if only because of the fact that the organiution
indudeJ amongst its members coun~ which, although unable ro play an active
finmcW role, nevertheless had several large claims, without mentioning certain political
aims. On the other hand, at the kvd of the European Monetary Agreement, mearu of
action were more n:mictcJ because of the absence up ro now ofthe United IGngJom
.md the permanent absence of Switzerland and the United Starn. He aho coruidc:rcd
that the creation of 3 European currency, although &sirable from =~- points of view,
could not play the tole which certain of its supporters c:otpectc:d ofit.
It therefore 5t:emcd that the W<'Stcrn colhborarion would luvc to phy :an incre;uingly
important role, and the rc..:rnt accession of the United States and Canada to the Bank
for International Settlements wa\' a significant event. It might perhaps be useful to
arrive at an Atl.mric monetary agreement within the OECf), pombly with the inclusion
ofJapan. It was i.ntcrnring to note in that connea:ion that rech.nical requirements .wd
political means Wt'nt hand in hand.
One lt:~lia.n parricip~nt nevetthdcss favoured a European currency, not because of
"feder~rivc" tendencies, :md thus political reasons, but because such a cuiTrn.cy was an
essential clement ofajoint policy at Common Market level. He .ilio thought it necessary
so as to ensure that diJfcrences: in the capital rirnariom did not disturb the normal ucruls
ofexchange and investment. Only a sort ofcentral b.mk, composed of SCltc:s belonging
to the European block could ru:hievt': 1uch a gOO. The tttrling quettion had been a
separate one until then, but it might be wondered whether the uruerdcd movements
recendy felt in that currency were not due precisely to the fact tlut its economic foun-
dation h.aJ not expanded to the same degree as its world role. It was possible that a rort
of fu,ion of the (NUnd sterling with the continental currencies to fonn a new unit
co-ordinated with the dollar would restore thc balance, to the benclit of the entire
Western world.
Several orators pointed out th:.rt monetary problems Wert' Mt the only oncs requiring
extensive We!tem CI)-Ordination. A Belgian participant, for ex:unpk, considered that
the trade experts committee of the OECD was ofa very academic nature. especially in
view of the Amcrican preference for the GATI which, due to ifll wide membership,
sutfered. from the Jisadvanug~ already pointed out in connection with the IMF. He
therefore recommended that a certain amount ofcompetence for trade affirin be given
to the OECD and in particular that then: should be more extensive consultation within
that body s,o ;u to avoid prejudicial incident~ mch as the recent onc:'l which lu.d opposed
the United States and the EEC in ronnection with some increases in wifE.
Another Belgian .wd a Swedish participant mentioned that the "imbalance" of
p;.yments should not be considered sui gcneris and therefore be dealt with on an ex-
dU$ivdy monetary ba5il, but that the situation merely reflected the economic policies
,,
of the countries in question, for example with regard to saYing$ and invesmlellt ntes
or the evolution of~ &~.lary Situation. The eff«_-r must not be confused with the Quses
and the rolumm by in greater C(H)rdination of polides. Similarly,the a.im ofthe OECD
regarding invemnenb and assimnce to under-Jcvclopt'd countries could not he u-
rainW by purely monetary measures. Monetary mtbilicy ~ ~ntial for a d.ima« of
confidence; nunipub.tions 'uch 3S the recent re---evaluation of the D Mark or the te<:ent
s12biliza.tion of the C.Utadi:m dolkr were not advisable for the rearoru already indicated
and also becarn:t: their long-term disadvanQgeS outweighed the immediatt benefits.
An AmeriClD participant mentioned the as:socitrion of prt~fe:sWnal and tndc-union
circles with rho:: work of OECD through two advisory rommitt«s res{X'lUiblc tOr
studying means offighting aga.in1t unfair competition, the &ctors behind rises in prices,
"imbalance" of paymena. and assistance to the okveloping tountries. At the same time,
a Swedi~h participant, rcolling the relationships which have grown up within the
OECD aud the Cmmcil of EUfope, regretted that the OECD w:u still without a par-
liamenwy forum which would help it to gain the support ofthe national parliaments.
The debate on the role of the OECD in helping to provide devdopment ass:Unnce
w:u opentxl by the German o.pporteur who mentioned 10m.e general :upet;a. of the
question. He pointed our that the new cotmtries were without governments capable of
sharing our efficicndy the funds put at their disposal. It ~ a situation in which the
lack of CXC{.Urive power in the OECD w:u strongly felt. It was therefore important
not to overlook the political aspect of :wistmce to the under-developed_ countries: it
was a Ucwr which ccru.icly did not ~pe the attention of the Rus:siaru. who drew
the obviow couclusioru. There was one tidd of action for the distribution ofpublic
fumh aud another one for that of private capital aud a useful task for the OECD would
he to en~ure the nettssary coordination. He called attention to the extraOTdi:nary
growth of the populations in new rolUltries. statiug that it was a factor which might
well rentkr v:a.in all efforts to raise the stmdard ofliving ofthotc nations.
Several lpCaken eonunented on the subjem which had been de:l1t with hy the rap-
porteur. A French participant recalled th:tt the political instability and attitudes ofnewly-
independent countries made iuvesoors hesitate. A Dutch participant suggested tha.t the
OECD should endeavour to convince the leaders of 5uch rountries that private
enterprise was essential and lasting. Referring to the work. accomplished for ma.ny
yean by the lntemationa.l Chamber ofCommerce, a British participant recal1ed that the
OECD h.td bcfote it a draft convention based on that work and designed to protect
private invcmnent. Certain bila.ter.U agreements to that end had already been concluded
and BIRD roulJ also play a useful role in that connection, especia.lly with regwi to
mutua.l insurance. But, whatever might be the source, it would. be nccetf4f)"', :u French
and Gettnan speaken pointed out, to prevent excessive investments out of proportion
to the resourtes available and the requirementi of the countries concerned. AJJ. Italian
,,
participant ~ that the best :md most necessary investment comimd of training
respousible citiu:ns and good technkal ~ for th0$C COWltries in whidl, as other
speakers mentioned, they were sadly LK:king. It ~ better for suclt training to be given
on the spot. rather than by the granting of fellowships to visit Western cow!trics,
where the bcndic:iaries were not always shielded &om hMmful political propagaru.h.
Several speakers wondered whether it Wlt!i desirable that aid granted from public
funds Would be <J.Ceompanied by various ties. A Norwegian and a Swedish participant
were opposed to th0$C ties. the former recalling that certain outstanding Ameril::aim
had in the past preferred to call on the United Nations for the gr.mtiug of financial
.i»UWICe, prccisdy in order to avoid politial. ties. The second spealer felt dut the end
in view - i.e. alkgi:mce to the Western outlook - was illurory, ;u gratiwde was only
to he e:cpected &om narioru; which lwl ilieady attained a more advanred stage of
development. Adopting a~ ~orieal attitude, the Gcrm.m rapporteUr felt that the
elimination of~ should be a long-term objective., in spite of the existing dctogWoru
from that principle. On the ocher band, a TUfknb. participant hdd the view that the
political nature of:mistance could nor be avoided and that it could therefore be ~d
as such wtthin NATO. An American p<Jlitician pointed out that the political umer-
Clinty reigning ill a:nain ofthe countries receiving <lid uecc:ssu::ued on the parr ofdonor
rountries, when the aid was given from public funds, a certain pn1dence ill the form of
ties. Moreover, mch ties were often usefuljnstificati<Jn for the assistance when approval
w.u being sought from a Congress which did not gr.mt ir very willingly and they often
enabled pcrfn-dy honQ\lnlble purposo ro befulfi.Ued,uludbeen shown by the economic
and wcial reforttl$ a.dmi.nistercd within the Alliance- for Development. Another eumple,
although perhaps a less sotmd one in the speaker'j opinion, was provided by the prc:uure
exerted <Jn Laos by the granting and withdrawal of American aid.
However, stated the Swedish s~er :W:eady quoted, bihteral a.id was losing lti
value precisely beause of lt'i "'oentiment:li" nature aud that wu why it was up to the
OECD, ifnot to put an end to it, at least to ensure cvergreatet co-ordination.
A Scandinavian spc:U.cr was interested in !tnowing wh:l.t standards should ~applied
in determining the amount of~tmcc which each rountty should. provide, A Norwe-
gWt speaker showed that in this connection a dim:nction had to he made between the
amount of the contribution and the burden which mch contribution implied for the
various douor tolUltries.
Other speakers, including one of the EUfopean rapporteurs, pointed out that it was
not sutlicient merely to supply it and. that any a.ssistmce must ~ considered together
with the increasing development uftrade v..'ith the countries concerned. T1us led to the
need to malo.e evergreuer elfi)rts to bnng about the rtabilization. of production in those
countria at sufficiently profitable nr.e1, a conclusion which wn shared by the Getman
npportwr and an Italian. participant. Nevcrtflcbs. as menrioued. by an American partici-
pant such a proct'dure should not eliminate the rok played by the rule3 oftheiiWket.
"
As the Chaimun pointed out at the end of the discussions, that wou1J be a
difficult and alm~t impossible t:uk, but one which must neve:rthdcss be attempted.
Furthermore, the Prin.;:e bdieved that the discussion on this item of the agenda had been
$0mewhat vague and that it had not given a deu answer to the problems dUctm«l
lk wondered ifthis diould not be attribute<! to the fro that Working Party 3 had
narttd i~ activities only recently and he suggested to diSCUS! the nutter tuvcred by
this point of the agenda once more at a future meeting.
&fore daring the m!X'ring, the Prince repeated the Assembly's tlu.nb to a:o Swedish
hosts, menciouing all those who had contributed to it5 cotnplcte succt."SS. He said that
the kind invitation extended by the French group to meet in France the fullowing year
md be-en accepted with gratitude.
"
PRESS RELEASE
Seventy three Eutop<:'an. Unit«! State's ami Canadian leaden wday rondudcd a
priwce and unofficial th.ree-<lay di~uuion meeting nar Stockholm. Panicip;mu
indudcd th0$C from the political, industrial, b.bour and professional iid&.
The gathering, another of the so-called "Bilderbe-rg Meeting,'' was ..-haired by
ILR.H. the Prin..-.:: ofthe Netherlands.
The principal question$ Jiscm;,cd in the counc ofthe meenng which cune to m end
to--day, were the political implicariom for the Wt..,tem C'...ommuniry of Nations arising
from their policies in the United Narioru, and the expansion of the Europcau Common
Market, with special reference to itt relation~ with the countries of EFTA :and North
America.
This was the eleventh Bilderberg Conference :and followed the original Bilder~rg
concept ofnot attempting to r~ conclusions.
The original mecting took place in Mr.y, 1954. 1n the BtL:kt-berg Hocel (from which
the Conference was named} in Oosterbeek, Netherlands. Subsequent mectmgs have been
held in mmy countries througltuut the world. The 1962 meeting was the fmt in Sweden.
"
