I~-
,'-
:
:"c
"
"'c...
;
0.
" .
0
..
0
0
\
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
BURGENSTOCK
\lt CONFERENCE
8-11 June 1995
NOT FOR QUOTATION
' :, :, --,
' \ ' (\'\'-0 J'
/··' \ .\'0 > \ .
! )1'
I ' /
"- \. ' ...\ ~- /
~-·;>·
'·\
" .
/I.;- ...- I . '- ../ ~.J
v or_.;;_...,: c. fll• t'r' /
D~tOO
~'31
I Cf~S
INTRODUCTION
The forty-third Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Burgenstock Hotel
in Burgenstock Switzerland, on June 8-11, 1995. There were 118
participants from 20 European countries, the United States and Canada.
They represented government, diplomacy, politics, business, law, labor,
education, journalism, the military, and institutes specializing in national
and international studies. All participants spoke in a personal capacity, not
as representatives of their national governments or their organizations. As
is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit frank and open
discussion, no public reporting of the conference proceedings took place.
This booklet is an account of the 1995 Bilderberg Meeting and is
distributed only to participants of this and past conferences and to
prospective participants of future conferences. It represents a summary of
the panelists' opening remarks for each seSsion, and of the comments and
interventions made in the subsequent discussions.
1
PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN
PETER CARRINGTON
Chairman of the Board, Christie's International plc; Former
Secretary General, NATO
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND
CANADA
VICTOR HALBERSTADT
Professor of Public Economics, Leiden University,
Netherlands
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR U.S.A.
CASIMIR A. YOST
Director, Institute for the Study of Diplomacy, School of
Foreign Service, Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.
CH JOSEF ACKERMANN
President of the Executive Board, Credit Suisse
I GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
Chairman, Fiat S.p.A.
I UMBERTO AGNELLI*
Chairman, IFIL S.p.A.
FIN MARITI AHTISAARI
President of the Republic of Finland
USA PAUL A. ALLAIRE*
Chairman, Xerox Corporation
P LUIS MIRA AMARAL
Minister of Industry and Energy
USA DWAYNE 0 . ANDREAS
Chairman, Archer-Daniels-Midland Company, Inc.
P FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO*
Professor of Communication Science, New University,
Lisbon; Chairman, Sojornal sari; Former Prime Minister
2
S PERCY BARNEVIK*
President and C.E.O., ABB Asea Brown Boveri Ltd.
F CLAUDE BEBEAR
Chairman and CEO, AXA Group
USA LLOYD M. BENTSEN
Partner, Verner Liipfert Bernhard McPherson
and Hand, Chartered; Former Secretary of the
Treasury
D CHRISTOPH BERTRAM*
Diplomatic Correspondent, Die Zeit; Former Director,
International Institute for Strategic Studies
TR SELAHAITIN BEYAZIT*
ICE
Director of Companies
BJORN BJARNASON
Minister of Culture and Education
DK RIIT BJERREGAARD
Commissioner, European Communities
CDN CONRAD M. BLACK*
Chairman, The Telegraph plc
TR CEM BOYNER
Chairman, New Democracy Movement
INT HANS VAN DEN BROEK
Commissioner, European Communities
GB E. JOHN P. BROWNE
Chief Executive Officer, BP Exploration
Company Ltd.
USA JOHN H. BRYAN
Chairman and CEO, Sara Lee Corporation
GR COSTA CARRAS*
Director of Companies
P MARIA CARRILHO
Professor of Sociology
E JAIME CARYAJAL URQUUO*
Chairman and General Manager, lberfomento
I ADRIANA CERRETELLI
Correspondent in Brussels, "IL SOLE/24 Ore"
TR HIKMET <;ETIN
Deputy Prime Minister; Former Minister for
Foreign Affairs
INT WILLY CLAES
Secretary General of NATO
3
USA JON S. CORZINE
Chairman and Senior Partner, Goldman Sachs
&Co.
CH FLAVIO COTTI
Minister for Foreign Affairs
GR THEODORE A. COULOUMBIS
President, Greek Foreign Policy Institute
CDN DEVON G. CROSS
Head of the Donner Canadian Foundation
INT JOSE CUTILEIRO
Secretary General, Western European Union
USA KENNETH W. DAM*
Max Pam Professor of American and Foreign Law,
University of Chicago Law School; Former Deputy
Secretary of State
B ETIENNE DAVIGNON*
Executive Chairman, Societe Generale de
Belgique; Former Vice Chairman of the
Commission of the European Communities
USA LYNN E. DAVIS
Under Secretary for Arms Control and
International Security Affairs, Department of
State
CH JEAN-PASCAL DELAMURAZ
Vice-President of the Federal Council; Minister
of Economy
I MARIO DRAGHI
Director General, Ministry of the Treasury
CDN MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN*
Executive Director, Hudson Institute of Canada
DK UFFE ELLEMANN-JENSEN
Chairman Liberal Party; Former Minister for Foreign
Affairs
USA THOMASS.FOLEY
CH
Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld;
Former Speaker of the House of
Representatives
WALTER FREHNER
Chairman of the Board of Directors, Swiss
Bank Corporation
4
USA THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN
Foreign Affairs Columnist, Ihe New York
1imes
CH FRITZ GERBER
Chairman and CEO, F. Hoffmann-La Roche &
Co., A.G.
USA DAVID R. GERGEN
Visiting Professor, The Te~ Sanford Institute
of Public Policy, Duke University; Senior
Fellow, The Aspen Institute
IRL DERMOT GLEESON
Attorney General of Ireland
B JOHN J. GOOSSENS
President and CEO, Belgacom
CDN ALLAN E. GOTLIEB
GB
Former Ambassador to the United States of
America
DAVID HANNAY
Permanent Representative, U.K. Mission to the
United Nations
FIN JUKKA HARMALA
President and CEO, Enso-Gutz.eit Oy
CH HANS HECKMANN
Vice Chairman of the Board of Directors,
Union Bank of Switzerland
N WESTYE HOEGH*
Chairman of the Board, Leif Hoegh & Co. AS; President,
Norwegian Shipowners' Association
USA RICHARD C. HOLBROOKE
Assistant Secretary for European and Canadian
Affairs, Department of State
SF JAAKKO ILONIEMI*
F
B
Managing Director, Centre for Finnish Business and Policy
Studies; Former Ambassador to the United States of
America
PHILIPPE JAFFRE
Chairman and CEO, Elf Aquitaine
DANIEL E. JANSSEN
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Solvay S.A.
5
USA PETERJENN1NGS
Anchor and Senior Editor, ABC News World
News Tonight
USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR."'
Senior Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld,
(Attorneys-at-Law)
USA PETER R. KANN
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Dow
Jones & Company, Inc.; Publisher, The Wall
Street Journal
D HANS-PETER KEITEL
Chairman of the Board, Hochtief AG
USA ROBERT M. KIMMITT
Managing Director, Lehman Brothers Inc.;
Former Under-Secretary of State for Political
Affairs
USA HENRY A. KISSINGER"'
Former Secretary of State; Chairman, Kissinger Associates
Inc.
CDN RALPH P. KLEIN
Premier of Alberta
GB ANDREW KNIGHT•
Non Executive Director, News Corporation
INT MAX KOHNSTAMM"'"'
Former Secretary General, Action Committee for Europe;
Former President, European University Institute
D HILMAR KOPPER"'
Spokesman of the Board of Managing Directors,
DeutscheBank A.G.
NL PIETER KORTEWEG"'
President and CEO, RoOOc<> Group; Honorary Treasurer of
Bilderberg Meetings
A MAX KOTHBAUER"'
Deputy Chairman, Creditanstalt-Bankverein
CH ALEX KRAUER
Chairman and Managing Director, Ciba-Geigy Limited
USA WILLIAM KRISTOL
Chairman, Project for the Republican Future
6
D KARL F. LAMERS
Member of Parliament (Spokesman for Foreign Affairs,
CDU/CSU)
GB NORMAN LAMONT
Member of Parliament; Former Chancellor of the
Exchequer; Director of N.M. Rothschild
F ANDRE LEVY-LANG"'
Chairman of the Board of Management, Banque Paribas
E FRANCISCO LUZ6N L6PEZ
Chairman and CEO, Argentaria
A ALEXANDERR.MACULAN
Chairman, Maculan Holding AG
TR SERIF MARDIN
Chairman, Department Islamic Studies, American
University, Washington, D.C.
FIN BJORN MATTSSON
President and CEO, Cultor, Ltd.
CH HELMUT 0 . MAUCHER
Chairman of the Board and CEO, Nestle Ltd.
F THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL"'
Director, French Institute of International Relations;
Professor of Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
CDN J. FRASER MUSTARD
President, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
NL HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN OF THE NETHERLANDS
PL ANDRZEJ OLECHOWSKI
Former Minister for Foreign Affairs
GR GEORGE A. PAPANDREOU
Minister of Education
USA ARNO A. PENZIAS
Vice President Research, AT&T Bell Laboratories
D HANS-FRIEDRICH VON PLOETZ
State Secretary, Ministry for Foreign Affairs
CDN J. ROBERT PRICHARD
President, University of Toronto
CH DAVID DE PURY"'
GB
Chairman, BBC Brown Boveri Ltd. and Co-Chairman, ABB
Asea Brown Boveri Group
GILES H. RADICE
Member of Parliament; Chairman of the European
Movement
7
J
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER**
Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank International Advisory
Committee
GB ERIC ROLL••
President, S.G. Warburg Group pic
GB EMMA ROTHSCHILD
Director, Centre for History and Economics; Fellow, Kings
College, Cambridge University
INT/I RENATO RUGGIERO*
F
CH
D
CH
INT
Director General, World Trade Organization; Former
Minister of Trade
FRAN<;OISE SAMPERMANS
Chairman, Groupe Express
STEPHAN E. SCHMIDHEINY
Chairman, ANOVA Holdings Ltd.
fURGEN SCHREMPP
Chairman, Daimler-Benz AG
WOLFGANG SCHURER
Chairman, MS Management Service AG
KLAUS SCHWAB
President, World Economic Forum
USA NANCY E. SODERBERG
Deputy Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs
GB H. DENNIS STEVENSON
N
IRL
Chairman of SRU Group and the Tate Gallery
THORVALDSTOLTENBERG
Co-Chairman of the Steering Committee of the International
Conference on the Former Yugoslavia
PETER D. SUTHERLAND*
Former Director General, World Trade Organization;
Former member, Commission of the European Communities
S HIS MAJESTY THE KING OF SWEDEN
GB J. MARTIN TAYLOR
F
E
Chief Executive, Barclays Bank pic
JEAN-CLAUDE TRICHET
Governor, Banque de France
FEDERICO TRILLO FIGUEROA
Vice President and Member of Parliament (Partido Popular)
8
s
D
FIN
A
NL
INES J. UUSMANN
Minister of Transport and Communication
GUNTER VERHEUGEN
Secretary General, Social Democratic Party
PERTTI VOUTILAINEN
President, Merita Bank Ltd.
FRANZ VRANITZKY
Federal Chancellor
KAREL VUURSTEEN
Chairman of the Board, Heineken N.V.
GB WILLIAM A. WALDEGRAVE
Secretary of State, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food
NL JACQUES WALLAGE
Parliamentary Leader PvdA (Labour Party)
USA STANLEY A. WEISS
Chairman, Business Executives for National Security, Inc.
USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD*
Former Deputy Secretary of State
INT/USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN*
President, The World Bank; Former President and Chief
Executive Officer, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.
D OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN**
Chairman and C.E.O. of Otto Wolff GmbH
USA PAUL WOLFOWITZ
Former Under Secretary of Defense for Policy; Dean, Nitze
School of Advanced International Studies
*Member of the Steering Committee
**Member of the Advisory Group
RAPPORTEURS
USA RUDOLPH S. RAUCH
Managing Director, The Metropolitan Opera Guild
USA ALICE VICTOR
Executive Assistant, Rockefeller Financial Services, Inc.
9
IN ATTENDANCE
NL MAlA BANCK
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
CDN MARY ALICE CARROLL
Local Organizer 1996
CH MARGRIT MARKSTALLER
Local Organizer 1995
USA CHARLES MULLER
President, Murden and Company; Adviser, American
Friends of Bilderberg, Inc.
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A Austria I Italy
B Belgium ICE Iceland
CDN Canada INT International
CH Switzerland IRL Ireland
D Germany L Luxemburg
DK Denmark N Norway
E Spain NL Netherlands
F France p Portugal
FIN Finland PL Poland
GB Great Britain s Sweden
GR Greece TR Turkey
USA United States of America
10
I.
II.
m.
AGENDA
WHAT IS NATO SUPPOSED TO DO?
Moderator: Henry A. Kissinger
Panelists: Hans van den Broek
Richard Holbrooke
IS THERE WORK FOR ALL?
Moderator: Franz Vranitzk:y
Panelists: Emma Rothschild
Jurgen E. Schrempp
ATOMIZATION OF SOCIETY: IMPACT ON POLITICAL
BEHAVIOR OF NEW TECHNOLOGY
Moderator; Etienne Davignon
Panelist: Arno A. Penzias
IV. LOOKING [BACK] AT WASHINGTON
Moderator: David R. Gergen
Panelists: Thomas S.Foley
William Kristol
V. CURRENT EVENTS: TURKEY AND THE ATLANTIC
ALLIANCE
Moderator: Paul Wolfowitz
Panelists: Hikmet Cetin
Thomas L. Friedman
VI. IS THERE STILL A NORTH ATLANTIC COMMUNITY?
Moderator: Christoph Bertram
Panelists: Henry A. Kissinger
Thierry de Montbrial
11
VII.
SHOULD THE EUROPEAN UNION INTEGRATE
FURTHER, AND WHY?
Moderator: Hans van den Broek
Panelists: Karl F. Lamers
Percy Bamevik
Norman Lamont
VIII. OUR AGENDAS FOR THE WfO AND WORLD BANK
Moderator: Conrad M. Black
Panelists: Renato Ruggiero
James D. Wolfensohn
IX. CURRENT EVENTS: FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
Moderator: Peter Carrington
Panelists: Thorvald Stoltenberg
Richard Holbrooke
Willy Claes
X. PEACEKEEPING IN AN UNstable WORLD
Moderator: Peter Carrington
Panelists: Lynn E. Davis
David Hannay
XI. LESSONS OF THE NEW CURRENCY CRISIS
Moderator: Hilmar Kopper
Panelists: Lloyd M. Bentsen
Jean-Claude Trichet
XII. PRACTICAL STEPS TOWARDS A BETTER GLOBAL
GOVERNANCE AND RULES
Moderator: David dePury
Panelist: Peter Sutherland
12
'
WHAT IS NATO SUPPOSED TO DO?
•NATO was designed to keep the Russians out, the Americans in,
and the Germans down. • This statement, made by one ofthe participants
during the discussion, succinctly summed up the role of NATO during the
cold war. Another speaker suggested that the third goal, which is no
longer relevant, should be replaced by •...and central Europe secure·.
The overallfocus ofthis session was to what extent the participants agreed
on enlargement of NATO, with the debate centering on the method of
selecting new members, which countries should be selected and in what
order and, finally, how quickly this should happen.
First Panelist
We should never think that the time of NATO has passed. It
continues to have a role to play, whether in crisis prevention, crisis
management, peacekeeping or, if need be, peace enforcement. In order to
sustain its effectiveness, NATO must be both strengthened and enlarged.
The strengthening, both Europeans and Americans believe, must come
from within Europe. This coincides with the determination within the
European Union(EU) to give more substance to developing a more unified
foreign policy which, in turn, may ultimately lead to a common defense.
The enlargement of NATO, which is already in the early stages of
planning, is of great interest to the members of the EU who are preparing
for their own enlargement, towards Eastern Europe.
There are three options with respect to NATO enlargement. The
first, strongly opposed by the Russians, is one of rapid enlargement by
having the central and eastern European countries join as soon as possible.
The second option is to wait and See whether the Russian attitude towards
its western neighbors warrants the response of including those countries in
NATO. And the third would be to take more time and concurrently work
towards these countries' membership in NATO and the European Union.
This method, perhaps the most logical, would underscore the validity of the
Partnership for Peace(PFP) program, initiated by the Americans last year,
where at this moment roughly twenty four countries have signed individual,
bilateral PFP agreements with NATO. The implementation of these
agreements, signed most recently·by Russia, has just started. It provides
for consultation, as well as military cooperation, and would seem to be a
logical preparatory stage towards full NATO membership.
13
This last option runs the least risk of destabilizing the present
situation in Russia. At the same time, it serves to prepare the countries of
eastern and central Europe for the full spectrum of economic, political,
financial, and cultural activities suitable for cooperation. And since
security is more than the military component, this course strengthens the
underpinning of strong relationships between the present and future
members of the EU.
Finally, in terms of NATO's image - as illustrated by its role in
the current situation in Yugoslavia- it is important that in the future NATO
carefully weighs its role in any peacekeeping operation before agreeing to
participate with another international organization such as the United
Nations.
Second Panelist
When discussing NATO, it is important to remember that the
United States is a European power, a part of the balance of power on the
European continent. Americans want to encourage Europeans to extend the
Europe of the institutions to meet the Europe of the map. Not just NATO,
but the EU, the OECD -- which all central Europeans wish to join -- the
Council of Europe, and other institutions. It is important to upgrade the
CSCE, now the OSCE, and strengthen it but not make it an institution that
substitutes for NATO. And we need to deal separately with the appropriate
role for Russia in a stable security environment. From 1815 to 1914,
Russia was a part of that structure; since 1917, that has not been the case.
The rationale for expanding NATO is simple. Just because it has
been the most successful military alliance in history, it must adapt and
change to extend its success and protection to central Europe which has
been the site of the two worst wars in history, as well as the focus of the
Cold War. It cannot be limited to the sixteen countries which forged the
alliance in another political framework. Just because the Cold War is over,
does not mean this area is stable.
The key is history. Central Europe cannot be imprisoned by its
own history, exemplified by today's problems between Bratislava and
Budapest, Budapest and Bucharest, Bucharest and Kyiv, Kyiv and Moscow,
Athens and Skopia, even Rome and Lubliana. All these disputes stem from
the unresolved legacies, from Versailles and Trianon, Yalta and Potsdam,
and other historic events. We must not push central Europe back in
history. The central Europeans must overcome these legacies or the US
will be reluctant to pull countries into the alliance which have unresolved
14
ethnic, territorial, or internal political problems.
When to enlarge NATO is harder to determine; it is not a simple
process. NATO is an integrated military alliance where membership
requires certain obligations and commitments. The process includes legal
confirmation by its present members who, by inviting a new member,
make the solemn commitment to go to that member's defense from outside
forces.
The process of expanding NATO is already underway. By the fall
of this year, NATO will send teams to all of the 26 members of the
Partnership for Peace who wish to receive such teams. These teams will
present the same scenario to each potential member; how NATO will
expand and what the post Cold War NATO will look like. The results of
such discussions will be the substance of meetings in Brussels during 1996.
Russia will continue to object to NATO enlargement, but they
understand that no outside country will have a veto over NATO
membership. At the same time, the present members of NATO, as well
as the central European countries who are so anxious to join, recognize that
Russia has a legitimate security role in Europe and a special NATO
dialogue with Russia has been instituted. It is hoped that in rough parallel
with the expansion process of NATO, there will be a beginning of a
Russia/NATO framework in place.
Discussion
Before beginning the discussion, the moderator called upon a
former Secretary General of NATO, who summed up the purpose of
NATO to date in one word: Russia. NATO has played a role in the
security of Europe in many ways, but its primary purpose has been to
protect the European countries from any territorial claims in the area
between Russia and Germany, and Russia has always been aware of this.
The end of the Cold War, said this participant, does not eliminate this role,
or mean there won't be any changes in the future. Russia is still a major
military power.
Assuming NATO will continue to exist, continued this participant,
there is the question of enlargement; how far does NATO go?
Remembering that Article 5 states NATO's agreement to defend any of its
member states from invasion presents a great dilemma. If its enlargement
were limited to countries in central and eastern Europe, this would send a
signal to Russia that the Balkan countries are less important to Europe.
Conversely, if NATO were to include the Balkans, would it be ready to
15
uphold Article 5 there as well?
The moderator addressed this concern by suggesting that as the
European Union expands, this question will be partially answered because
it is most likely that any member of the EU would go to the defense of
another, whether or not either one of them is a member of NATO. NATO
expansion is desirable, nevertheless, because it is unwise to leave a grey
area between Russia and Germany; both countries have national policies
which would make it difficult to hold back from taking over some of this
territory. It is also important to move quickly on enlargement; enough
study has already been done. The Partnership For Peace program,
mentioned by one of the panelists, looks to be a compromise within the
United States administration between those who favor expanding NATO
and those who would rather test the waters through bilateral agreements
between NATO and potential members. One should be concerned that a
number of countries which have signed this agreement have no common
denominator on many levels, making them, as a group, potentially difficult
members of NATO.
The relationship of Russia and Europe is essential to peace.
Whether this is accomplished by formal negotiations, or through other
means is hard to determine. Russia's membership in the PFP, for
example, could prove to be difficult, leading to unanticipated problems
down the road. On the other hand, if the Russians were to state that they
are willing to stay within their borders -- for the first time since Peter the
Great -- and if Russia would concentrate on its economic difficulties, a
constructive relationship between Russia, the EU and the United States
would ensue.
A Frenchman disagreed ai>out early expansion into eastern Europe,
saying that would only provoke Russia into another Cold War by openly
reaffirming NATO's role to date: protecting countries against a Russian
threat. Rather, he felt, more efforts should be made to stabilize the
relationship with Russia. Also, more attention should be focussed on the
expansion of the European Union even though, due to economic
institutional problems, this will be more difficult.
A participant asked if the expansion would extend to the
Ukraine/Russia border, whether Ukraine would be included in NATO --
and if not, why not -- and whether the expansion of NATO would
undermine the anticipated Russian ratification of the START II treaty.
Two members of the panel responded, one stating that reaching out to any
former member countries of the Soviet Union, including the Ukraine,
would raise such profound issues, that such expansion should be more
16
dependent on the evolution of the basic relationship with Russia. The other
panelist noted that the Ukraine does not wish to join NATO; a few years
ago its government declared its unwillingness to join any alliance, thus
obviating the need to consider how to handle an invitation from Russia to
join an alliance with them. The Ukraine is in the process of making a
choice, which is made difficult because it is entirely energy-dependent on
Russia. It must decide whether to follow the Belarus model of becoming
a wholly owned subsidiary of Russia, move towards the West, or assume
a middle ground position. It is encouraging, said this panelist, that the
Ukraine is the most active participant of the Partnership for Peace.
Another participant agreed with the Frenchman that adding only the
Visegrad Countries to NATO would create new dividing lines, and he
wondered how this would be perceived by the ten countries applying for
EU membership who want to eliminate artificial divisions of the past.
Those ten countries have valid reasons for wishing to join NATO, but
when considering each of them for membership one must be aware of side
ramifications which no one wants to confront.
Russia is much more concerned about the enlargement of NATO
than that of the EU, which it perceives as an option for democracy and a
market economy. The latter should be viewed as a mature attitude, said
one speaker, and it remains NATO's responsibility to convince Russia that
its stability and security will be enhanced by an enlarged NATO. Several
participants supported this view, noting that should Russia decide not to
remain within its borders, the inclusion of the countries of central Europe
in NATO would inhibit any imperial tendencies. In point of fact, most
likely, Russia would be relieved to have this issue resolved. In tum, by
furthering an understanding between Russia, NATO, the EU, and the US,
all of these entities will be better prepared to face the likely security issue
of the next century -- China. For those who are more hesitant about
rushing towards the inclusion of the Visegrad countries, speakers noted
that it is important that NATO state its purpose clearly and firmly; delay
would prolong the focus on potential threats, and the current ambiguity
cannot help but increase instability. And for those who feel there is no
current threat, there is; the instability of these countries makes them fair
game for their larger neighbors, most particularly Germany and Russia.
Yet another participant warned that if NATO does not draw new lines,
lines will be drawn by others.
Several participants, including a German, although noting the
importance of NATO as a means of keeping America in Europe, suggested
that there is too much focus on NATO enlargement, and not enough on
17
strengthening the EU. A British speaker commented that if drawing new
lines for NATO's borders is so difficult, or might challenge existing
relationships, why not maintain its present format; a coherent group and a
military force which is extremely large and competent. While remaining
the same size, NATO could state that it will go to the aid of any country
threatened by Russia, whether or not that country is a member of NATO.
There was sharp disagreement on the validity and effectiveness of
the Partnership for Peace. Several participants, including one of the
panelists, felt that it is a stalling mechanism for members of the United
States administration who cannot agree on the future of NATO, their tactic
being to use the PFP as a testing ground. Another speaker questioned
Russia's recent signing of a PFP agreement; what will NATO do if Russia
decides to take the next step -- which will surely be taken by other PFP
members -- of asking for NATO membership? Such a move would
dissolve the reason for NATO, as well as for continued United States
participation. A panelist responded by defining PFP not as an organization
but as twenty-six individual programs with three different kinds of
memberships; preparation for NATO membership, an end in itself (Russia
falls under this category) and, for all, a confidence-building mechanism.
The panelists' overall conclusion was that the future of NATO will
be solid and secure only with strong leadership in its member governments,
particularly the United States. It remains for those governments to educate
their citizens to a point of understanding NATO's vital role in world peace,
as well as their willingness to support its future.
18
IS THERE WORK FOR ALL?
Unemploymem statistics suggest that the answer to this question is
•No. • This is an unacceptable response. We must at least try to offer work
to as many as possible. A curious thing about the business cycles ofthe last
two decades is that when there is a recession, unemployment has gone up,
but when recovery comes, unemployment does not go down. And there is
clearly important structural unemployment: many of those without work
have been unemployed for a considerable period.
In the course ofthe discussion, participants returned repeatedly to
afew themes. Most ofthe jobs created in the last decade have been in the
service sector. There is a long-standing bias against these kinds ofjobs,
which some panelists attribute to Marx. This prejudice must disappear.
Service jobs ought, also, to reflect social needs: governments ought to steer
the jobless towards employment that is socially useful. This may lead to
higher taxes; some were prepared to accept this, while others thought
higher taxes were the worst possible solution and would only create greater
unemploymem.
Debate was sharp over the appropriateness ofthe US response to
unemployment vs. the European. The US is more inclined to allow the
market to work; Europeans believe that citizenship implies the right to
employment, education and housing. The more brutal US approach has led
to greater job creation, while the European attitude has led, over time, to
greater job security but higher unemployment.
Participants agreed that unemployment in the third world is the
greatest threat to world peace. Most believed that competition, free trade
and rapid development ofthird world markets are the most promising paths
to lower unemployment in the developing world; these policies would also
help the OECD countries to resume steady growth. Finally, while re-
training ofworkers ought to be a priority ofboth government and ofprivale
companies, most felt that a sound education was more important than any
amount of re-training.
First Panelist
The underlying assumption is that technology and science create
jobs, and the notion that jobs are limited in a world with an infinite need
for services in health, leisure and education is peculiar. The politics of
19
unemployment is the subject. Few European or North American countries
consider unemployment to be a very high priority. The two exceptions are
Finland and France; most others are afraid to think about the politics of
unemployment. Such diffidence was not characteristic of western European
governments for much of this century. After World War I, the International
Labor Organization was set up because the men at Versailles thought that
unemployment led to social tension and war. There was similar concern
during and after World War II. It is natural that unemployment should
have political consequences when one considers the three elements of
unemployment: you lose your job; you are rejected in your search for a
new job; and your life is empty. Of course it affects society profoundly.
The best study of the effects of unemployment in Europe was of
the Austrian town of Marienthal in the early 1930s. It reveals a terrifying
process of apathy, decline of civic life and the growth of fantasy. Writing
in a 1904 piece on "Full Employment for a Free Society, • Sir William
Beveridge said, "A person who has difficulty in buying the labor that he
wants suffers inconvenience or the reduction of profits. The person who
cannot sell his labor is in effect told that ...he is of no use. The first
difficulty causes annoyance or loss. The second is a personal catastrophe. •
What remedies are there? The most frequent solution at the
beginning of the century was to reduce wages. In the mid-1930s, macro-
economic management came into fashion. For Keynes, government
expenditure and emphasis on the workers' own expenditure were the keys.
ln the 1980s, wage reduction reappeared. Now there is a more subtle form
of wage reduction: structural reform and flexibility. And the newest
orthodoxy is training. Experience suggests that all those remedies have
major weaknesses.
So where are the new jobs? In the United States, over the last
decade, 100% of the new jobs have been accounted for by private services
and local government. It is often noted that many of these low-paid jobs
are ghastly. That is no doubt true. But there is a strong trend towards new
jobs in "soft services. • These occupations are: therapists, kindergarten
teachers, elementary school teachers, day care people, officials in local
administration, lawyers, travel agents, prison officers, waitresses. These
kinds of low-productivity service jobs are common in other countries that
have approached full employment. In Japan it is the retail trade. In the
EFTA countries, which had close to full employment in the 1980s, there
were a lot of public service jobs.
To develop strategies to come to terms with this high percentage
of empioyment in the service sector, much better statistics are needed.
20
Unemployment statistics are often misleading: who is discouraged? Who is
in the labor force? And non-traditional considerations need to be measured,
such as the contribution of a particular job to the degradation of the
environment.
Second, we need strategies for valorizing services. The notion of
a •social minimum• has been interpreted as meaning a minimum income.
But for many thinkers, certainly for Beveridge, it meant a social minimum
in terms of basic needs - housing, health, education -- for every inhabitant
in the society. Today, one might add environment to that list. The kinds
of jobs required to provide that "social minimum" to all are highly labor
intensive. Consider urban transport. A solution to this problem might be
much better public transport, as well as improved communications, small
electric buses and a lot of new technology. But there would be a shortage
of bus drivers. Yet we have many young and middle-aged men who could
be bus drivers. These jobs must be better jobs -- and better paid.
In looking at the role of government in providing incentives for
minimum services -- whether private, semi-public or public -- it is
important to think of these expenditures, not for macro-economic reasons,
but to fill functions that are needed, thereby creating jobs. That might be
costly, but tax rates have become too low. With such a policy, there
would be a shift in government expenditure from transfer payments such
as unemployment to payment of government employees. This would be a
transformation of a bad sort of welfare state into another kind of welfare
that would be more positive for society. To work politically, this change
must be international. In the EU, this could mean high priority for
coordinated expenditure, not so much on big roads programs, but on social
minimums. Finally, on the "big politics" issue of free trade: during the
first period of modem unemployment, at the beginning of the 19th century,
there was intense pressure for protectionism. The same was true in the
1930s. Unless we engage in this effort, we will see a move towards
protectionism. But Europe cannot be part of a world economy without
doing something along the lines discusstXI. Nor, probably, can it be part of
a world at peace.
Second Panelist
Unemployment is the major global problem of our time. It is a
political problem and a security problem as well as an economic problem.
Is there work for all? In principle, yes. There is no acceptable alternative
to a positive answer. And we must do everything, step by step working
21
every day, to reach that positive answer.
Unemployment is already explosive in our western society and free
market economy. Looked at globally, we have a time bomb of
immeasurable magnitude. Unless we move aggressively, the western world
will be faced with a wave of immigration on an unprecedented scale. The
major security problem of the West could become immigration from the
East. The worldwide level of underemployment is about 820 million
people, twice the population of western Europe.
There are two interdependent economic problems. The western
countries are wrestling with employment problems implicit in structural
change. And the former communist countries and countries of the third
world must be allowed to exploit markets that are appropriate to their
competitive abilities. There are no perfect ways to eliminate
unemployment, but there are areas that businessmen and politicians can
address immediately.
There are also popular or ideological formulas that need to be
disposed of. For example: total volume of work is a cake that must be
shared among more and more participants by giving each a shorter slice of
working time. This notion is especially popular in Germany. In 1995, the
metal industry began to work a 35-hour week, a very unsatisfactory form
of job creation, since the same amount of money is paid for less time
worked. Another misconception is that one can redistribute wealth by
shorter working hours. This is as unrealistic as the notion that the service
sector can provide jobs for all those who lose them because of
restructuring. And many economists have another "solution": income
restraint and limits on wage increases. These approaches may have led to
lower unemployment in the United States, but as a consequence of these
policies, many Americans live close to the subsistence level. They are the
"working poor. •
Development of the emerging nations through high-tech transfer
and rapid industrialization has also been a failure. The gap between rich
and poor countries remains, with a few exceptions, as great as ever.
The most promising remedies for unemployment both in Europe
and in the third world are technology, training, and capital. Technology
in Germany is not really accepted, but it offers the only means of
increasing the number of satisfying jobs. As for training, Europeans must
stop focusing on job security and emphasize education that equips people
for employment in a rapidly changing economy.
22
Discussion
By asking the question: "Is there work for all?" , we admit that the
worm is already in the fruit -- that there is not enough work to go around.
This is unacceptable. A solution must be found to unemployment. In the
OECD today, practically no government really believes that competition is
good; instead, they wonder whether unfettered competition is acceptable as
we restructure our economies. This is dangerous because we are, possibly,
coming to the end of regular business cycles at a time when three-fourths
of the world's population is trying to join the global economy. If we want
to create jobs in the future, we must support deregulation and
liberalization. Once the three-quarters of humanity that are not in the
OECD have joined the world economy, then we have a chance to create
growth. Some of our companies show what can happen. They begin to
invest in the underdeveloped world, and, rather than losing jobs at home,
they actually add jobs at the higher end of the technological scale. Indeed,
as another speaker noted, trade with the underdeveloped world greatly
helps job creation in the OECD countries. In 1994, these countries had a
positive trade balance with the developing world, and for Europe, the
surplus was $50 billion. Two-thirds of the increase in imports in the next
few years will come from the developing countries. And in 1993, one of
the worst recession years in recent memory, internal trade in the EU
decreased by 10%, but exports to Asia went up by 16%, and to Latin
America by 6% . The developing countries helped the OECD out of
recession. We must fight the underlying ambivalence reflected in this
question, an ambivalence we see replicated in the thinking of economic
policy makers and governments. In Egypt, 500,000 people enter the labor
market each year; 100,000 get a job; 400,000 join the unemployed. This
is a dangerously destabilizing element for the entire region. The time has
come for action, and, as has been suggested, the service sector ought to be
the focus for this action.
Another participant said that the world needs a new "mind set, •
emphasizing wealth creation rather than redistribution. This is a leadership
issue for both government and the private sector. But few countries have
much of a track record. The welfare state seems to have run out of ideas.
In the United States, there is a "fantastic" record on job creation, but a
poor record on income distribution, with 1% at the top owning as much as
90% at the bottom. There are the eastern Europeans who used to
guarantee employment but at a price that is known to all. Japan is
interesting: there used to be 2.5% unemployment, and even as industrial
23
output declined, unemployment remained below 3 %. This is because they
took all the potentially unemployed people and kept them in a kind of
"decent" employment, although it is not a very productive employment.
Several speakers spoke of the difficulty of making accurate
comparisons between the situations prevailing in the US and in Europe.
Statistics are one reason: in the US, there is a growing "informal" labor
market and a growing tendency not to report income. This is proven by
the widening discrepancy between income and spending data; indeed,
spending figures are almost twice as high. Also, while it is true that
Europe has a more "paternalistic" attitude towards the rights of citizenship
than the US, wages have risen significantly in America. Some six million
new jobs were created in the 1980s, and 60% of them paid above the
median wage. And median income rose in between the 1979 peak in the
economic cycle and the next significant peak, by 5%. Further, over the
last ten years, wage increases in finance and wholesaling have risen much
faster than wages in manufacturing. The US does offer a positive model
of job creation, even though there was some slippage in the late '80s,
which this participant attributed to tax increases in the same period and
again, in the '90s when taxes were raised again. This slippage suggests
that higher taxes will not lead to higher employment.
At the end of the session, the Chairman summed up: pessimism
will not produce a solution. Nor will soft currency policies work.
Unemployment cannot be limited by currency devaluations. And, finally,
everyone agreed with the overall conclusion: there must be work for all.
24
ATOMIZATION OF SOCIETY: IMPACT ON POLITICAL
BEHAVIOR OF NEW TECHNOLOGY
"The problem with the future is that the future is not what it used to be."
-Paul Valery
The key difference between the current revolution in technology and
the other epochal changes the world has undergone is speed. The
information revolution has been here for a while in manufacturing: it is
easy to tell the difference between a refrigerator of the 1970s and one of
the '90s. It is hard, though, to tell the difference between an office of1970
and one of 1990. But the change in the last five years could hardly be
more dramatic. What has happened? We have had computersfor over 50
years, telephones for over a hundred. What has happened is that the two
have come together. The merger of computing and communication is the
subject of this panel.
Panelist
The largest computer cannot replace a single human being, but it
is disturbingly easy for a relatively small computer with a communications
package to replace an entire office building of human beings. This merger
has at least three important effects on society. First, huge numbers of
people have direct access to information now stored on computer disks.
The best example is the automatic teller machine. Imagine what would
have happened had a job applicant gone to a bank a few years ago and
said, when asked how to improve service, "let the customer write in our
ledgers directly. " Such a person might have been hired for his sense of
humor. But that direct access has changed the way banking is done; it has
also transformed the lives of tellers, messengers, order entry clerks and
legions of others who used to have jobs. The second effect is, the
lowering of transaction cost: the economies of scale, of mass purchasing.
Look at a company like Walmart, which has 2,000 stores in the United
States. Walmart used to buy disposable diapers from Proctor and Gamble
by the carload. Now they buy them by the individual package; the diapers
are only paid for as each package moves across the bar code reader. This
has a profound impact on the way retail business is done and on
employment.
Third, it is now possible for individuals to broadcast to the entire
25
J
world, without permission from the FCC or without spending any large
amount of money. The Chiapas rebels in Mexico were on-line worldwide
several days after their revolution started-- and at a cost lower than the
price of a few rifles. Direct access has hollowed out many corporations
and threatens to do more. The threat, incidentally, may be more important
than the reality. Take the case of a person who sells fuel oil in the US.
Twenty-five years ago, this person's drivers took oil from a distribution
point to customers. When the truck was empty, they would get a set of
forms. One set would be left with the clerk. The driver would carry the
others to a distribution point. There, authorization forms would be added.
He would bring the pile of forms to the pump, where a man with a
clipboard would add some more forms, make some entries, and deliver the
oil. Five sets of interactions were required before this driver returned to
his own office with a report on what he bad been doing. Today, there is
just one employee left at this distribution point: the safety inspector. When
a trucker requires more oil, he does not go to his office; there is no office.
He drives to a pump and gets the oil himself. He takes a piece of plastic
from his pocket and pushes it through a slot. He is connected to company
headquarters by telephone, and the computer there prints the bill. Trivially
simple technology; a bright engineering sophomore could have designed it.
Yet across the United States, thousands of people lost their jobs. Adam
Smith explained why it was better to have semi-skilled people make pins
rather than master craftsmen. The craftsmen would want to do it all. It
was far more efficient to have a group of people come together and assign
each person responsibility for one step. Today, though, we find that these
groups are threatened. We talked earlier about training. What kind of
training can make jobs secure today? A fertility gynecologist working at
one of the largest medical centers in New England has just taken a 5% pay
cut; and his company must shed 10% of its workers. What happened? His
particular group spends 20% of its time doing research. His hospital was
doing fine. But it was impossible to bring in another gynecologist from the
outside because of transaction costs. But with computers, those costs have
sunk so far that the hospital can out-source those jobs. And the tie that held
these sophisticated professionals together has disappeared. They are like
longshoremen, who appear every morning at a shapeup to try to get work
lifting bales of cotton. These jobs are auctioned off on a daily basis.
Adam Smith's theory of the firm still holds, but the numbers in his
equation have changed dramatically because of lower transaction costs.
People of similar interests can band together. In some instances this a
good thing: minorities can achieve group identity. In some cases it is bad:
26
militia men can find each other. No one need be ashamed anymore; people
with similar views are just an "uplink" away. This is tribalization.
What does all this mean? Quality is cheaper than poor
craftsmanship. A Swiss watch may cost $1.50 to make. The cost of quality
is negative. Making the same watch badly would cost $30-$50. At $1.50,
no supplier can be allowed to provide anything but perfect equipment. The
line must work perfectly every time. Years ago quality differentiated
successful companies from those that failed. No longer. Customer
feedback used to be a determinant of success. No longer. Today, paying
attention to customers is a nuisance because everything works. What's
required is harmony: today's technology is at odds with itself, its users and
with nature. We need ease of use, system integration and environmental
renewal. New entrepreneurial businesses can be built around those values.
They will replace these "hollow" corporations with institutions not
concerned with paper shuffling. Jobs can only be created in an
entrepreneurial infrastructure. It is shocking to find high quality companies
in Europe that say they will move to the US when they get a little bigger.
Their reason: the environment is better for a small company. Yet it is true
that in the US, people can get together and make money more easily than
they can anywhere else. Cysco systems is an example. A young couple
working for a university. They had an idea. They applied for every credit
card they could get. They put a second mortgage on their house. Three
years later they had to give away so much of the equity in the fledgling
business that the husband had to go back to work full time. They had lost
control of the company. The woman was fired. The man left angrily.
And between them, they took away $320 million. Ten years after the
company started doing business, it is worth over $10 billion. The
infrastructure that allows that kind of success could be built worldwide.
Europe is wrong to use the recent upturn in the economy to keep people
in jobs that ought to disappear. When the downturn comes, those
employees will be out of work, and Europe's problems will be greater than
ever. Governments cannot create jobs by talking to one another. What is
needed is an environment where a Cysco systems can flourish.
Discussion
The information age is not just another evolutionary phase. It is
qualitatively different, and it behooves us to think of our era in this way.
In the service economy the computer made a rather limited difference. It
was a personal tool that made individuals more productive, but it led to
27
•
I.
little change in the process by which work is done. The knowledge
economy, by combining personal computer and telecommunications, allows
groups to be much more productive by sharing information to create
knowledge. In the past, corporations were hierarchical, with considerable
distances between those who did the work of billing, manufacturing or
selling and the top. People in between were human information
processors; now they are being replaced by technology. Coordinators were
required; they are needed no longer.
This is as true in the service sector as it is in manufacturing.
Information is now ubiquitous. The old flow from bottom to top is not
necessary. Therefore, those who create value are the knowledge workers;
they are no longer the people in between. The person on the line is the
person using the information. We need fewer knowledge workers. They
also can decide the best way to work. Training becomes information
sharing, knowledge sharing, not something learned in a school or
classroom.
Another participant noted that when a newspaper recently asked
who were the most powerful people in the world, few statesmen were
named. Most on the list, in fact, were those who dealt in information: Bill
Gates, Rupert Murdoch, three or four managers of American pension
funds. The hierarchy has changed. In part this is due to the inability of
governments to control activities made possible by the new technology --
the satellite technology, for example, that allows speculators to speculate,
the Mafia to internationalize its operations, or the drug cartels to move
drugs worldwide. Society is no longer a pyramid; it is a network of
temporary contracts with no more jobs for life, etc.
There are, however, some negative effects for individuals. We
have so much information that we have no time to concentrate on any of
it. Our culture becomes more superficial. The most successful politicians
are "secondary illiterates." They know how to read, but we will not elect
them if they are very well-read. There are other aspects that are quite
positive, however. Interactivity allows us to argue. The final product is
no longer determined exclusively by those who broadcast; the recipient has
some input, too. There is also a right to be different; minorities are more
equal than they used to be, thanks to the new technology. There is new
globalization. We now have the same news, often in real time, all over the
world. That gives us a sense of community. On the one hand there are
more "tribes," but there is also more of a global community, though we
often complain that there is an invasion of American culture. And it is
possible that the information era will actually reduce the gap between have
28
and have nots, since it is easier to reduce that gulf between "info-rich" and
"info-poor" than to narrow the gap between the materially rich and the
materially poor.
Several participants noted that the far-reaching changes the world
is experiencing in the information era are typical of the unforeseen changes
caused by new technology. The automobile, for example, is destroying
most American cities. And the new information technology is having a
profound effect in areas one might not have considered. A speaker noted
that when two dolphins died in captivity in Chicago, a worldwide protest
developed almost overnight: the news media ran with the story. Internet
communities formed. And civic leaders in Chicago were flooded with
protests from New Zealand, Scandinavia, Germany. In diplomacy, we are
seeing the mushrooming of non government organizations (NGOs), thanks
to communications technology. Many huge international conferences are
really meetings of these new NGOs. The Rio conference on the
environment and the Cairo conference on women are two examples. Policy
is increasingly made across national boundaries. One speaker noted that
as Iceland prepared to revise its constitution, communications between a
minister and Icelandic citizens over the Internet were monitored by people
all over the world, and suggestions for constitutional improvements were
forthcoming from many quarters.
The cost of food, another speaker noted, bas been reduced by
almost 15% in the last seven years thanks to information technology
enabling better control of barges, rail cars and trucks. Creation of a global
village of food cooperatives and shippers linked by computer networks bas
dramatically improved control; indeed, there bas been 50% increase in
business with half the inventory. Often, technology seems to be at odds
with itself. In the area of health care, the ability to prolong human life bas
raised a whole skein of new ethical issues. Technology bas led to the
creation of new financial products like derivatives, which have, of course,
posed micro-risks to individual institutions but which pose systemic risks
to the world financial community. And the quantity of information is so
overwhelming that the old formula, "garbage in, garbage out," bas become
"garbage in, gospel out."
Will the shifts in power relationships be democratic? Probably.
Even fears of tribalization could lead to participation by many who would
otherwise be excluded. Certainly it is better to have militants participate on
the Internet than through violence. But what about technological illiteracy -
- the ability to critically assess the huge amount of data they can access?
And who organizes the data? Also, while it is today quite cheap to access
29
data it may get more costly, and then there will be haves and have nots
again. Since there are no barriers to information, need and curiosity allow
people with tangential need to join in, which would not have been possible
in the past. Are we creating a world in which people, freed from greed,
are able to sit quietly at home playing with the gadgets that put them out
of work? But individuals will still have conflict, and there will still be
need for institutions to deal with them. We used to have churches, party
systems, a market economy, to settle conflicts among groups. But with
society made up of so many individuals, what will take the place of these
institutions? We may already be in a post-information era. It is no longer
that amount of knowledge one has or has access to, but one's ability to sort
it and use it that counts, and in this society, the most valuable commodity
is attention -- the ability to command it and the willingness to give it.
30
LOOKING [BACK] AT WASHINGTON
As the moderator pointed out at the beginning ofthis session, there
has been a voter rebellion in American politics. The Republicans have
gained a majority in the House ofRepresentatives for the first time in forty
years, they hold a majority in the Senate, they hold a majority of the
governorships in the largest states in the union, and the mayoralty in the
two largest cities-- traditionally Democratic strongholds-- New York City
and Los Angeles. What are the consequences for American domestic
policy, especially in the fiscal area, and what are the consequences for
American foreign policy?
First Panelist
The recent election was not a vote for the Republican party, but
a rejection of the Democrats. And although the Republicans claimed that
it was their platform, known as the Contract for America, which won them
the majority in the house, very few voters understood its contents prior to
the election. In point of fact, the newly elected congress rejected the two
linchpins of that contract; a balanced budget and term limits for members
of congress. At the same time, however, the Republicans took it as their
mandate, addressed all ten points of the Contract in the first few months
of this year, and passed all but the two mentioned above.
There are a number of reasons for the sudden downturn of the
Democratic party's popularity since President Clinton's election two years
ago, many of which have been developing for a long time. In a poll taken
in the late 1950s, 76% of Americans declared they could trust the American
government all or most of the time to do the right thing. Last year this
same poll produced a 19% level of trust, which some think would today be
around 13%. Much of this can be explained by the end of the Cold War.
The vast majority of both Republicans and Democrats felt that during the
Cold War the federal government was performing an important role;
resisting Soviet aggression and preventing nuclear war. Now Americans
are looking inward; they are criticizing the government for too much
regulation, and for spending too much money on programs that don't
concern the American voter. Politicians today are envisioned as being
motivated by ambition and greed, and sadly lacking in personal integrity.
31
•
This leads to a dichotomy between what most people who watch
Washington believe is true and what the public thinks is true. For
instance, preceding the election last year, polls were taken which indicated
the country was still in recession. In point of fact, however, the Federal
Reserve had raised short term interest rates five times to cool off the
strength of the recovery. Most Americans thought their taxes had been
raised. But the tax bill in 1993 didn't affect any individuals with a gross
income under $140,000, or $180,000 for a married couple. In short, the
Democrats didn't tell their story very well, whereas the Republicans'
attacks on the Congress and the Administration were masterful.
Second Panelist
The 1994 election in Washington was the end of a political era
which began with Roosevelt, an era with Democratic Party dominance
which had lasted for sixty-two years. This is unlike European politics
where there is more apt to be an oscillation between two major parties in
a parliamentary system. In spite of the election of Republican presidents
during this time, the Democrats were safely in the majority; they controlled
Congress and held the majority of the state governorships. This began to
fall apart in the last quarter century, with the victories of Presidents Nixon
and Reagan, but it didn't end until November, 1994.
Although the American public didn't necessarily understand the
details of the Contract with America, they had a sense that it did stand for
less government, lower taxes, less regulation, tough welfare reform, as
well as taking on the public se.ctor interest groups, and the like. The
degree of swing in 1994 should not be underestimated, and rather than
viewing the election as just a rejection of the Democrats, we should see it
as the dawn of a new political era. The 1994 election was not unlike the
1930 election, the off-year election which broke thirty-five years of
Republican hegemony and brought the Democrats to parity in Congress.
They became the majority party in the election of 1932, continuing in 1936
and afterward. It is not impossible that this same pattern could repeated
through the rest of the 1990s.
This new era is notable for several reasons: whereas the President
has historically shaped the domestic policy agenda, this is not true any
more. Congress will do so. Whereas people traditionally consider political
parties to be weak, there has never been such cohesion as exists within the
Republican members of congress today. Historically, voters have seen
candidates who run bold campaigns, and then become more moderate when
32
in office; not true in today's Republican congress. If anything, the
Republicans in Congress are taking their platform further than anticipated.
If the voters ratify the performance of the current Republican congress and
the Republicans maintain the majority in the 1996 elections, and if a
Republican President is elected at that time, there will be a Roosevelt-type
realignment in store.
Discussion
The discussion began with the moderator commenting on the
changing face of the Republican party in the United States today. The
heart of the party has often been an economic conservatism and an
international approach to foreign affairs. Now, there is an additional
element of social conservatism and populism which should not be
overlooked. This could lead to a balanced budget sooner than might have
been anticipated but also presents problems for American foreign policy.
The NAFTA and GAIT agreements, for example, might not have been
passed by the current congress which is more focussed on internal fiscal
responsibility to the possible detriment of international trade relations.
A Canadian commented on the division of power in the American
government and asked the panelists to address the apparent necessity of
making a •deal" in order to reach agreement between Congress and the
President. This participant wondered whether any President, including a
strong one, can lead effectively when so much power is given to the
congress, especially a one which is so decentralized and where there is no
focus of power or accountability. With the new direction of the recently
elected Congress, will we see a greater ability to get things done? And
what effect will this have on America's continuing relationships with
Europe, as well as the rest of the world?
This concern was repeated by several participants, one of whom
asked the panelists to comment on the ~xtraordinary swings, not only in the
United States, where the Republicans assumed the majority, but in Canada,
where the Conservatives sustained major losses, and in the recent
Presidential election in France, where the leader in the polls ended up
losing in the first round of balloting. To this list of sudden changes in
power, the first panelist added the instability which threatens governments
in Germany, Spain, Italy, Japan and, even at this very moment, the United
Kingdom. Therefore, it is misleading to highlight exclusively the shift to
conservatism in the United States; established parties on both sides of the
political spectrum around the world have been the victims of voter
33
disillusionment. A Canadian reenforced this view, noting that Bush had
been defeated because the voters felt he did not have their interests in mind
and Clinton offered change. But Clinton, in tum, has given the impression
of not living up to his promises.
A Canadian underscored the importance of listening to the voters
by describing the successful election of Premier of Ontario, a Conservative,
the previous day. His election, based on a platform of reducing the debt,
addressing welfare reform, and cutting back on other government programs
of assistance, reflected the public's wish to reduce spending. The speaker
noted that a platform no different from the Contract for America had been
implemented in his own province, where the voters demanded that the
government get its spending under control. With that mandate, his
government embarked on a program which took a deficit of $4 billion
Canadian dollars to a surplus this year of $1.2 billion Canadian dollars.
The actual reform will not be sustained quietly, and this is where
politicians usually fall down; they promise to reduce the debt but not in
areas of special interests. Instead one must institute a strong program of
reform and restructuring, placing the responsibility of implementing these
programs on the individual organizations involved.
Several speakers asked the second panelist where foreign policy fits
into the new conservatism. For example, in the election of 1992, President
Bush asked the voters who they were going to trust, assuming they sought
trust in foreign policy, whereas they really sought trust in strengthening the
economy which, in tum, would lead them to a role of greater
competitiveness in the world. Those voters felt they had been let down in
this promise. which may explain their increasing lack of interest in foreign
policy as a whole. They are not ready to support causes beyond the
borders of the United States when their own standard of living has
decreased. However, stated another speaker, the two leaders of Congress,
Gingrich and Dole, are internationalist> and, one hopes, will remember
America's responsibility in world affairs while at the same time reducing
government at home.
A speaker from Denmark did express concern that while the
Republicans in the United States intended to get their own economic house
in order, he feared the focus was out of proportion to the need for
strengthening foreign relations. The Atlantic Alliance has a unique
opportunity to create a period of stability, but if there is a surge of
populism - which means abdication of leadership - where !§ American
foreign policy and what would be the cost if none existed? A participant
from Britain supported this concern, asking the panelists to what extent
34
they realize that many of the policies one sees coming out of the US
Congress will have an isolationist effect. For instance, it is difficult to see
international collective action on issues such as the environment,
population, or peace and security effectively carried out without some
American leadership, resources and, as a last resort, military force. A
speaker from Portugal questioned where GAIT and NAFTA would fit into
the Republican's New Era. Did American intend to rely on regional trade
or would it support international trade and live by the guidelines of the
World Trade Organization
Several participants came to the defense of the current Democratic
administration. One termed the 1994 election not as a swing to
conservatism as much as a reflection of the fear, anxiety, and feelings of
economic insecurity which are felt by the whole spectrum of the working
public, many of whom know their jobs are constantly in jeopardy.
Although their fear is as much the result of corporate downsizing,
expanded technology, weakened unions, and global competitiveness, they
blame the politicians for their troubles and tum to new voices for hope.
A member of the Administration supported the concern of several
participants, noting that Congress is trying to force American leadership
into a retreat. Examples include substantial cuts in international programs;
cuts in Russian aid, hampering that country's ability to reform; cuts, if not
elimination of peacekeeping bills, undermining America's ability to help the
UN and NATO, not just presently in Bosnia but in any future area of
international concern. The panelist representing the previous Congress
concurred, noting that while the previous Republican administration was
appropriately frustrated when the Democratic Congress tried to block some
of its programs, some of the current proposals in Congress go a great deal
further in hampering progress. And while the leadership in both houses is
internationalist, it has occasionally been hampered when rank and file
members have withheld support.
35
I
CURRENT EVENTS: TURKEY AND THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
During the Cold War, Turkey 's strategic location was a familiar
topic: the country was NATO 's southern flank; the principal barrier to
Soviet penetration ofthe Middle East; bulwark ofNATO and the American
presence in the Mediterranean. Now, with the Cold War over and the
Soviet Union but a memory, Turkey remains strategically situated for a
series ofnew reasons. It is critical to western policy in the Persian Gulf,
particularly with respect to Iraq; it is a bridge between the West andfonner
Soviet cemral Asia; it plays a significant role in the Middle East peace
process atul is influential in the Balkans and central Europe. But the most
critical aspect of Turkey's strategic importance is not its geographic
position but something more figurative: its position between the western
democratic world and the nearly one billion Muslims. Bringing one of the
largest Muslim countries in the world into the family of western
democracies is a great opportunity; yet at this moment, Turkey 's relations
with Europe are troubled. 1he power vacuum that developed in northern
Iraq has led Turkey to send troops across the border in pursuit of Turkish
Kurdish separatists. This, in turn, has caused grave concern among
European Union members who have only recently voted to admit Turkey
into the customs union, a vote that has yet to be ratified. Human rights
considerations and repressive constitutional remnants from the era of
military rule create obstacles to further integration of Turkey into Europe.
Finally, the unsettled question of Cyprus hi1ulers efforts to win assistance
for Turkey in both Europe and in the American Congress. Participallls
returned repeatedly to another question: will Turkey evolve domestically in
a way that makes it part of the west, or will it turn towards
fundamentalism.?
First Panelist
The disintegration of the Soviet Union and the reunification of
Germany transformed Europe in the late 1980s. In the resulting
atmosphere of instability, a new order was required to address security
needs of Euro-Asia.
NATO, a defense organization that had stood the test of time, had
to adapt itself to wholly new conditions or become an anachronism. At the
1994 Brussels Summit, a decision was taken to study the enlargement of
36
NATO through admission of democratic countries to the East.
This is a complex and difficult undertaking. It is too early to
predict the outcome -- either with respect to the members who may be
admitted or the time frame. As NATO studies the issue, however, the
interests of Russia must be taken into account. Russia's location,
importance and history require this if stability is to be achieved. But
Russia must not be given a veto on enlargement nor on NATO's activities.
Rather, the scope of cooperation between Russia and the alliance should be
commensurate with her weight and role in international politics. Russia's
signature in May on the document about enhanced NATO-Russian
cooperation must be viewed as a major step forward.
The ongoing clashes in the former Yugoslavia remain a major
concern. NATO will be called upon increasingly to undertake missions
different from its traditional function of guaranteeing the collective defense
of its members. The alliance has offered to support peacekeeping
operations on a case by case basis under the authority of the UN Security
Council or the responsibility of the OSCE. Such operations include making
available alliance resources and expertise, but, needless to say, the alliance
should not be a sub-contractor for another organization. Full operational
command should stay with the Allies. The humiliation of UNPROFOR in
Bosnia should not be repeated. The strategic concept behind the alliance
allows it to act in a flexible and timely manner. Adaptation of the alliance's
command and force structure will make NATO more useful in the future,
an important consideration, since, even though there is a new European
order, there is no viable or reliable European security architecture. Only
NATO with its integrated military structure can address the new security
challenges: terrorism, fundamentalism, racism, and ultra-nationalism.
NATO can provide security and stability in a world that has
become more unstable and can prevent Europe from backsliding into
fragmentation and the destructive logic of counter-alliances. NATO can
keep trans-Atlantic relationships working smoothly and effectively. NATO
has ended centuries of balance of power J>olitics in Europe and has assured
a US presence on the continent; its dissolution and the disengagement of
the United States would undermine Europe's drive toward further
integration. Turkey has defended western values since its creation. It has
joined western organizations and has played important roles in them.
Turkey has been part of the process of European integration since 1964.
It has developed its own model for development, one based on its
economic, social and political choices. Following this model has brought
Turkey face to face with challenges posed by its neighbors and others in
37
the region. Expansion of NATO must take place simultaneously with the
expansion of other integration processes in Europe. Countries that have
contributed to western defense for more than 40 years within the
framework of NATO should be accorded full union. Turkey has shared
western values since its foundation in 1920, and Turkey's request for full
membership in the European Union continues that tradition. Turkey is
situated in one of the most troubled regions of the world, and it is even
more important now than it was during the Cold War because as a Muslim
society, and a democratic, secular state, Turkey is a model for one billion
people in the Islamic world This is not an easy position, but the Turkish
people are committed to this path, and they believe that their partnership
with the west will help them as they follow it.
The history of the world is not the result of one cultural
development. It is the result of mingling of cultures. The question is: will
the West let cultures clash -- a clash that will lead to new, and probably
more severe, conflicts than we experienced in the era of a the bi-polar
world; or are we going to let cultures intermingle? Turkey is the only
country that can serve as a guide along this difficult path.
Second Panelist
Turkey's strategic location subjects it to two very strong forces, the
tug of American foreign policy and the attraction of Islamic
fundamentalism. So strong are these contradictory pulls that Turkey offers
one stop shopping for the problems of the post Cold War world, a 360
degree foreign policy nightmare. Since the end of the Cold War, Turkey
has become the epicenter of the newest regional system of central Asian
states, primarily ethnically Turkish, running from the Balkans through the
Caucasus into central Asia. The United States and Europe have a
fundamental interest in assuring that this region follows the Turkish, not
the Iranian model. Turkey must be anchored in the European Union.
In recent years, the US has had two policies in Turkey: a
European policy and an Iraq policy. The former has been relatively
astute, and consists of using the US's leverage to tie Turkey to the EU.
The latter has been brain dead: if a power vacuum in the Kurdish areas of
northern Iraq is maintained, Turkey could fall out of the EU and into the
abyss of northern Iraq.
Over the last two months, the world was given a case study of the
impact these two countervailing forces can have. A vote was scheduled
that would allow Turkey into the European customs union. At the same
38
time, some 30,000 Turkish soldiers invaded northern Iraq to attempt to
break the back of the Kurdish separatist party, the PKK. The reaction
from the European Union was swift and predictable. Essentially, it said, "If
that's the real Turkey, the Turkey that attempts to stifle Kurdish
nationalism, then that is not a country that we want in the customs union."
There was a perfect example of the conflict between these two policies: the
effort to anchor Turkey in Europe and the effort to bottle up Saddam
Hussein in Baghdad by maintaining a power vacuum in northern Iraq.
There seem to be four options. First, a deal could be struck
between Ankara and Baghdad that would allow Saddam to re-assert his
authority over the Kurds in northern Iraq to fill the power vacuum. The
second would be a collaboration among the US, Turks and the leading
Kurdish families of northern Iraq to build a government structure that can
assure Turkey that its border will not be violated. This assumes that an
end can be put to internecine squabbling among the Kurds. Third, "the
south Lebanon solution", where Turkey would go in and out of northern
Iraq on a periodic basis just as Israel goes in and out of southern Lebanon.
But it is an open question whether Turkey could pursue such a policy and
still win admission to the EU. A fourth option would come into play if
something were to happen to Saddam Hussein, and another dictator
replaced him who would be allowed to move into northern Iraq to fill the
power vacuum. Option two is the least bad option from the Americans'
point of view, but they have not pursued it very strongly as yet. If it is to
be pursued, then a very high level mission capable of getting the attention
of the Kurds is required.
Islamic fundamentalism is essentially a secular phenomenon. It is
about grievances and a protest against governments that do not function.
It is about television -- about resisting the invasion of western values into
traditional patriarchal societies. And it is about economics: all Islamic
fundamentalist movements have failed on that front. People have bodies
and souls, and feeding just one of them for too long will prove disastrous.
That is the main flaw of all Islamic fundamentalist societies that have
emerged since Ayatollah Khomeini went back to Iran.
Discussion
All participants believed strongly that Turkey is committed to
remaining secular, democratic and free market. This will be easier to do,
though, if Turkey is accorded full membership in the EU. Turks feel that
Europeans and Americans confuse the "Kurdish problem" with "terrorism."
39
Turks live comfortably with Kurds; terrorists are bent on dividing Turkey.
Finally, Greece does not wish a divided or demoralized Turkey,
notwithstanding long-standing hostility between the two countries over
Cyprus. Indeed, some Greeks see the two nations as being a potentially
positive force for improving the situation in the Balkans: working together,
Orthodox Greece and Muslim Turkey could be honest brokers for the
populations of the former Yugoslavia.
A participant pointed out that Turkey's problems with Iraq resulted
largely from forces over which Turkey had scant control: the Gulf War
was not a Turkish project, although Turkey did support its allies. When
the war ended, there was a power vacuum in northern Iraq that no country
but Turkey dealt with. There are pipelines with a capacity of eighteen
million tons of oil a year running between Iraq and Turkey. These are
now idle and deteriorating. There is anarchy in northern Iraq. To whom
could Turkey talk about the emerging menace? This spring, Turkey said
that it would not occupy Iraq, and it was true to its word. Once its
military operations were concluded, its forces returned to Turkey.
Whatever new problems have developed since the end of the Cold
War, one from the past still clouds the outlook for stability in the area:
Cyprus. Until this is settled -- until Greek and Turkish leaders do what
Adenauer and de Gaulle did to bury the centuries-long hostility between
Germany and France -- there will be little chance of lasting peace. The
international community has been supportive of the effort to have Turkey
join the EU. Even Greece has not used its veto to keep Turkey out of a
customs union. The US has appointed a special task force to work on this
problem. The EU listed Cyprus as a candidate member when it offered
Turkey membership in the EU customs union in March. The decision to
admit Turkey must be ratified by the European Parliament, and an
American participant emphasized how critical ratification is: without
admission of Turkey to the EU, it seems unlikely that there will be
progress on Cyprus. A Europea11 emphasized that the Community
understood the linkage: admitting Turkey, a non-member state - into a
customs union with the EU, is unprecedented and is not being undertaken
lightly. Like the US, the EU knows that Cyprus is the key to stabilizing
relations with Greece, but it was noted that certain elements in the Turkish
constitution such as those limiting freedom of expression need tO be
rectified for political relations between the EU and Turkey to develop fully.
The Turkish government has prepared a package of measures that addresses
these problems, which it will submit to the Turkish parliament. Should the
parliament reject this package, then Turkey's integration into the EU would
40
be endangered. But, this speaker stressed, matters between Turkey and the
EU are much more satisfactory today than they were just a year ago, and
there seems to be considerable hope that they will improve further once
membership in the customs union is in place.
Another European speaker expressed sympathy with Turkey's
position as a nation "in a waiting room," and he noted that Europe's carrot-
and-stick policy towards Turkey is influenced by more than foreign policy.
In a country like Germany, for instance, which has more than two million
Turkish workers, policy towards Turkey has important domestic aspects.
Many young people in Germany perceive movements like the PKK as
liberation movements, not as the terrorist group that they are. And, as
Turkey manages to control terrorism within its borders, the PKK becomes
more active elsewhere. Returning to the idea of carrot-and-stick, would it
be helpful to link improvement on Turkey's human rights record to customs
union admission? Might this have a positive effect on domestic opinion in
countries like Germany?
Islamic fundamentalism is a critical element in the tug of war over
Turkey; yet, one speaker noted, few people, and perhaps least of all, the
western diplomatic community, make much effort to understand what is at
issue. Usually, the "solution" is rather reductionist. The questions are
simple: "Who are these fundamentalists?" "What do they want?" "What
do we do with them?" And the answers are little better: nuke them; cajole
them; ignore them. The focus is usually on the pieces of the puzzle, but the
entire picture needs to be reconstructed. Islamic fundamentalism is a
universe, not a collage.
41
J
IS THERE STILL A NORTH ATLANTIC COMMUNITY?
Whereas a great deal of importance has been given to the
relationships within the Atlantic Alliance on economic tenns and trade
issues, the more subjective feelings within and between the member
countries merit closer attention and scrutiny. Each of the two panelists
addressed the underlying currents in Europe and America which contribute
to the tenuous nature of this relationship and how it affects the more
concrete differences across the Atlantic.
First Panelist
A new political initiative for the North Atlantic area is essential
and this is being debated within and between three different generations in
America. The first generation, which developed its views on foreign
policy during World War II and the post-war reconstruction, believes in an
important geo-political role for America and that this role has been
beneficial, constructive, and essential. The next generation, whose
formative experience was during the Vietnam war, believes that American
intervention abroad has not always been beneficial, has often reflected
grave faults in the American society, and that these faults have to be
remedied before Americans can consider themselves qualified to be active
abroad. Such activity, they feel, should be more in the direction of human
rights and other improvements than in the more political strategic
orientation.
Then there is the post-Vietnam generation, today's young adults
who, on the whole, are more conservative in their outlook but, at the same
time, are clearer about domestic policy than foreign affairs. In America
this generation has to be given some sense of direction and, as Americans,
some cause for which they can commit themselves.
All this is happening at a time when all over the world every major
country is facing an unprecedented era; a world of five or six more or less
equal powers which have lost their capacity to affect events and who are
without a strategic or a clear-cut ideological enemy. The United States, for
example, can neither dominate the world, nor withdraw from it. America
may be the only military super-power, but the events that can be affected
by military force are shrinking and are very specialized, such as the former
Yugoslavia. Experience in America forms no basis for operating in a
world in which logic requires equilibrium. Theoretically, the US could
42
play the role of Britain in the nineteenth century; splendid isolation,
backing the weaker against the stronger. But to do that on a global scale
would run too contrary to basic American convictions.
Concurrently, Europe is in the process of forming itself. As a
nation-state it is too small to be a global player and its make-up is yet to
be determined. Russia finds itself within borders it has not known since
Peter the Great. It is trying to form a democracy without the traditions
that generated democratic principles in the western world, with a state
church rather than a separation between church and state, with no
enlightenment, with no capitalism and with no practical experience of
democracy at a moment when it has to adjust to a loss of empire.
China will be a huge player in the next century. And the issue
presented here today repeatedly is that one has to educate China and
encourage it to be restrained. It is possible that the weight of China,
whatever the formal intentions of the Chinese leadership, will be so great
as to profoundly affect its attitude. And this will limit the degree to which
the Chinese can afford to break with the West on most of the current issues
we now face.
With all these enormous changes taking place -- including the huge
changes in the Islamic world and the growth of India as a potential super
power -- should the nations of the west deal with them individually or as
a group? Any attempt to deal with them on a regional or national basis
alone will lead to a continuation or to a resumption of the western civil war
that started in 1914 and ended in 1945, and would exhaust western values
and institutions. For instance, one cannot travel through China, or
Southeast Asia, or India and see these huge industrial capacities being built
there without at least asking the question whether at some point this will
not lead, either to a substantial lowering of western standards of living or
to a need to reorient our societies in a fundamental way to avoid a
fundamental lowering. We keep talking about a Pacific community. In
point of fact, the relation of the Asian nations to each other is most similar
to that of the European nations in the nineteenth century. Japan, China,
Korea, India, Southeast Asia do not look at each other as part of a
community but as strategic opponents. Therefore, the West must address
these problems in some community form, most logically by the expansion
of NATO. This should not be viewed as a way by itself to hold the
Atlantic Alliance together; rather, it is a way to avoid debacles. Another
unifying method would be to form a North Atlantic Free Trade Zone. The
most essential ingredient is strong leadership; our leaders should pul before
us some concept on which we can work now, which is not social reform
43
or some technical problem, but which will perform the most important
function of the Marshall Plan; the purpose of which was not to transfer
money but to set a common goal towards which Europe and America could
work together.
Second Panelist
The North Atlantic Community continues to exist for three reasons:
a common civilization, history, and common interests - both economic and
political. The first, civilization, will become more important as other
powers, such as China and the Islamic world, surge. The concern is how
to manage the transition as we enter a period of great disequilibrium.
How does one define "Atlantic•, at a time when the limits of
Europe are ill defined? During the Cold War, Europe was everything west
of the Iron Curtain, but today there are no clear boundaries. As we look
back in history, the divisions of Europe were defined by the Eastern and
Western Roman Empire, the Western and Eastern church, and others, all
very relevant today. So, today we don't need to invent new institutions;
our present institutions are very good. The problem is to manage the
transition, by adjusting present institutions to the new realities.
Establishing a free trade zone is a good idea because it reenforces mutual
interests. At the same time we need to identify and implement specific
security needs in this increasingly unstable world. If we succeed in
managing concrete problems such as Yugoslavia, we can be optimistic for
the reshaping of a new transatlantic relationship through current
institutions, such as NATO and the EU. But if we fail in the concrete
problems, in favor of abstract solutions, we will court disaster.
Therefore the situation is very uncomfortable for all of us. We
must try and navigate through blurred vision in an environment which has
very little logic and requires a great rleal of pragmatism. It might be useful
to consider an Atlantic Charter which would defme a renewed relationship
in very broad terms.
Discussion
The moderator began the discussion by noting that the Atlantic
relationship has been affected in two ways; the common concern - fear of
the Soviet Union- is no longer there and the organization which was set
up to deal with Atlantic relations- NATO - is now becoming less central.
Unless we remind ourselves that our common interests go beyond security
44
and our institutional needs go beyond NATO, we are unlikely to deal with
the problem. A former Secretary General of NATO concurred, noting that
with the unifying fear of the Soviet Union removed, Europe and America
have drifted apart; Americans no longer consider the relationship with
Europe as vital and Europeans feel the American nuclear umbrella to be no
longer necessary, both views being extremely shortsighted. In response to
a perceived decline of interest on the part of Americans towards Europe,
an American noted that although Washington is trying to balance its
budget, the defense budget will not be cut and America will continue to
maintain the present level of troops in Europe.
However, a number of participants picked up on this theme,
questioning whether Europeans and Americans felt, with the demise of the
Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War, the same responsibility towards
each other's well being or even if America would remain a member of the
Atlantic Alliance. Some speakers suggested that it would be wise to
develop new common interests to hold the Alliance together, such as
environmental issues and a free trade zone, as two examples. This led to
several people reminding the group that members of the Alliance needed
to work more diligently on agreeing to a common approach to present
situations, such as Bosnia, before looking for new areas on which to
collaborate. In addition, noted one participant, there remain many threats
beyond both Bosnia and the Soviet Union. Just because the Soviet Union
no longer presents a threat, this does not totally eliminate security issues
as a central concern to both Europeans and Americans: Iran, Iraq, the
current situation in North Korea, the emergence of China all demand our
watchful eye and joint focus.
There was some disagreement on the role free trade might play in
cementing the Atlantic Alliance. Several participants felt that a free trade
area would dilute the effectiveness of the recently concluded GATT
agreement; some worried that the agriculture and textile interest groups
would hamper any free trade movements, whereas others felt that a
common interest in a free trade area could go far in replacing the threat
of the Soviet Union as a binding force and reason for continuing dialogue.
A British participant noted that to date, even though some trade
negotiations have been bitter, they have been handled well. But with other
common interests disintegrating, most particularly the security threat,
members of the alliance have been less determined to arrive at common
solutions. Others underscored the importance of looking towartis the
industrial evolution of other countries - China, Singapore, Vietnam, for
example - as opportunities for investment rather than threats against
45
American leadership.
A German agreed with the panel, commenting that all of the
participants have grown up during the Cold War, with foreign policies
based on defense and deterrence, rather than programs focussed on shaping
the future. It is time to think more non-militarily, and to be more
concerned with the future quality of life, which will mean convincing
leaders and the public to pay the costs involved.
Addressing the statement that the current boundaries of Europe are
ill-defined, the American panelist stated the necessity of drawing those
boundaries now. It would be impossible to talk about expansion without
having a clear-cut understanding of Europe's borders today. This same
participant warned that the Atlantic Community won't succeed with
questions like Yugoslavia unless there is more dialogue on the purpose of
any of these goals. Several participants agreed with this speaker, noting
that although Americans find that the constant changing of European
leaders hampers continuing dialogues, more communication between
Europe and America on common goals is essential.
46
SHOULD THE EUROPEAN UNION INTEGRATE FURTHER, AND
WHY?
The Maastricht Treaty maps out further steps towards integration
with its provisions for economic and monetary union. But the Treaty also
states that Europe should develop its own defense policy and identity as
well as increase cooperation across borders to fight crime, and hannonize
policies on refugees and asylum. Finally, Maastricht calls on members to
consider enlarging the European Union and to weigh what changes would
be desirable to accommodate new members. It is unlikely that institutions
designed for a union ofsix members thirty years ago will suit a Union that
may eventually have as many as twenty five members.
During the discussion, considerable passion developed on several
questions, but three topics dominated. First was the deepening vs.
widening ofthe European Union. Many felt it important to develop the ties
that bind the existing members together, while othersfelt it more important
to bring new members, particularly in eastern Europe, into the Union. One
felt that deepening was essential if widening was to be successful. The
second main topic was monetary union. Most speakers felt it was the sine
qua non for successful integration andfuture competitiveness. Others felt
it was not necessary and was an obsession of Brussels-based Eurocrats.
Finally, there was a sharp cleavage among those who felt that Great
Britain would be unwise to join wholeheartedly with Europe, and those who
felt that this view was, •negative, defeatist and unhelpful·.
First Panelist
Integration is majority voting. It is a mechanism for decision-
making. It sounds very technical; actually, it is very political. The
decision-making system determines the legal character of the union.
Majority voting gives the political union the features of a state. The
decisions of the Council have direct legal consequences for the citizens of
all member states. This means that democratic control cannot be exercised
by national parliaments, but only by the European parliament. Why should
integration go further? Reality has changed for Europe, whether one is
talking about economics or crime. Europe needs common decisions because
it is dealing with a common reality. This means that Europe needs
47
common institutions. Europe faces common challenges, and therefore,
common interests. Without common interests, there would be no chance for
European unification. Our point of view may differ quite substantially, but
our vital interests are the same, and none of us can master them alone.
Common institutions are both necessary and attainable.
There are three ways of making decisions, but only majority rule
can work in a democratic system. Unanimous voting does not work. We
must have majority voting in the European Union, if we are to have
efficient decision-making. In a monetary union, central banks can only
coordinate policy by majority rule. And monetary union is the key to
further integration. Without currency stability there will be no possibility
of job security or economic growth. Monetary union is the key issue,
which is why it is so controversial in the United Kingdom. If a union is
established, the UK will join, and this will change Britain's attitude towards
the EU. The Act of Union of 1707 joined England with Scotland; it is
hard to believe that at the end of the 20th century, we will not be able to
join Britain with Europe.
Second Panelist
Economic integration has been an overwhelming success. Not only
must it go ahead, it should be accelerated. Foot dragging in areas already
agreed upon must stop. Next, state monopolies must be opened up. On
physical integration, a happy medium must be found between Jacques
Delors' European network and the practical reality of fifteen finance
ministers who do not want to fmance more than a fraction of the plans for
such a network. Cut out those that do not pass the cost/benefit test, and
get on with the others. A European company statute is needed. In the
United States, a company incorporated in Delaware can do business
anywhere. Building the network of !'ubsidiaries required to do business in
Europe is horrendously expensive: approximately $40 billion. Finally,
a monetary union would force weak political leaders to grapple with their
deficits, and their interest and inflation rates in order to move towards
convergence.
Big gains are in prospect if vertical integration is speeded up; even
bigger gains loom if horizontal integration is accelerated. The European
Union should extend to the East and to the South. Such expansion is not
a threat to the EU but an opportunity. It is not a question of solidarity;
nations rarely take serious steps in the pursuit of solidarity. But they do
in pursuit of narrow national interest. Expansion is a narrow national
48
interest for western Europe. And it is a win/win situation. Expansion
would bring huge new markets. In central Europe $100 billion must be
invested just in telecommunications; several times that much is needed
further east. Transportation, energy, modernization of industry -- all offer
opportunities for export-hungry western Europe. The Czech Republic and
Poland have turned the comer, and they have money to pay for these
exports. There are still many barriers; no matter what one hears from
Brussels about free trade, tariffs of 50% to 100% are in place for textiles.
Division of labor is terribly important, and it is much more difficult
without integration. There are, further, great opportunities in direct
foreign investment. The percentage of such investments going to eastern
Europe is pitifully small. Direct investment brings more than just money.
Compare Poland with Spain. Poland's GDP is seven times that of Spain.
Since Spain joined the EU, it has received $160 billion in foreign direct
investment-- a major lift. Last year, Poland got $1.3 billion. At that rate,
it would take a century for Poland to receive as much as Spain. Eastern
Europe is especially suited for foreign investment, since it is rich in human
resources. Poland, for example, has an impressive number of highly
qualified engineers.
Some prospective members of the EU have poor economic records:
high inflation, high debt as a percentage of GDP, high levels of subsidy.
But for every bad story one sees among candidate members, there is an
equally bad -- or worse -- record for a country already a member of the
EU. Other countries further east are not yet ready for membership.
Perhaps they never will be, but they could be given associate status, or
arrangements for cooperation could be worked out. Finally, on the
southern flank, where there are 300 million people. Turkey should, of
course, be admitted. But economic cooperation should be intensified with
the others. Many of these Mediterranean countries have huge
unemployment -- up to 50%. This is a ticking bomb. Europe cannot
simply tum its back on these people eyen if these countries are not ready
for membership.
Third Panelist
In spite of the importance of the unification of Europe, as well as
the provisions of the Maastricht Treaty, we should be skeptical about the
way Europe is developing. The question: "What is further integration
for?" is asked, but it is not answered. Some people say, "More majority
voting. • But more majority voting is a means, not an end. It is necessary
49
for further integration but, except for monetary union, it is unclear what
will be achieved. There is some talk of a "common reality, • but the one
common reality of European history in the last two centuries is the reality
of the nation state.
Two things ought to happen. First, one ought to be frank about
the intention to take power from national parliaments and give it to a
centralized parliament that looks increasingly like the government of a
nation state. Second, someone ought to attempt to show that this will
improve the way people are governed.
What are the arguments for further integration? "Peace" is the
usual answer. But integration did not keep the peace after World War II.
NATO did. If integration did help, it does not follow that further
integration of a bureaucratic kind will help more. The single market has
been, in the main, realized already. Much of the good that will result
from further trade liberalization will be the result of the work of the World
Trade Organization or similar bodies. Much legislation designed to
promote the single market is simply unnecessary. A single market does not
necessarily require a single sales tax. In the United States, the fifty states
regulate sales taxes.
Much social legislation being enacted in Europe is making Europe
the high cost producer; the high unemployment--slow growth area. And
Maastricht has done little to improve Europe's infrastructure: the Channel
Tunnel was not built because of Maastricht.
The single currency is worrisome on both economic and political
grounds. A single market does not require single currency, as NAFTA
proves. Fixed exchange rates ended in 1972, yet world trade has expanded
at ever increasing rates: what evidence is there that floating rates inhibit
trade? A currency union will lead inexorably to a political union. More
power for the European parliament makes sense only if the intent is to
create a state called Europe. Yet there is no evidence that the people of
Europe will be better governed if the changes that are proposed are
implemented. As Europe assumes more of the characteristics of a nation
state, the people of this new state ought to be told frankly that is happening
and consulted as to whether they want it.
Discussion
The first participant to speak made a bold statement: Maastricht is
a bad treaty that is also incomprehensible. When further steps are
presented in referenda to the people of Europe, they must be presented in
50
clear terms; not to do so is a recipe for disaster. The constitutional
objectives must be expressed simply, as constitutions are expressed. A
participant in the Maastricht drafting process objected that the treaty itself
was a major achievement. Those drafting it were required to produce a
document on which twelve governments -- and later fifteen governments -
- representing different cultures could agree. As a negotiator, however,
this speaker agreed that it would have been desirable to produce a separate
summing up of the treaty written in a more comprehensible manner.
One speaker noted that integration is not an end in itself. It is a
way for a group of countries to develop policies related to that group's
ambitions. It is not the ideological program of retarded bureaucrats, but
rather a means for achieving efficiency and action necessary in a period of
sweeping change. Why is monetary union important? Because in Europe
there is a competitiveness issue that requires the convergence of European
economies in order to achieve stability over time. The monetary union
should be enacted by the Monnet method: no arm twisting, no military
threats. If one country does not want to join, it does not have to. But
union does have a magnetic effect. The pressure to join the EU is a
consequence -- and evidence -- of that effect. If the European Union did
not work, why would other countries wish to join?
A Scandinavian speaker returned to the question why further
integration is desirable. The reason, he said, is embedded in the preamble
of the Treaty of Rome: "to secure peace and freedom in Europe. • To be
sure, NATO saved the continent from the threat to the East. But European
integration forced France and Germany to establish a relationship in which
future wars are practically impossible. Integration is not a question of
widening or deepening. Both are necessary: deepening is needed to make
widening a success. It is clear why widening is a win/win situation. It
must be equally clear why not widening is lose/lose. That has to do with
the original idea behind European integration. Wise political leadership is
needed when it comes to deciding how to make decisions. A citizen of a
small country like Denmark has a vote that is six times more powerful than
the average German when it comes to making decision about Europe. That
must change, or a system will emerge in which the big countries do not
wish to participate and will create their own directorates. That is not in the
interest of the smaller countries.
A participant took issue with the claim that monetary union is
unnecessary in a single market. Stable exchange rates in Europe are good
for inflation. They are essential for a single market. The wild fluctuations
of the lira in the past eighteen months could not be tolerated in a single
51
market system. Another feature of a single market is capital mobility: one
cannot have independent monetary policies, fixed rates and capital mobility;
one of them -- the independence of monetary polices -- has to go, which
means one currency.
A further reason for monetary union was advanced: supplying
capital for European growth. At present, trying to find capital for
investment involves sixteen different currencies and use of "crutches,• such
as derivatives, that few feel are sound. One must still, however, re-
convert these instruments into local currency. This cannot continue. It is
misleading to compare this situation with NAFTA, which is built around
the biggest national currency and capital market in the world. A market
of similar size is required in Europe to create the magnet for further
widening.
A German speaker sought to explain why Great Britain feels so
differently about integration than the continental countries do. Perhaps, he
said, it is because, never having suffered invasion, the British have not
known the horror of living under a government that could not protect them
from disaster. But would refusal to integrate into Europe be good enough
for the British in the long run? Can Britain outside Europe be influential
and prosperous? Can it be a great nation? As a practical matter, can
Britain make money? To do that, a common currency is vital. Skepticism
about Europe has grown more mainstream: in the old days, anti-Europe
feeling was considered exotic; no longer. Today, those who are for
Europe have to make the case. Making that case cannot take the form of
explaining institutional issues to ordinary citizens. That is for experts.
What citizens expect is that the European Union performs on three basic
issues: jobs, peace, and internal security. Given these challenges, the
debate about widening and deepening seems theological. The key question
is: Are our nation states today successful on these three issues? Not so,
responded one panelist: widening before deepening would be removing one
of the EU's chief attractions for those now outside it: its inexorable, if
slow, march towards political union. The same panelist defended the idea
of a single European currency on the grounds that, in its absence, the D-
Mark would continue to dominate in a way that citizens of less robust
economies might well regard as hegemonic -- just what the EU has been
created to avoid.
In response to a question about a common European defense
structure, a panelist described it as a precondition for maintaining US
interest in European security, as well as a means for protecting European
security when the vital interests of the U.S. are not threatened. Another
52
panelist suggested that perhaps the most effective means for guaranteeing
Europe's defense would be to increase membership in the EU --to increase
it by the year 2000 to the point where it included 25 members and another
25 to 30 countries with associate status, with a membership of 1.1 billion
people, with the southern and eastern flanks protected. The challenges of
Communist backlash and Islamic fundamentalism will be met successfully
only by economic development, and the best way of containing these
threats is by economic integration.
53
OUR AGENDAS FOR THE WTO AND THE WORLD BANK
Although the World Trade Organizarion came into existence only
in the last year, whereas the World Bank wasfounded somefifty years ago,
they are both international institutions and, as such, share some common
issues. The most important, said one participant during the discussion, is
the very nature of the two organizarions. As the world becomes more
global in focus, moving away from nationalism and regionalism, these
institutions need to maintain their strength and work together as effective
facilitalors of world development.
The panel was led by the President of the newly fonned World
Trade Organizarion(Wl'O) and the recently appointed President of the
World Bank. Each presented the importance of institutions which are in
positions to remind the world populalion, during an increasingly unstable
period in history, of the importance offocussing on issues which have an
impact around the globe.
First Panelist
The Uruguay Round negotiations, after lasting seven years, can be
viewed as an historical success because of the degree of liberalization
achieved, and the expansion of the trading system into textiles, agriculture,
services, and intellectual property. But the most important reason for its
success has been the integration of many of the developing countries into
the multilateral trading system. The li!>eralization of the multilateral system
is perhaps the most successful story of the west since the end of World
War II. When GATT was created, in 1948, only eleven developing
countries participated. Now 100 developing countries are founding
members of the World Trade Organization and 25 more are considering
joining the club.
So a global system has been created, not just for liberalization, but
also global rules and disciplines which apply to everyone, as do
enforcement and dispute settlement systems. This is a revolutionary
achievement, and it is our duty to do all we can to safeguard this
achievement and to improve it. Although it is not difficult to state the
agenda, the political implementation is more of a challenge.
First, the implementation of the Uruguay Round agreement will be
more difficult than people realize. Already we have seen some difficulties
54
in the liberalization process in textiles and agriculture. We need the
political will to implement what we have decided and this requires a great
deal of attention. Second, we have an important built-in agenda of
liberalization, beginning in a few weeks with the first liberalizing deadline
of the financial services, as well as some improvements in the movements
of people who are tied to service activities. This will be followed by a
liberalization of basic telecommunication and maritime transport and, in
1999, we have to begin negotiation for the further liberalization in
agriculture, services activities, intellectual property.
Third, we must focus on the expansion of the system because this
is the institution where there are rules and disciplines applicable to
everyone. Fourth, we have to expand the trading system into new areas
where there are clear connections, starting with the environment. People
had been concerned that the developing countries would resist discussions
of environmental issues in terms of trade. But to date the developing
countries have been active and enthusiastic participants in such discussions.
Other important fields are trade and investment, and rules of trade
and competition, the need for which is demonstrated by the current
conflict between the automobile industries of the United States and Japan.
The one issue which has not been resolved is whether to include
labor standards as part of the WTO; this is currently being debated.
One of the greatest ambitions of the WTO has been to charge its
director general with discussions with the leaders of the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund to enhance the global coherence of
economic policy. There are three layers in this exercise. The first is that
through the promotion of a global market we are encouraging better
coordination of economic policies and an improved international monetary
system. The second is to avoid contradictions of policy between the three
institutions, and the third is to promote a coordinated effort to enhance the
strengths of each of the three institutions.
There are obstacles to overcome: the tendency of the West to limit
competition with developing countries, an inclination to prefer bilateralism
to multilateralism, and a disproportionate relationship between regionalism
and multilateralism. But at stake is a new vision of relations among
nations following the fall of the Berlin Wall, and this attempt to establish,
through a global system, a stronger interdependence between developed and
developing nations is extremely important.
55
Second Panelist
The World Bank, an essential institution at this time in world
history, is really four institutions. The first, the IBRD, was set up for
post-war reconstruction some fifty years ago. One part, the International
Development Association, looks after 78 nations, representing 57% of the
world population, of whom one billion earn less than $1.00 a day.
The other three institutions in the World Bank are the International
Finance Corporation, the Insurance Guarantee Corporation, and the Global
Environment facility. The World Bank employs 11,000 people; it has
offices around the world; it has distributed over 300 billion dollars in its
lifetime; and has a current balance sheet of about 180 billion dollars. The
bank is a self-financing entity, having been infused with capital at its outset
by a number of governments. However, the International Development
Association, which looks after the poorer countries by making
concessionary loans, has to ask for assistance in relation to funding every
three years; assistance amounting to about six billion dollars a year.
Poverty alleviation and sustainable development, wherever it takes
place, impacts us all, which is why the World Bank is relevant to
everyone, not just those who suffer. When a disease surfaces on one
continent, it has the potential of infecting the entire world population unless
it is addressed at the source.
Population and migration, war and famine, and the emergence of
markets in the developing world are all issues which also need to be
addressed. The World Bank is relevant because it is a world body and, as
such, wields considerable opinion on the countries it helps. The bank does
not just lend money; it helps countries learn to grow, learn to govern
themselves, learn about infrastructure, learn about leadership, educational
systems, health programs, and financial aid organizations. Because of its
fifty-year history, it has tremendous influence on the governments with
which it deals, far more than bilateral assistance.
The private sector's aid to the developing countries is increasingly
vital and welcomed. But at the moment the private sector sends funds to
roughly 25 countries, whereas the World Bank is helping 78 countries.
The private sector is accountable only to itself, whereas the World Bank
must be consistently supportive of the countries it helps, and creates a
global structure where any country can approach it for assistance. The
bank has to adapt to the changing world, not only with respect to the
countries which receive its help but also to its shareholder countries which,
56
themselves, have changing administrations and priorities and must be
convinced of the validity of the World Bank's continuing role in the world.
Discussion
Although there was general agreement on the importance of the
WTO and the World Bank, several concerns were raised quite early in the
discussion. An American participant took issue with the importance of
worldwide organizations, saying that regionalism and nationalism are also
alive and well, and that while multilateral organizations can be very
effective, they can also make mistakes. Sometimes problems are best
addressed, economic growth is best fostered, and human rights are best
protected by regional or unilateral efforts. We shouldn't be asked to
pledge fealty, he continued, to a theology of multilateralism in order to
identify ourselves as good citizens of the modem world. It might be
worthwhile for the panelist from the World Bank, for instance, to address
not only the successes but the failures of this institution over the years.
Another issue which was addressed in terms of both organizations,
but with different conclusions, was the question of the environment; to
what extent is the World Bank focussed on this problem and how soon
should the WTO take it up?. Several speakers urged the World Bank
panelist to place high priority on ecological concerns, which are of
increasing interest and importance around the world. On the other hand,
a participant urged the President of the WTO not to succumb to pressures
from environmentalists at the outset; that it is considerably more important
to consolidate the results of the recently completed Uruguay Round and to
focus, instead, on additional members such as Russia and China, in order
to make the organization truly global.
Several participants addressed concerns about the size of the World
Bank, asking if it should be shrunk and! if so, to what extent and in which
areas? One European commented that as governments try to shrink
themselves and some of their programs are privatized, the World Bank can
play an important role in helping those private organizations in areas which
might be new to them. Several other speakers urged that the World Bank
shift some of its programs, such as the International Finance Corporation,
to the private sector. In Europe, particularly, there are private institutions
which are capable of assuming this role. A Canadian added that the
reliability of private sector capital, as well as an overall reputation for less
corruption, might be two reasons for considering such a shift. Such moves
57
in the directions of downsizing and restructuring would also go a long way
in restoring some of the bank's weakened credibility.
Responding to one participant's question on the role the WTO
would play in the current United States/Japanese dispute on automobiles,
the panelist representing the WTO said that already he had heard from
representatives of both governments. Both of whom had stated their
preparedness to present the issues and to abide by the WTO's conclusions.
At the same time, the panelist expressed hope that the two sides will solve
the issue between themselves before the WTO makes its ruling. Finally,
he assured the participants of his commitment to implement the agreements
of this new organization within the announced schedule, to establish
credibility for the World Trade Organization and to solidify its place in the
global structure.
Responding to the concerns expressed about the World Bank, the
other panelist assured the participants that already he is aware of where the
bank fails in its missions and within the next few months will visit all of
the countries which have relationships with the bank. Through these visits,
he plans to address issues such as drugs, crime and the way funds are
distributed, as well as areas where savings could be achieved through
cutbacks in staff or support. For instance, the bank will wind down the
IFC once that organization has completed its mission.
On the subject of turning some of the bank's projects over to the
private sector, the panelist reminded the group that although the private
sector is extremely supportive and effective, sometimes a private sector
organization, for whatever reason, decides to leave a country or discontinue
a project. The country is still there and, on the whole, still needs the
assistance.
Finally, in spite of the World Bank's weaknesses, the panelist
asked that it be given this opportunity to improve its image and
effectiveness. There are 11,000 pecple in the bank who have a dream for
the world; they deserve the opportunity to reach for their goals.
58
CURRENT EVENTS: FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
"The perfection of means and the confusion of goals seem to characterize
our age."
Albert Einstein
With that quote, one ofthe panelists summed up the feelings of a
number ofparticipants as they discussed, for the fourth time over the last
five years of Bilderberg meetings, the continuing saga of what is now
known as former Yugoslavia. Although thefocus has variedfrom one year
to the next, the themes have centered around differing views on whether
Europe and America should even play a role in the conflict, to what extent
the roles and responsibilities of NATO and the United Nations should
overlap, to what extent sanctions or the use offorce should be employed -
all infused with a great deal offrustration on the pan ofthe participants.
The panelists this year included a represelltative ofthe United Nations, a
member ofthe current American administration, and the Secretary General
of NATO.
First Panelist
Although it is clear that the only chance for peace in this area is
through negotiations, such a conclusion is more difficult to achieve now
than ever before. With each passing year, in spite of the various peace
agreements which have been drafted, there is more hatred, more violence,
more ethnic cleansing. However, we must continue to negotiate and to that
end, the most important event taking place now is in Belgrade, where
Ambassador Fraser of the United States is trying to convince President
Milosevic to recognize the Bosnia-Herz.ogovina borders in return for
suspension of UN sanctions. If this fails, we could face an immediate
negative effect, not ,only in Bosnia but in Croatia. Conversely, if these
negotiations succeed, the resulting cease fire in Bosnia could have a
contagious effect in Croatia. This, in tum, could lead to continued
negotiations in Bosnia on the contact map and in Croatia on the economic
agreement reached last December. However, although the military
situation at this time is no worse than last year, the political mood i:;: much
more confrontational, making negotiations extremely difficult.
The credibility of the United Nations is at stake over its role in the
59
Bosnian situation. Some feel that NATO's stature is suffering as well, but
this is hard to understand. NATO has performed all that has been required
of it; the UN has had more difficulty. One reason is that all parties in the
conflict expect the UN to support their individual conditions for
negotiations and, as the UN negotiators refuse to take sides, all parties are
attacking the UN. The people in the cities and towns do not want the UN
to leave; they know the UN's continuing presence gives them some
protection and stability; in Bosnia alone, 2.8 million people receive food
and medical supplies, to the extent that such supplies reach those in need.
The problem for the UN is the gap between the expectations and what the
UN is actually able to do, between rhetoric and reality, between resources
and the rules of engagement. The UN cannot wage peace and war at the
same time. It welcomes the rapid reaction force which will not only mean
stronger protection but, hopefully, more deterrence.
Second Panelist
As British Prime Minister John Major said yesterday, "In the years
before 1914, and again in the 1930s, we paid a heavy price for the
mistaken view that events hundreds of miles away had no importance for
us. And by the time we learned that we could not tum our backs on the
fate of Europeans, it was too late."
We have to admit that Yugoslavia represents the worst collective
failure of the western security system since the 1930s. Although it is not
a crisis for NATO and the reputation of NATO is not at risk, the
Yugoslavia situation has undoubtedly strained the Alliance. At the same
time, the United Nations has sustained much more reputational damage.
Above all, the dual key arrangement, by which NATO and the UN were
supposed to work together, has evolved, instead, into a dual veto. The two
organizations have incompatible missions and mandates and one would hope
this joint effort is never considered again.
However, the members of the Alliance should take this opportunity
to learn from this experience. The countries of Central Europe must settle
their historical disputes, which have the potential of creating a similar
conflict; the Cyprus issue is no longer a local problem on a small island;
all of southeastern Europe from Turkey to Iran and Iraq and Syria
constitute a single area of crisis - including Ukrainian/Russian relations -
and the enlargement of NATO is vitally important. It also reminds us
how important it is that Russia, which has played an ambiguous role in the
contact group, be brought into a proper role in the security structure of
60
Europe.
The war has not spread to Macedonia or Kosovo or Albania. Nor
has it re-erupted in Croatia where the fragile peace still holds.
Nonetheless, the situation is deteriorating rapidly and we are reaching
another crossroads. This is critical for France, above all, because the new
French government has taken the initiative in bringing forth a quick-
reaction force to reinforce the UN by improving its ability to accomplish
its mandate. The UN has been in an untenable position, leading some to
believe it has to get stronger or get out.
Unfortunately, none of these actions will be decisive because the
driving engine of this catastrophe remains in the hands of a faction of a
faction of a faction of the Serbs. At the same time, although the American
administration has refused to go along with the Russians and others who
wish to lift UN sanctions against the Serbs, in exchange for their
recognition of Bosnia within its boundaries, President Clinton has
authorized a substantial suspension of those sanctions as an incentive and
intends to work more closely with the UN negotiating team in working out
a mutually agreeable approach.
As for the arms embargo in Bosnia, the American administration
believes it is profoundly wrong, but does not have the votes in the Security
Council to lift it and is not going to violate a Security Council resolution.
Therefore, the goal of the United States is to continue to support the
Federation, the Contact Group, the UN negotiators, to try and prevent the
war from spreading, to achieve a new cease fire, and to reinvigorate the
negotiations.
Third Panelist
It is clear we are entering a new phase in this conflict, although
that is not to suggest that peace is on the horizon. Peace will only come
to pass when all factions realize and accept the costs of this war as well as
the prospective gains to be made from.a negotiated settlement. That point
has not been reached, but faced with the recent taking of the hostages and
discussion of a rapid reaction force, the troop contributors have decided to
remain and reinforce their presence, always under UN command.
From NATO's perspective, it is essential that we are clear about
the goals of the next phase. We owe it to the military to be unambiguous
about our goals; it is, after all, their lives which are at stake. The current
mandate is dictated by a series of Security Council resolutions which
combine elements of peace keeping and peace enforcement. This is
61
confusing. There is an uneasy balance between these two goals: providing
aid to the population in general and providing protection for the safe areas
in particular. The first requires consent of the parties. The second has
frequently required the use of military force. It is difficult to see how
both can be conducted at the same time unless the UN peacekeeping forces
have a huge increase in their numbers and capabilities. For this new
phase we should ensure that the international community is clear about
what the UN peacekeeping forces should achieve, and that they have the
means to do it.
NATO's role in the Bosnian crisis bas been to implement goals set
by UN Security Council resolutions. NATO bas been active in the Adriatic
Sea, and has been responsible for the no-fly zone, close air support and air
strikes - both only at the request of the UN - and has prepared different
scenarios for withdrawal, although NATO opposes this solution. The
relationship, although difficult at times, has been good. At the same time,
as others have said, what is referred to as the dual key system has not
worked. When difficulties have occurred, they have resulted from
confusion of goals and particularly when there has been a conflict over
priorities.
However, we will be entering a new phase in this conflict if the
French rapid reaction force is actually implemented and NATO will
consider providing close air support if requested by the UN. Once the UN
peace forces are capable of defending themselves, and once they
demonstrate that they cannot be manipulated and intimidated, it is hoped
that the Bosnian Serbs will realize the futility of their position and, as the
Americans say, they will stop calling the shots. In those conditions, the
UN negotiators will have a real chance of finding a peaceful and equitable
solution.
Above all, we should be clear that as we enter this new phase, we
cannot allow the United Nations and the will of the international community
to continue to be flouted in regards to the fundamental principles of
international conduct. International borders are being ignored and human
rights violations are being perpetrated daily. If this can happen in Europe -
the home of NATO, the European Union, and the OSCE, it can happen
anywhere. The arguments are fully on the side of persistence, rather than
withdrawal.
62
Discussion
The questions and concerns raised by the participants reflected a
continuing frustration over a situation which is not only dangerous in itself,
but underscores the potential for similar dilemmas over conflicts in other
areas around the world. Precedents are being set in Bosnia and lead one
to ask to what extent Europe, America, the United Nations, NATO, or any
combination of national and international organizations will respond to
future crises, in Bosnia or anywhere else. Will it depend on whether
countries belong to NATO, or whether there is a vested interest in a
country in trouble - the most recent example being the Gulf War, where
the United States dependence on oil was a deciding factor? Will members
of NATO or the United Nations, if they have no vested interest in an area
of conflict, feel obliged to suppnrt each other out of mutual loyalty and
commitment? And if members of the Atlantic Alliance disagree on such
goals, will fundamental relationships within the Alliance be damaged?
These issues were under the surface of the more direct focus on Bosnia.
Several Americans questioned the relationship between the heroic
goals towards peace in former Yugoslavia and the less than heroic means
of achieving them. A European concurred, stating that as there was an
unwillingness to commit heroic means, the goals should be brought into
line with the means at hand.
In response to a panelist's conviction that the current negotiations
with Milosevic are the key to success, several Europeans questioned
whether Milosevic could be trusted to uphold his side of the agreement
and,even if so, whether he has enough control over the Bosnian Serbs to
assure their recognition of Bosnian borders.
The proposed rapid reaction force met with mixed reviews. Some
saw it as a potential deterrent to further Serbian atrocities, but others felt
that more hostages would be taken in retaliation.
On the subject of withdrawal, there was a general agreement, both
among the panelists and most of the participants who spoke, that although
the UN should never have become involved from the start and the extent
of its effectiveness is strongly debated, to withdraw would have dire
consequences. It's reputation as a peacekeeping organization would be
severely compromised, sending a message of failure followed by desertion.
Withdrawal would leave a bitterness among the extremely large Muslim
population which would reverberate throughout the world's Muslim
community. Another speaker underscored the difficulty of withdrawing
troops safely, particularly the Dutch in Srebenica.
63
The issue of the arms embargo was even more hotly debated. One
group found it hard to believe that the United Nations is denying one of its
members the means of self defense, while a second believed that a lift of
the embargo would automatically bring in outside parties, some of whom
would supply the Bosnians with arms and others who would arm the Croats
and the Serbs. This, in tum, would lead to a confrontation which would
not only accelerate but would have the potential of spreading beyond the
borders of the former Yugoslavia into a wider conflict. On the other hand,
by keeping the embargo in place, the war is being fought by outside forces
who have minimal interest in the issues, rather than by those who are so
anxious to defend their beliefs. Several suggested that the embargo be
lifted temporarily, not requiring approval of the Security Council and,
therefore, not subjecting the vote to a Russian veto.
All three panelists concluded that in spite of the ill-advised dual
key approach of NATO and the UN, the partnership has worked
remarkably well, to the great credit of all concerned. A unified front is
increasingly important, not only to be as effective as possible in Bosnia,
but to reassure the skeptics that it is possible for intentional organizations
with such diverse memberships to agree on common goals and how to
achieve them.
64
·- - -- - -- -- - -- - - - - - - - -
PEACEKEEPING IN AN UNstable WORLD
The collapse of the Soviet Union led many to believe that
international problems would be easier to solve, and that the United
Nations would be able to manage things in a way that was impossible in a
world dominated by two confrontational superpowers. But in many ways,
problems have become harder to resolve. And, ironically, a number have
arisen that would probably not have were BrezJmev still alive. For
example, would Yugoslavia have broken up? Would the Gulf War have
taken place had the Soviet Union not disintegrated?
Peacekeeping in these conditions is a chancy game at best, and
those responsiblefor peacekeeping missions need to have precise goals and
an accurate reckoning of the resources required to achieve those goals
before they dispatch troops. And, an important watchword: do not send
peacekeepers ifthere is no peace to keep.
First Panelist
It is useful to look at the general concept from three standpoints:
Why peacekeeping? What kind of peacekeeping? And what resources are
appropriate?
Since the end of the Cold War, multilateral peacekeeping has
become the international community's response to violence erupting within
states and across borders provoked by ethnic and religious groups seeking
power, autonomy or independence. Usually, these conflicts do not affect
the vital interests of the major powers, but usually they do affect their
interests -- in regional stability, in trade, in mitigating the suffering of
those displaced by the conflicts, and in upholding international law.
Further, public focus on these tragedies makes it more difficult for
governments to stand aloof. Multilateral peacekeeping gives governments
an alternative to standing aside or going it alone.
What is the best form of peacekeeping for conflicts of this kind?
Often, it is very difficult even to conceive a possible political arrangement
that might end the violence. The participants are often unwilling to
consider peace absent a clear victory, and the prospect of outside
intervention is often high, the likelihood of success quite low. Thus
decision makers face hard choices as they consider what form peacekeeping
should take.
The experience of the United States in Somalia and Bosnia has led
65
the Clinton Administration to formulate guidelines for choosing which
peacekeeping efforts merit involvement and which means are most likely
to lead to success.
In brief the guidelines are: goals and interests must be clear; there
must be some evident commitment among the parties involved to come to
a peaceful outcome; if there is no such prospect, and a peace-enforcing
operation is required, the risks must be weighed and sufficient resources
committed; and finally, the operation must be limited in time and scope to
the achievement of the initial goals.
Since adoption of these guidelines, some operations that did not
meet the guidelines have been closed down: El Salvador and Mozambique
are two examples. Similarly, peacekeeping missions have not been sent to
Afghanistan, the Sudan and Sierra Leone. Thanks to these guidelines, it
is likely that peacekeeping missions will not multiply as rapidly as they did
immediately after the end of the Cold War.
Even with adherence to these guidelines, there will still be cases
where nations see that their own interests require intervention. This has
led the United Nations to put together coalition peacekeeping operations in
which the Security Council provides an overall mandate but turns to groups
of countries to conduct them. This was done in Rwanda, Liberia and in
Haiti. These coalitions stabilize the situation and, in some cases, tum it
back to the United Nations as was done in Haiti following the return of Dr.
Aristide.
The challenge in coalition peacekeeping is to avoid any assignment
of spheres of influence to individual countries- a particular consideration
with respect to Russia. A number of conflicts have broken out in states
that were part of the former Soviet Uaion, and the countries themselves
have turned to Russia for help. But when the Russians have asked the
United Nations or the OSCE for a mandate for these operations, they have
faced unwillingness to give them one, primarily because the Russian troops
are not seen as neutral; nor do they seem to have the kind of political
discipline and control that ought to go with a United Nations mandate. So
the approach has been not to provide a mandate but to help provide
observers and monitoring forces. This is not an ideal solution, but it is a
realistic one.
Providing resources for UN peacekeeping forces is very unpopular
in the US Congress. As of October 1, the law will require that the US
contribution to peacekeeping operations be no more than 25%; and the
Administration's effort to find $600 million in arrears owed to the UN has
failed. This parsimony seems likely to continue, if not worsen, in view of
66
the strains occurring across the entire federal budget.
The new peacekeeping guidelines have not quieted the debate in the
United States about this whole question. That debate is about
peacekeeping, it is about Bosnia, but, fundamentally, it is about the role of
the United States in the post Cold War world. Perhaps most important, the
debate is about what the United States is prepared to do with its military
forces to carry out its responsibilities. There is support in the US for
coalition peacekeeping rather than traditional UN peacekeeping. That
support comes from those who wish for less US engagement in the world
and from those who wish for engagement but only on America's terms.
The Clinton Administration is committed to peacekeeping and to the UN
to contain regional conflicts; to promote democracy and protect human
rights; to stem the flow of refugees; and to bring stability to regions where
the US has strategic and economic interests.
Second Pa11elist
The world is a more unstable place than it was in the postwar era.
It is also probably a slightly less dangerous place, although this safety may
prove to be short term, particularly when one recalls how quickly after
World War I, neglect -- whether benign or malign-- let a lot of wild beasts
loose in the jungle. In the modem world, Islamic fundamentalism and
proliferation of nuclear weapons, suggest that close attention is warranted.
The instability we see will likely persist, since leaders in the West are
increasingly obliged to give priority to domestic concerns, particularly, as
is often the case with peacekeeping, when there is no truly vital national
interest at stake.
Where are the main areas of instability now and in the near-term
future? The Balkans; almost all of Africa; the southern fringe of the former
Soviet Union; and, if the transition in China after Deng goes poorly,
almost all of East Asia. With the end of the Cold War, the major
organizations designed to provide "hard• security, NATO and the Warsaw
Pact, were either swept away or saw their relevance drastically changed.
The Bre:zhnev Doctrine, a brutal kind of peacekeeping, disappeared with
the Warsaw Pact. NATO remains highly relevant to Europe•s security,
and it has a peacekeeping potential. But it cannot peacekeep worldwide.
That really leaves only the United Nations, to which everybody turned after
the Gulf War. The United Nations was overstretched between 1992 and
1994, and the disappointments that resulted have created the danger of the
baby being thrown out with the bath water.
67
The UN cannot carry out major enforcement operations on a large
scale. It has neither the military nor the command and control capability to
take on in battle a Saddam Hussein or even a Savimbi, a Karadzic or an
Aidid. So there will be these "coalitions of the willing," when important,
but not necessarily vital interests of one or more countries are at stake.
The Gulf War, Somalia and Haiti are three examples. But even with such
ad hoc coalitions, the Security Council ought to authorize operations;
otherwise, the law of the jungle will tend to rule.
At the other end of the scale, there will be more classic
peacekeeping operations -- Cyprus, the Golan Heights, the Western Sahara
and Georgia. This kind of operation remains valid: it is a low cost
alternative to mayhem, but it tends to lead to consolidate the status quo.
It is important, therefore, that these kinds of operations be accompanied by
a political process that searches for a political solution. Between these
two poles, are all the cases of failed states, civil wars and spreading
regional cancers, often compounded by external meddling. Here the
United Nations bas bad some successes in recent years: in Namibia,
Cambodia, El Salvador, Mozambique, and, potentially in Haiti and, the
second time around in Angola; perhaps, even in Tajikistan. The UN bas
a chance to play a crucial role in the transition from a war situation to one
in which democratic institutions can be set up and respect for human rights
established. The UN cannot work, however, without a minimum of
cooperation and consent. Absent that minimum, as Liberia, Somalia and
often Bosnia have shown, it is difficult for the UN to cope. Also, between
the two ends of the spectrum there is the sui generis case of Yugoslavia,
where the UN has taken a kind of hybrid action. The UN has been
successful in achieving containment of the conflict; it bas helped thousands
of people; but it bas not achieved peace. All one can say about that
operation is that while it is not brilliant, the alternatives are not obvious.
The lessons one can draw are these: more resources and efforts
should be devoted to preventive action, from diplomacy to deployments like
that to Macedonia. The UN must learn to manage the CNN factor -- to
respond to surges in popular demand for response to a humanitarian
disaster without being propelled into a military action that it bas neither the
will nor the resources to make decisive. This is what the UN faced in
Rwanda; it is likely to face it elsewhere, and the CNN factor is likely to
become even more crucial. It sweeps you in at the beginning, and it
sweeps out at the end just as quickly when you see the body of one of your
troops being dragged through the streets. Third, the UN should strengthen
regional groupings that have a potential preventive or peacekeeping
68
function. Fourth, the UN must be more careful about getting involved too
deeply and too early before the necessary spirit of cooperation bas
developed. It may be better to bold back, as was done in Angola, where
the infantry battalion was not deployed until the cease fire was properly
observed. Fifth, the U.N. must be even better equipped to deal with
peacekeeping. When the post-Gulf War wave of demands hit it, it was
woefully ill-suited for those misswns. Now, while running seventeen
peacekeeping operations, it has undertaken a major reform, and it is getting
better. Sixth, the UN's legal framework ought to be used wherever
possible. It may be affected by vetoes, but those vetoes are rarely used,
and their effects are often shortly reversed when they are used. The
peacekeeping instrument that we are gradually evolving bas an important
future if we learn from mistakes.
Discussion
Participants agreed that conflicts are no longer clear cut; objectives
are not precisely defmed; interests are threatened that are not vital. And
they wondered bow peacekeepers can function against this background.
Peacekeeping forces must be sufficiently powerful to carry out their
mission; their commander must be empowered to act as necessary. If these
two conditions are met, peacekeepers acquire a deterrent power; if they are
challenged, they must take action. And the risks -- and appropriate
response -- must be thought out before peacekeepers are dispatched.
Statesmen today struggle to develop a strategic vision in a world
where it is often not worth sending a hundred thousand troops to achieve
a decisive victory, but it is important to manage "gray areas." The
challenge is to get beyond the need for a single, over-arching enemy to
define a nation's foreign policy - some unknown "ism." Such an enemy
may arise, but it is important to avoid creating one in order to have a
foreign policy.
We are making the world safer by dismantling the weapons of the
former Soviet Union; we are building important regional trading blocs.
This kind of achievement is not recognized for what it is: citizens are used
to military victories or diplomatic coups. In 1994 the Clinton
Administration got high marks in the press for standing up to Saddam
Hussein. This was one of the easiest foreign policy issues the
Administration bas dealt with because the enemy was well defined and the
issue clear cut. It was the first time that President Clinton was able to do
what American presidents have traditionally done. But such classic foreign
69
policy crises will become rarer, and a new standard of judging a leader's
performance is called for.
One participant suggested that the world seemed to be forming into
a new type of bi-polarity: a stable North, and an unstable, fluid South and
East. And the rules of the game in this world imply a form of triage. The
stable North, acting with some form of consensus, divides the unstable part
of the world into zones of vital interest, where coalitions of the willing, as
in the Gulf, would be formed to achieve goals crucial to national interests.
Then there would be zones of moderate interest, as in Bosnia, where
rhetoric is not backed by resolve. Finally, there would be zones of
indifference, of benign neglect, such as Sudan or Afghanistan. The lesson
that emerges is that there should be a symmetry between rhetoric and
resolve; that we ought not to lead people to expect support and then drop
them when the action gets tough, as has been done with the Bosnian
Muslims.
Two speakers suggested that not everything had gone wrong. For
40 years the US has maintained a UN peacekeeping group at the 38th
parallel in Korea; for nearly 20 years, US soldiers have been stationed in
the Sinai, and peace has been maintained. Another speaker noted that
problems like Bosnia have deep historical roots and could not necessarily
be resolved because public opinion inflamed by the CNN factor wanted
them resolved speedily. This is particularly true when those demanding
action are not prepared to make the requisite economic or military
sacrifice. A questioner wondered whether a stand-by force drawn from
members of the European Community might be created to be dispatched to
apply force whenever the rules of the Paris Charter were violated. Such
a force would be professional or vo.lunteer, not composed of conscripts,
and not operating under the UN but under European control. Another
participant wondered whether Sir Brian Urquhart's suggestion for a UN
standby force should be created that would not be under national control
might be reconsidered.
Public support for UN peacekeeping is low; how to restore it?
Perhaps the UN should not again invoke Chapter 7 of its charter.
Peacekeeping must once more be the result of a decision by the warring
parties to accept Blue Helmets and to stop fighting. When that is no longer
so, the Blue Helmets should leave. Enforcement should be left to the UN
mechanism that covers enforcement; peacekeeping must be kept separate
from enforcement to restore its good name.
Given that the world faces decades of serious instability, and that
the US i.s the only superpower, how can the US provide world leadership
70
if such deep-seated antipathy to the UN persists? An American responded
by stressing that the antipathy was directed not so much at peacekeeping
as at the organization itself. The UN had, af:ter all, held for fifteen years
that Zionism was a form of racism. Many Americans found that a morally
objectionable position hurt the moral credibility of the UN. Not everything
the UN does is bad, but Americans are not willing to cede the moral high
ground to the UN on every occasion.
Another American disagreed with the notion that the UN is
unpopular and cited a newspaper poll taken after the Gulf War that showed
that support for the UN had never been higher. Another poll last autumn
showed support for peacekeeping remained high. Americans take exception
to missions like Somalia and, lately, Bosnia, that are not well thought-
through. Support for the UN among Americans depends on good
execution.
Responding to a question on better preparation for peacekeepers,
a panelist noted that the situation in Rwanda turned out to be completely
different from what had been expected. It is difficult to predict precisely
what will develop in the course of an operation. Much could, however, be
done about training peacekeepers better. He also noted that financing of
peacekeeping operations is a "disaster" coming down the road. The United
States has unilaterally determined not to pay its share of peacekeeping
operations, deciding, alone among UN members, that peacekeeping is not
the legal obligation that the Charter states it to be. And on the question of
using force when the rules are not observed in Europe, this panelist noted
that the rules of the OSCE make it more difficult to get a resolution
authorizing the use of force through that organization than it is to get one
through the United Nations. Brian Urquhart's standing force he thought
was unlikely to be acceptable; he could not see member states allocating
troops or permitting their use by the Security Council without their having
a say. Besides, looking at the last five years, it was likely that such a
standing force would have been in action 365 days a year for five years -
- something no government could contemplate calmly.
Finally, with respect to Chapter 7, it would be a mistake for the
Security Council to pledge that it would not use Chapter 7 again. Chapter
7 is necessary to impose sanctions. It is also needed for action in cases
where there is no government to give consent. But this panelist did agree
that the UN should not in the future be involved with the kind of
enforcement operation often associated with Chapter 7. Peacekeeping has
a better name in Latin America than in the Atlantic community. It has a
better name in Africa, particularly now that a more effective deployment
71
is going forward in Angola where failure the first time discredited it.
Speaking about the US attitude towards the United Nations, a
second panelist said that polls were unclear. The main job is convincing
Americans that the UN can be effective in reaching the goals the US sets.
Effective policies and sharply defined goals would make it easier to present
the case to the American people. Finally, UN fmancial assessments are
made according to a formula that no longer represents relative ability to
pay. Making that system equitable again will go a long way towards
changing Americans' attitude to the United Nations.
72
LESSONS OF THE NEW CURRENCY CRISIS
There is an anomalous situation in today 's currency markets: while
foreign currency movements may be in line with long-term trends, volatility
ofrates has increased tremendously,far more than current conditions ofthe
world economy would seem to warrant. The link betweenfundamentals and
currency movements has been loosened, and the volume offoreign currency
transactions has exploded: one trillion dollars are traded each day in the
global currency markets, and only 5% is related to trade and services.
There is also a new element at work: international ponfolio transactions,
which are led by institutional investors, whose reshujJZing offunds tends
to reinforce one-way movements in the markets.
Several themes developed in the course of this session. On some
there was consensus: cooperation among central bankers is preferable to
"benign neglect;" discipline among policy makers is essential -- both in
strengthening economicfundamentals and in maintaining a coherent public
stance when intervening in currency markets; regulation or controls will not
work; a credible alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency is desirable;
and it is critical to increase savings levels in the US.
First Panelist
As recently as two days before this meeting, the President of the
European Commission said that the United States needs to bring its budget
under control in order to stabilize the dollar. This is hardly big news. It
is a tradition that Americans come to Europe to tell the European nations
how to govern themselves; and, showing equal regard for tradition, the
Europeans say, "Don't lecture us until you get your house in order. •
In the panelist's view, the Americans do have their house in order:
they've locked in $500 billion in deficit reduction; there is low inflation
with steady growth; unemployment is 5.7%. Six million new jobs have
been created in the last two years, 60% of which are over the median
wage. According to the IMF, in 1995 the percentage of the government
deficit to GDP will be 1.9% -- less than half the 1992 figure of 4.3%. In
Europe, only Germany is anywhere near to that figure. The EU target for
deficit reduction is 3%; only Germany and Luxembourg have met it. But,
when a falling dollar and a rising yen and D-Mark threaten to stifle
production in Europe and Japan, criticism arises about US economic policy.
Interest revives in more managed exchange rate systems, and in taxes and
73
controls to limit volatility. Most G-7 monetary experts believe that the
dollar should appreciate, and they are prepared to cooperate, as they
demonstrated on May 31 when they intervened. But these same experts do
not want to move towards fixed or closely-managed exchange rates or
regulatory controls on capital movements. Many feel that the US really
wants a cheaper dollar. The US has not, and will not, according to the
panelist, use exchange rate as a trade tool. Indeed, there ought to be a fire
wall between monetary and trade policy. The US government shares the
Federal Reserve's goal of sustained growth and low inflation. As for taxes
or controls, the panelist believes that they have very limited potential;
Mexico substantiates this view. Further, given the amount of capital
crossing borders today, it's easy to see why any effort to impose such
controls only invites efforts to skirt them. In Mexico, for example, $5
billion is reserves disappeared in five hours when a devaluation suddenly
seemed likely.
On a trade-weighted basis, the dollar has declined by
approximately 9%, 15% against the yen and 13% against the 0-Mark. At
the moment, thanks to the intervention of the G-7, it is approximately 4%
above its low. Several factors affect its fall: deflation in Japan; the
associated rise of real interest rates; and concern about Japan's external
surplus; worry about low personal savings in the US; the US's large
current account deficit; and the willingness of investors to continue to
fmance that deficit. But, even considering these factors, there is a
consensus that the dollar is below where it ought to be. A stronger dollar
is desirable from the US point of view. It would help restore confidence
in US securities necessary to finance the current account deficit. It would
stimulate investment. It would help check inflationary pressures in the US,
thus helping to keep interest rates low. Appreciation would help the
dollar's role as the principal reserve currency. The US is not eager for a
recession in Europe and Japan; Europeans and Japanese are customers of
the US.
What is being done? The US is pushing for greater cooperation
among the G-7 countries to promote stability. On May 31, the G-7
intervened in concert, the dollar moved up, and it has been trading in a
narrow range since. And there is now in the US Congress a competition
between Republicans and Democrats to see who can cut the deficit more.
Furthermore, the panelist predicted, by the end of 1995, politics will have
been put aside to achieve the goal of balancing the budget. Determination
to achieve this goal will mean smaller tax cuts. This would be far better
for the economy. One example: the average mortgage on a home in the US
74
today is $80,000. If it were widely believed that there would be a
balanced budget, it seems likely that there would be a two percent drop in
interest rates. A two percent reduction on an $80,000 mortgage is a
reduction of $1,600 a year in mortgage payments. That's a much better
contribution to the standard of living of middle income people than a $500
tax credit.
Exchange rate variability among the major currencies is necessary
and often constructive. Unanticipated events occur; fundamentals change.
Changes in exchange rates may be a more effective response than changes
in domestic growth or in inflation. Exchange rate intervention can be
effective in some circumstances: but these are limited, and intervention
must be used very judiciously. Manipulation of tax mechanisms to achieve
greater exchange rate stability would, the panelist warned, have major costs
in terms of other economic objectives.
Second Panelist
Recent fluctuations in the value of the dollar have a number of
causes: the low level of savings in the US; the Japan-US trade quarrel;
changes in strategy resulting from the end of the Cold War and the collapse
of the Soviet Union; and the shifting of global portfolios towards the yen
and the 0-Mark. Nevertheless, in recent years, we have seen the dollar
weak at times when the fundamentals did not suggest weakness and strong
when they did not show strength. The market today does not respond so
directly to changes in the fundamentals as it used to do.
In the postwar period, the dollar was the anchor currency, and all
other currencies moved in relation to it. Fluctuations were extremely
narrow. The result was great stability based on a unipolar system. The
GOP of the US after World War II represented more than 50% of the
global GOP, and the dollar dominated the entire world. The erratic
fluctuations of the '20s and '30s, which were one of the main causes of
World War II led to the idea that a stable global currency system was
important to political stability.
The Bretton Woods system "exploded" at the beginning of the '70s
for many reasons: new technology, massive capital moves and the Vietnam
War. The US decision to finance the Vietnam War in an un-disciplined
way helped create a weak dollar, and there were wide fluctuations all the
way up to 1985, when a new phase began, which might be described as
"benign neglect. • A US Treasury Secretary of that time said, "I don't
know what the value of the dollar is; the markets know better. • Yet the
75
markets had shown that the dollar could be worth anywhere between 3 D-
Mark and 1.3 D-Mark. The lesson is that the market, without guidance,
will fix value only within a tremendously wide range.
Benign neglect led to the dollar being fixed very high at a time
when the fundamentals were rather poor, which was bad for both the US
and for the global economy. Since about 1987, a new attitude has
developed. The US and the other G-7 countries care very much about the
value of their currencies, even though they have had limited success in
controlling fluctuations. This is not •benign neglect. • The underlying idea
is that policy has to be managed -- managed with great subtlety, but
managed. Measures like those taken at the Plaza or at the Louvre are
symptomatic of the difference between the era of benign neglect and
current thinking.
Why is a more managed exchange rate system preferable to benign
neglect? First, countries are protected from the effects of short term
capital movements and speculation; you allow currencies to respond to
trade imbalances and shocks; you preserve the freedom of international
trade; and you assure the autonomy of monetary and macro-economic
policy. Free floating currencies did not achieve these goals, particularly
during the era of benign neglect. Currency speculation was intense. The
hedging that is absolutely necessary in such a system contributes to the
volatility of markets; excessive volatility and severe misalignments have
had severely detrimental effects on the real economy. They produce
nightmarish problems for international businessmen because ex post
exchange variations will have a great impact on profitability; yet there is
no way, ex ante, to circumvent exchange rate risks.
Two final points: savings levels and protectionism. There is some
link between the explosion of the Bretton Woods system at the beginning
of the '70s and the downward trend in the level of savings in the OECD
countries. Exchange rate fluctuations have to compensate for the
disciplines, particularly fiscal discipline, that are imposed by a system of
fixed exchange rates. Lack of discipline leads to a new trade-off between
the present and the future, with more weight given to short term
satisfaction than to long term interests. You favor consumption to the
detriment of investment. The early '70s were a very significant moment in
the history of the West. And the US spread these values to the rest of the
world. It's a striking fact that all the OECD countries have lost roughly 5-
6% of GDP in savings since that time.
There is a complex relationship between protectionism and the lack
of exchange rate discipline. Protectionist lobbies can take advantage of
76
erratic fluctuations, arguing that there is no need for further liberalization
as long as invisible barriers can go up and down. These arguments may
be wrong, but their advocates have a point. On the other hand, some might
propose the use of floating exchange rates for the purpose of influencing
trade. This would be an enormous mistake, as the current quarrel between
the US and Japan will no doubt illustrate.
This does not mean we should go back to Bretton Woods. We live
in a different world, in a multipolar rather than a unipolar one.
Technology has totally changed the way business operates. The
international monetary system is conducted in real time. We have free
capital movements. Any system of taxation or rules that does not fit the
global economy or take into account today's new technology will fail. We
must reinforce discipline -- everywhere -- in the national macro economies
and in structural terms. And here there is cause for optimism in the recent
consensus developed in the G-7 that structural reforms are very important.
Provided that fundamentals are in line, it is important to accept the idea of
government and central bank guidance of the market. When there are
misalignments, it is the duty of these authorities to signal their consensus
to the market. This was done at the last G-7 meeting in Washington. The
central bankers signalled that the dollar should rise. They issued a
communique and they intervened in the market. This should be a model
for future action.
Discussion
The incapacity of fixed exchange rates to absorb shocks suggests
that what is often said of democracy can also be said of floating rates: it
is the worst system possible -- except for all the others. There always will
be exceptional events, and flexibility is essential. Another commentator
felt that the reason for greater volatility in exchange rates was the changed
nature of capital flows. In the '70s and early '80s banks managed the
recycling of balance of payments deficits, while individual investors held
government bonds to fund fiscal deficits. In the last fifteen years there has
been a massive shift from bank loans to securities and from individual
holdings to institutions. Thus, some few hundred banks no longer control
loans to developing countries and handle negotiations when a problem
arises. Instead, one must reckon with thousands, perhaps millions, of
investors who hold securities they bought in the markets. Moreover, these
securities have to be marked to market, and their value changes
immediately when interest rates and exchange rates change. This isn't the
77
case for bank loans, which remain on the books at nominal value as long
as the only change is the interest rate. When there are changes in interest
or exchange rates, the message the markets receive has a major impact on
the face value of the assets held by this multitude of investors with
potentially serious economic or even political consequences. While it used
to be the role of governments to monitor markets, now it's the reverse:
markets monitor governments.
Another commentator noted the perception is that we live in a
world of free currencies, which is an illusion: a person seeking currency
diversification has only three 'choices: the D-Mark, the yen or the dollar.
So, if one wants to be out of the dollar there are only two alternatives.
When you choose one of them you often miscalculate. Finally, what has
happened to the dollar is the fate of any reserve currency. There is always
need for more currency. And there is no natural limit that makes reserve
currency countries stop pnntmg money. Non-reserve currencies find
natural limits. If the EU is going to become a one-currency area, it should
not become a reserve currency. If it does, it is lost.
Responding to this point, a panelist said that Europe does need a
single currency and that it should have reserve status in order to offer some
alternative to the dollar. Why should 70% of Europeans' wealth be locked
up in one currency? Billions of dollars can disappear overnight because of
a drop in the dollar. The D-Mark and the Yen are reserve currencies, but
they aren't a true alternative to the dollar. What's needed is a liquid
market where billions a day can be "liquidated," as is the case in the
Treasury market. This prompted the observation that too much emphasis
was being put on "speculators." It is natural that, as Europe moves
towards a single currency, there should be much reorganizing of portfolios,
that there should be excess dollars in the market and that it was wrong to
attribute volatility to "speculators."
One questioner noted that prominent economists such as Paul
Krugman and Milton Friedman believed that increased savings might
actually lead to a weaker dollar. Most rejected this view and said that
increased saving in the United States was critical. One American suggested
that a consumption tax would be nooded in the US. A panelist agreed,
pointing out that Americans save half as much as Germans and third as
much as Japanese. While a sound idea, imposing a consumption tax must
not widen the gap between rich and poor in the US, already is wider than
in any other OECD country.
To another panelist, the Friedman-Krugman view seemed
"paradoxical." Increased savings would either be used for investment in
78
US business, making it more efficient, or they would go to reducing the
current account deficit. Another panelist noted that other countries had
poured some $1.2 trillion dollars into covering that deficit in recent
decades, and that these were dollars that "cannot be invested elsewhere."
With respect to monetary and trade policy, a participant noted that
ministers responsible for these areas rarely talk to one another. "They are
different animals," he noted. This has some positive effects, since it
ensures that currency policy cannot be manipulated to achieve trade
objectives. It makes it more unlikely that there would be "politically-
motivated devaluations." But most participants felt that the gulf that exists
between these two departments in most governments leads to uncoordinated
policy. There was, too, a consensus that regulation or controls were the
worst possible solutions. Markets are too big, they move too fast, and they
are too sophisticated. They would, "innovate their way around controls or
move to another jurisdiction."
In his concluding remarks, a panelist said that currency mis-
alignments are inevitable when "benign neglect" is the policy. That policy
is, in his view, no longer viable. We must insist on fiscal and monetary
discipline; without it, serious turmoil could result. However, while such
discipline is "a necessary condition, it is not a sufficient condition." We
must employ another weapon: the consensus of central banks and
governments and their capacity to send signals to the markets, whether by
formal communique or by maintaining verbal discipline in general and
particularly in cases where interventions seem necessary. The worst
eventuality, he felt -- indeed, he termed it "absolutely abominable" -- is
public quarrelling and a display of disagreement.
79
PRACTICAL STEPS TOWARDS A BETTER GLOBAL
GOVERNMENT AND RULES
We have lived under the same institutions and rules in the economic
area for fifty years. For the first 20-25 years those institutions served us
well. But at the beginning of the '70s they began to erode; the exchange
rate system collapsed, the GAIT system began to erode as people
discovered there were other ways to protect themselves than tariffs, and that
had a negative effect on growth. Since then we have tried to redesign the
monetary system, but with lillie success.
Addressing the radically transfonned global economy, a
transfonnation which continues at a rate beyond anyone's comprehension,
the panelist spoke about the need to refonn the existing institutions,
fonnulate new policies which are more applicable 10 today's conditions,
and to set rules through which the transition to the new world order might
be as smooth as possible.
Panelist
Over the last few years, the world has had to address the impact
of important changes which will affect us all; the collapse of the Iron
Curtain, advancing technology, massive increases in trade flows,
interdependence and change in global growth prospects, and the addition
of 2.5 to 3 billion people to the free market system. That change, although
equally as important as the others, has not been reflected in any
institutional change. A G-7 summit is about to begin in Halifax, presenting
an opportunity for its participants to review the institutions of global
cooperation and how they relate to these changes, as well as the present
and future global economy.
There are significant limitations on what can be done to ensure a
smooth transition, but the potential for division between different areas of
the world is so great that we must seize this opportunity to create structures
which will enable the participants in the global economy to move forward
together to agreed policy conclusions, and to the application of any rules
which are developed.
In the direction of policy, such discussions have been held to date
within organizations formed by the major powers; NATO, the G-7, the
QUAD, or the OECD. The countries belonging to these organizations are
disinclined to hold such debates under the auspices of the newly formed
WTO, most likely because they feel more secure working within their
homogeneous group of developed countries. However, as these major
80
powers reflect an increasingly smaller fraction of global trade, their attitude
runs a great risk of alienating and isolating a large part of the new players
in the evolving world economic system.
For example, the G-7 was created in 1975 to provide collective
leadership. Today, however, many of the developing countries have a
GDP larger than some of the G-7 countries, and the G-7 group should
reflect the importance of these emerging major players in the world
economy. In short, when one talks of global governments, one must first
develop policies which are inclusive, bringing in those who presently feel,
and rightly so, left out.
One must consider the application of the rules which are made.
Even though the major powers repeatedly affirm their acceptance of and
intention to abide by the rules established in multilateral fora, the evidence
is otherwise. For instance, there is discussion as to who should serve on
the dispute settlement body of the newly formed World Trade Organization.
One needs only to recall the World Court: its sad fate reflects the difficulty
which nationalistic tendencies introduce into a dispute settlement system.
Finally, the strengthening of the European Union is essential to
create a balancing factor in the development of global economic policies.
Equally important is a voice from the developing countries, which is
lacking today. So the issues ahead in terms of global governments are
related to the formulation of policy and the acceptance of the disciplines of
multi-lateralism.
Discussion
The discussion began with a speaker noting that although the
Bilderberg participants recognize the importance of global interaction, the
group represents an extremely small portion of the world population, the
majority of which is either concerned with national interests or indifferent
to global issues. It is important to overcome this apathy, and one method
would be to incorporate non-governmental organizations [NGOs], such as
international corporations, into discussions on how this can be done. This
should be considerably facilitated by the explosion of new global
information infrastructure, making it much easier to include the population
at large in the discussion of these issues.
Another participant took this approach one step further, suggesting
that apathy might be partly based on a feeling of those beyond the major
powers that they are powerless to have a role in world decisions. It is no
longer appropriate to create divisions between the haves and the have nots,
81
and as countries become more developed and capable of playing a role in
world affairs, they should be included in such organizations as the G-7 -
providing they have democratic governments. For example, whereas
China should not be admitted, India and Brazil do qualify.
A number of speakers criticized the G-7 on several levels; not only
because it is no longer representative of the world today but because it has
become little more than a media circus or, as one participant phrased it, a
mutual admiration society. A participant from Germany, a journalist,
commented that any gathering which attracts 5,000 journalists must be
somehow ill conceived and ·that perhaps the greatest beneficiaries at such
summits are the local industries, such as hotels and restaurants. Another
speaker noted that it seemed odd to invite Russia to attend these meetings,
but to exclude it from the economic discussions. In response to the
moderator's question to participants representing countries which are not
members of the G-7, two speakers - one from Portugal and another from
the Netherlands -noted that although the need for some form of leadership
was clear, it was often difficult not to feel powerless as decisions were
made on one's behalf without contributing any input.
This opinion was repeated by a number of participants; to support
and strengthen organizations which are inclusive, rather than exclusive.
Otherwise, those who continue to feel excluded will form their own groups,
as was the case with the Group of 77 and the G-15, both formed by
underdeveloped countries. However those groups, without the expertise of
the OECD to provide them with informational support, have been at a
severe disadvantage.
In spite of these criticisiD£, however, the majority expressed
support of a G-7 type organization because, as one speaker noted, in any
society decisions by some are made for the benefit of all. Otherwise there
is no forum for the leadership required to chart a cohesive direction to
world affairs.
Several participants supported the panelist on the importance of
regionalism, not as a replacement for world wide groups such as the WTO
but as a method of developing north-south cooperation, in addition to the
relationships which currently exist between Europe and America, as well
as America and Asia. In America 40% of all trade is inter-hemispheric,
and has increased dramatically since the introduction of NAFI'A. Similar
regional explosions of trade are taking place in Europe and Asia; a very
positive sign because, as one speaker noted, trade is the engine of growth.
Finally, several participants warned the group that several
international organizations already exist that currently wield considerably
82
more influence and power than organizations mentioned above. One,
organized crime, will not be eliminated without unprecedented world wide
cooperation. Another, the Church, is often underrated as a forum for
movements within and between world regions. Another, from a different
angle, is the media, which can have both positive and negative effects on
political trends, depending on whether the population and political leaders
use it merely as a source of information or as a guideline for decisions -
wise or not - which will be popularly received.
The panelist concluded by asking if giobal governance is beyond
reach. He urged the continuing support of the G-7, or at least a similar
forum, because, quoting Winston Churchill, "Jaw, jaw is better than war,
war. • Furthermore public opinion, if encouraged, can force the G-7 to
make decisions and agreements, rather than merely performing for the
media. This was the case several years ago, when the G-7 was asked, and
agreed, to make a firm commitment to press for the conclusion of the
Uruguay Round. It is also essential that areas of the world heretofore
excluded from such discussions be brought in. An example would be a
suggestion made at a G-7 meeting several years ago, when a member urged
a dialogue with the G-15. If this doesn't happen, the world economy will
transform itself in a dangerous and divisive way. If one looks at the East
Asean area which had an output of 4% in 1960; today that output is 25%;
and between 1992 and the year 2000, 40% of world output will come from
this area; it cannot be excluded from world policy discussions. Finally, the
panelist reiterated the importance of regionalism, with the caveat that it
does not lead to creating spheres of influence, as an important method of
encouraging peaceful coexistence throughout the world.
83
~
.\'
"'
to
1
;
'i
~'
C>
~ -
\,
;..,
<t~
<!'
'!-
>.
4-·
I'
~
"
>
.;-I
~
•\
