~~~~ ~~~~~~~~~~oom ~
3 2044 057 195 240
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTlAL
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS.
82
982
BAD Ri\GAZ
CONFERENCE
17- 19 April 1970
B/\RVARD
i' !liiM
1 ~~ \ 1~
·~ !DC'>';D"/
Lt 0~'\J·\(\ ~.
f
r:n
Cj
~
~
~
N
C)
~
~
z
0
~
r-
::g
\.!)
~
0'>
....
<
~
-
~
....
~
'
"
'
~
~
~
~
~
~
0'>
z
....
<
I
~
r-
~
0
....
0
H
C)
H
~
\\
CONTENTS
of Participants
First Item of the Agenda
\'"Future Function of the University in our Society" _
Summary of and Introduction to the American Working Paper
Summary of and Introduction to the English Working Paper
-Summary of and Introduction to the French Working Paper.
Item of the Agenda ,
in Foreign Policy" .--
c~1,,Summary of and Introduction to the American Working Paper
A General Reaction by an American Participant to the Working Paper
Discussion on "Priorities in Foreign Policy" . . . . . . . . . . . .
Summary of and Introduction to the German Working Paper on the
Environmental Problem . . . . . . . .
Discussion on the Environmental Problem. . .
Annex
Introductory remarks by a German Participant on the German Issue
5
9
13
J6
22
28
45
50
51
66
70
and its Consequences for Europe and the Western System . . . . 85
\.
\
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JosEPH E. JoHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
JoHANNES MEYNEN
AoNELLI, GrovANNI
ALLIOT, MICHEL
ALLISON, GRAHAM
ALTISSIMO, RENATO
AsHBY, SrR Emc
BALL, GEORGE w.
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID s.
BENEDIKTSSON, BJARNI
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BERCHTOLD, WALTER
BERNARDINI, GILBERTO
BEUVE-MERY, HuBERT
BIRGI, M. N URI
BRINKHORST, LAURENS jAN
BROUWER, L. E . .JAN
BRUGSMA, WrLLEM L.
CAMU, Lours
CoLLADO, EMILIO G.
CoRNU, DANIEL
ITALY
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
IcELAND
UNITED KINGDOM
SwiTZERLAND
ITALY
FRANCE
TuRKEY
NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
SwiTzERLAND
5
CuLVER, JOHN C. UNITED STATES
DEAN, ARTHUR H.
MEYERSON, MARTIN
UNITED STATES
DEURINCK, GASTON
UNITED STATES MoBERG, SvEN
SwEDEN
DRAKE, SIR ERIC
BELGIUM MoYERS, BILL D.
UNITED STATES
DucHENE, L. FRANCOis
UNITED KINGDOM NoGUEIRA, ALBERTO F .
PoRTUGAL
EDwARDs, SIR RoNALD
INTERNATIONAL NYKOPP, JoHAN A.
FINLAND
F ASCELL, DANTE B.
UNITED KINGDOM 0RVIK, NILS
NoRWAY
FAURE, EDGAR
UNITED STATES PRICE, CHRISTOPHER
UNITED KINGDOM
FILION, GERARD
FRANCE REINHARDT, EBERHARD
SWITZERLAND
FROSCHMAIER, FRANZ
CANADA RHODES JR., JOSEPH
UNITED STATES
FURGLER, KURT
INTERNATIONAL RICHARDSON, ELLIOT L.
UNITED STATES
GERWIG, ANDREAS A.
SwiTZERLAND RoBERTs, JoHN
CANADA
GISCARD D'EsTAING, OLIVIER
SWITZERLAND RocKEFELLER, DAvm
UNITED STATES
GooDPASTER, ANDREW J.
FRANCE RocKEFELLER, IV, JoHN D.
UNITED STATES
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s.
INTERNATIONAL RoLL, SIR ERIC
UNITED KINGDOM
HATTERSLEY, RoY
CANADA
RoTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE
FRANCE
HAUGE, GABRIEL
UNITED KINGDOM ScHAEFER, ALFRED
SWITZERLAND
HEAD, IvAN
UNITED STATES ScHMIDHEINY, MAx
SWITZERLAND
HEINZ II, HENRY J.
CANADA SILVERS, RoBERT
UNITED STATES
H0EGH, LEIF
UNITED STATES S0RENSEN, SvEND 0.
DENMARK
HOLLAND, STUART
NoRWAY STOLTENBERG, GERHARD
GERMANY
JANSSEN, DANIEL
UNITED KINGDOM STONE, SHEPARD
UNITED STATES
JoRDAN ]R., VERNON E .
BELGIUM
STREICHENBERG, GEORGES
SWITZERLAND
KAISER, KARL
UNITED STATES TERKELSEN, TERKEL M.
DENMARK
KEPPEL, FRANCIS
GERMANY TIDEMAND, OTTO G.
NoRWAY
KING, ALEXANDER
UNITED STATES TscHuDI, HANS P.
SWITZERLAND
KNOPPERS, ANTONIE
INTERNATIONAL UMBRICHT, VICTOR H.
SWITZERLAND
KoHNSTAMM, MAx
UNITED STATES vANCE, CYRUS R.
UNITED STATES
KROGH, PETER F .
INTERNATIONAL VEDEL, GEORGES
FRANCE
LANGSLET, LARS R.
UNITED STATES
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
SwEDEN
LENNEP, JoNKHEER EMILE VAN
NoRWAY WARIS, KLAUS
FINLAND
LEPAN, DouGLAs v.
INTERNATIONAL
WEIZSAECKER, RICHARD FREIHERR VON
GERMANY
CANADA
WoLFF voN AMERONGEN, OTTO
GERMANY
LESGUILLONS, HENRI
LEVI, ARRIGO
INTERNATIONAL
LIOTARD-VOGT, PIERRE
ITALY
IN ATTENDANCE:
LIPSET, SEYMOUR, M.
' SwiTZERLAND
UNITED STATES
CrTTADINI CEsi, MARCHESE GIANG.
ITALY
LuNs, JosEPH M.A. H. NETHERLANDS
REUTLINGER, pAUL
SwiTZERLAND
MACH, BERNARD SwiTZERLAND
RoY, BERTIE LE
NETHERLANDS
VERNEDE, EDWIN
NETHERLANDS
MATHIAs jR., CHARLES M cC. UNITED STATES
MAUDLING, REGINALD UNITED KINGDOM
,,
l '
I ~,~' 7
6
INTRODUCTION
The nineteenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at Hotel Quellenhof in Bad
Ragaz (Switzerland) on q, 18 and 19 April 1970 under the Chairmanship
of H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 95 participants from the United States, Canada and 14 Western
European countries as well as from various international organizations. They
consisted of members of governments, politicians, prominent businessmen,
journalists, leading national and international civil servants and outstanding
representatives of the academic world and other groups.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization to which they might belong. In order to enable
participants to speak with the greatest possible frankness the discussions were
confidential, with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. Future Function of the University in our Society.
II. Priorities in Foreign Policy.
9
;;;
,'Jt
It
\ft;
,I
~;j
tl
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands opened the Meeting and recalled
· the Bilderberg rules of procedure.
The Prince expressed the gratitude of the Conference for the hospitality in
Switzerland to the President of the Swiss Confederation who was present as a
participant.
FUTURE FUNCTION OF THE UNIVERSITY
IN OUR SOCIETY
The discussion ofthis item on the agenda was prepared by three introductory
working papers written respectively by an American professor (who was
prevented at the last moment from attending the conference), an English
participant; and a French participant.
SUMMARY OF THE AMERICAN WORKING PAPER ON THE
UNIVERSITY AND SOCIETY
The University in the United States is under pressure, but it does not
prosper under pressure-at least of the kind to which it has been subjected
over the past five years.
Its relations with society are delicate. Since it must be a servant of society
and independent ofit, the University is at one and the same time an instrument
of social cohesion and national identity, and an indispensable instrument for
social criticism. In times of social stability this relationship is manageable.
But changes induced by the prospects and promises of recent years have been
so rapid that few institutions have been able to prepare for the inevitable
demands resulting from them.
A number of particularly serious pressures are currently being exerted on
the University.
The first is the increased demand for admission, especially in the field of
higher education. The root cause is to be found in the requirements of modern
technological society, whose need for trained manpower is insatiable. No
country can hope to provide the leadership necessary for a modern society if
only a very small fraction acquire the equivalent of a college or University
13
degree. (The author estimated that 30% of the relevant age group going
through secondary school and 5% of the relevant age group going through
University are the threshhold figures for a modern society.) But though
secondary education has been democratized, leading to a greater number of
University enrolments, higher education is still planned on the traditional
bases of professional standards and high selectivity. ,
The second pressure on the Universities is inadequate finance, which is
linked with the problem of numbers. The lack of resources is further aggra-
vated by negligence in planning, and the productivity of higher education has
not improved. One consequence of this has been an enormous increase in the
use of public funds in University budgets. This has led to increased public
surveillance of academic expenditures, which in turn raises deep problems
about the future autonomy of the educational system. The University, as it
relies more heavily on public funding, is held accountable not only for its use
of those funds but for its actions on other matters-notably its handling of
student unrest.
A third problem arises from the demand for relevance. Traditional educa-
tion offers little nourishment for the most crucial needs of the emerging coun-
tries, or for the needs of some older countries which are in the process of
modernization. A better curricular balance is called for between the humani-
ties, the social sciences and the natural sciences, with a distinction between
abstract and applied studies. True, in more mature countries the drive to
make studies relevant to the new problems of society is strong, but it is signifi-
cant that it is no longer taken for granted that abstract studies may sooner or
later promote the solution of real problems.
Moreover (noted the author ofthe working paper), as the number ofstudents
has increased, larger and wider cros~-sections ofour societies have been admitted
to the Universities; many of today's students are ill-prepared for the rigor of
their studies, and they expect that there should be a direct connection between
what they are taught and the agonies ofthe environments from which they come.
Even a casual observer will see the connection between numbers, costs and
relevance. To provide education that is relevant to a variety of demands is a
costly business, and higher costs require demonstrably higher relevance.
An ironic feature of the current sc~ne is the fact that the feeding of the cycle
of numbers, costs and relevance is in large part th~ result of the University's
successful adaptation to the demands made upon' it. But even an adequate
integration ofthese three interrelated issues cannot alone create the atmosphere
in which the University is struggling to perform its mission today. There are
deeper and more complex problems involved, among them the relation of the
University to the priorities of soci~ty.
14
At the beginning of the '6os, at least in the more developed countries, the
leading edge of these societies shifted its social priorities away from affluence,
full employment, and peace-keeping by military power, towards more pre-
occupation with justice for the minorities and for the poor, the quality of the
environment, and peace-keeping through the subordination of national
ambitions to the idea of the international community. One feature of this was
the adoption by young people of a new scale of values, while their elders were
not inclined to give up the old values. True, the generation gap has always
existed, but present-day social conditions add to it. Young people's dissatis-
faction with society has led to problems which are not merely complex but
explosive.
In these circumstances it was inevitable that the University, while trying
to deal with its internal priorities, should find the new social concerns of its
students almost impossible to resolve, the more so since the students were not
content to have the University function as a neutral forum. Having become
so closely identified with the society that supported it, the University became
a target for opposition. The question that remains is whether the University
is more valuable as a neutral arena for inquiry and debate, or whether it is
more valuable as a lever for social reforms.
In this connection, the author noted that in a society where there is a sub-
stantial consensus on main priorities, University neutrality becomes more
possible. The countries that have had the most difficulty with their Universities
have been those with the deepest divisions in their social philosophies and
social programmes. In these countries, the problem has become a political one.
Most countries are trying to avoid the two extremes of neutrality and social
activism by ensuring that the University retains the maximum ofindependence
from society while also making concessions to the new concerns in admissions
policy and in curricular ventures. But the key problem of the University's
mission still remains, and division of opinion on this question has triggered a
long series of crises.
Beyond this problem, there is another and deeper one which imperils the
very idea of the University itself. This is the emergence of a skepticism that
denies the possibility of objective, rational thought. The belief that reasoning
man will increasingly comprehend his environment to the benefit of a better
evolution of mankind is a notion that has less currency with each passing year.
In its place has arisen an intuitive approach proceeding from the dark reaches
of the mind. The acquisition of knowledge is no longer considered to be a
cumulative process, and the opportunity for rational discourse is not seen as a
raison d'etre of the University.
It is therefore not surprising that the problem of University administration
15
is both universal and pressing. Yet, even in the face of these difficulties, the
University cannot afford to ignore its obligation to try to become what society
must become-an open, rational, self-disciplined and essentially humane
community. It must work with society on the difficult task of reordering its
priorities and remodelling its institutions to deal effectively with our great new
purposes. In other words, the University community can point the paths and
light the way for society, but it cannot expect society to fall in line. There can
be no doubt, however, that the University and the intellectual community
that it represents have a political and social role. The University's responsi-
bility is first and foremost to maintain a balance between itself and society,
to set its own standards which are independent of society's pressures and yet
compatible with its goals. Furthermore, the University must address itself to
preparing the next generation for dealing with matters which are now only
dimly perceived. It is the fulfillment of this role of maintaining a balance
which is undoubtedly among the most difficult and delicate tasks facing the
University, and it is a subject which will continue to preoccupy all those who
would see the University survive.
SUMMARY OF THE ENGLISH WORKING PAPER ON THE FUTURE
FUNCTION OF THE UNIVERSITY IN OUR SOCIETY
The British author of this working paper took as his point of departure
student unrest. What, he asked, can our generation learn from a sit-in? First,
that no such movement can mobilize massive support except on a moral issue;
secondly, that such a demonstration is a stirring experience for those who take
part in it; it satisfies a deep hunger for a community spirit. This confronts our
generation with two questions about the future ofthe University in our society:
should the University impart a moral content to higher education? And should
Universities be designed as communities to satisfy this hunger for social
cohesion among students?
A DEFINITION OF FUNCTION
Without straying into semantic discussions about the meaning of the word
"University", the author referred to the underlying purpose as expressed by
Rashdall 70 years ago in writing about Universities in the Middle Ages.
T heir great contribution to society, he wrote, was that "they placed the
administration of human affairs .. . in the hands of educated men".
This statement unambiguously expresses the fact that, by tradition, Univer-
sities are primarily concerned with educating people. Research, advice to
governments, service to industry-for centuries activities like these have been
I6
undertaken as sidelines. It is only recently that they have competed with the
prime function. The author invited the meeting to begin its discussion with
a consideration of this point, namely whether the principal contribution of
thr: University to society for the rest of this century should still be to educate
all who are likely to bear responsibility in the various sectors of present-day
society. Ifthis proposition is accepted, other activities carried on in the Univer-
sity have to be justified by their relevance to this central function.
TO WHOM IS THE UNIVERSITY RESPONSIBLE?
This was the preliminary question posed;by the Rapporteur. Is the Univer-
sity responsible to its students, regarded hs clients? To the corporations or
services or professions which employ gradu~tes? To parliament, which finances
higher education? Or should the University be responsible only to itself as a
guild of masters and scholars?
It can be said that the shape and size of a University system in any country
depends on the balance between three social forces: the pressure from candi-
dates to enter the system (as in the United States); the suction from employers
(as in the Soviet Union, ~here the demands of the State predominate); and
the inner controls excercised by the system itself (as in Great Britain). But in
the three countries cited, the factor which previously dominated has in recent
years declined in importance to the benefit, partly or wholly, of the two others.
The author himself was inclined to reject an exclusive responsibility to any of
these three "customers". There remains the residual case. But the objection
to this case is familiar.
A University run by professors becomes a University run for professors; but
the function of the University is to put the administration of human affairs in
the hands of educated men, and professors are not very experienced about
human affairs.
The author illustrated the difficulty of replying to this question by three
comments:
r. The achievements of knowledge rest upon continuity, consistency of ap-
proach and the slow development oi the inner logic of a subject. If the deter-
mination of what is to be taught were to be solely in the hands of students or
employers this continuity would be repeatedly interrupted. The fragmentation
of knowledge would be made even worse, the fragments would have less
cohesion.
2. The danger of too close a control by parliament is that education becomes
politicized and loses its capacity to criticize society in a detached way.
17
J
3· To leave the sole responsibility to Universities themselves has not,. in the
past, produced encouraging results.
THE THREE BASIC QUESTIONS
The author then put three fundamental questions which, he claimed, could
not be dissociated:
Who is to be taught at Universities?
What is to be taught?
Who is to teach?
The first of these questions is the most difficult, in view of the tide of social
equality in Western society. There is no' prospect that st,udent numbers will be
contained even within their present di'mensions; there are only two limiting
factors: the limit of benefit which a degree or diplomaoffers to the individual,
and how much the State can afford. This latter limitation can affect the number
of students, and also the quality of teaching. Here again, there is a dilemma
and a danger-that of neglecting or cheapening the education of those to be
entrusted with the administration of human affairs.
This is why it may be considered that whatever arrangements a country
may make to provide mass higher education, there must be filters in the Univer-
sity system, and opportunities must be given to the most gifted minds, some-
times in an austere discipline, to develop their capacities. The nature of these
filters is controversial; a massive failur('! rate (as in France) or a very stringent
selection (as in Britain) are not good solutions. Perhaps solutions may be found
in some form of stratification between and within Universities or between
different kinds ofinstitutions; or again in a widening of basic higher education,
subsequent to which only a small proportion ofstudents are selected to receive
the most exacting apprenticeship the University can offer.
The difficulties of this last-named quality of education are that it cannot be
provided except through close contact with teachers who are themselves
distinguished; and our techniques for selecting the students to receive it are
unreliable. In this connection, employers in the future should be much more
willing than they are now to release potential leaders for two to three years of
University education as adult students; and Universities should be more
flexible in accepting such students.
Refresher courses would then become one of the Un,iversity's major activites,
and not a sideline.
The University must be, at one and the same time, popular and "elitist".
Somewhere in the University, whatever other activities it has, a very few
selected students must be educated1very well. However egalitarian society
18
gets, its fortunes will depend upon the ideas, the work and the influence of a
handful of perceptive men.
Considering this to be the University's most important function, the author
dealt with the other two questions (what is to be taught and who is to teach)
with reference to this elite minority.
What is to be taught? The author considered that, in some institutions,
certain disciplines are already well taught, notably in respect of technological
human affairs.
The problem is not what to teach about physics to potential physicists, about
medicine to medical students, or about economics to students who are going
to become economists, but to ask what else should the University teach to
physicists, doctors, economists? And-since the highest responsibilities in the
management of human affairs frequently fall upon men who are not special-
ists-what should the University offer to men with this destiny before them?
What, especially, is the place of humanistic studies in the University as here
defined?
In view of the fact that a specialist may be confronted, in his narrow profes-
sional work, with poignant issues for which the University has not prepared
him, and that the "generalist" in the civil service or in industry may be dealing
all the time with problems of this order (for example, pollution, trade in arma-
ments with the Third World, the integration of minority groups into society),
how does the University educate them to administer affairs like these?
There are some who say that the management of these affairs is learned
only through experience. But this is not a satisfactory answer. Students demand
what they call "relevance", though by this they usually mean a sort ofintellec-
tual parochialism. This sort of relevance has to be rejected. But there is an-
other sort. The prevailing matrix of University studies presupposes objectivity,
rational thought disengaged from its consequences, the privilege of being
able to think without taking decisions. But in the administration of human
affairs decisions have to be taken, and if they are not governed by principles,
they have to be governed by expediency. Some critics assert that the principles
which guide intellectuals in administration are untaught but nonetheless
there. They call them "counter-revolutionary subordination", by which they
mean the enlistment of intellectuals in a conspiracy to preserve the status quo.
These critics distort the situation, but nevertheless they are fumbling towards
something important. The University can only function under a "moral code
of liberalism", but this is not a sufficient guide to contemporary issues in the
administration of human affairs. By its very silence about the moral implica-
tions of scholarship the University does make assumptions about moral
questions.
rg
This does not mean that a kit of moral principles should be taught. Nor
potted courses on ethics or sociology. The solution is perhaps to be found
through an entirely different approach, with the aid of men who are already
administering human affairs, and involving, for example, interdisciplinary
seminars at which all the aspects of a given problem are exhausted. A second
approach would be to examine very thoroughly the ways in which the very
techniques and conventions of scholarship carry their own repertoire of moral
principles (for example, the virtues of humility, courage, tolerance and respect
for the humanity of others). Taken as ingredients of a University education,
these studies-which could also be of a multidisciplinary nature, with the
participation of professional men-could contribute to conveying to the elite
among students the dismaying experience of navigating towards deci~ions
equipped only with incomplete charts. For the administration ofhuman affairs
by expediency and not by principles is a course which Universities ought to be
ashamed to contemplate. Ifthe student's solution to these problems is common-
ly based on naive principles, it is because he has not been given the opportunity
of discovering any sounder ones.
The other lesson drawn from recent events is the students' hunger for some
common purpose to cement the community ofyouth, and their evident delight
at the shallow but euphoric solidarity which unites them in some protest or
other. The common belief that they exclude their elders from this community
does not seem to be correct. Many students break their ties with home and
family in various ways, and seem to need to find a substitute for home and
family at the University. Only a few English and American Colleges and Univer-
sities traditionally supply this substitute. The concept ofthe University as a com-
munity ofsenior and juniorscholars may be more important for the stability ofthe
Universities of I 970-2000 than we are at present disposed to grant. For the U ni-
versity cannot hope to fulfill its function unless there is common consent between
its senior and junior members as to the purpose of the place. And this common
consent may not be possible unless there is a deliberately created pattern ofpart-
nership in which the student feels he has a secure and clearly defined place.
Finally, the third question: who shall teach? In former times, especially in the
great British Universities, the professors were chosen on grounds of both eru-
dition and piety. This is now out of date; professors are now appointed on
criteria of scholarship. It is a common complaint on both sides of the Atlantic
that insufficient weight is given to the professor's record as a teacher, and none
to his record as a companion for youth.
The prime criterion should be-as it already is-quality of mind; for only
the flexible, innovative, lively mind can teach others how to adapt the knowl-
edge of the past to the needs of the future. The Universities should remain
20
centres of research, otherwise they will not attract innovators. In particular,
there are grave dangers in suggesting that research should be concentrated
into research institutes.
Posts at Universities should be made more attractive to men of powerful
and original minds; But these minds are needed also by the State and by in-
dustry. Therefore many professors find themselves using the University as a
base for extra-mural activities. This is a serious problem. On the one hand,
it is essential that professors should not be isolated from the outside world.
On the other hand, in some Universities professors would be indignant if it
were suggested to them that educating the young and doing research relevant
to their teaching added up to a full time job. One possible solution might be
to enlist the cooperation of professional associations and government services
and industry in two ways: by "lending" them professors to advise and consult,
and by "borrowing" men of high intelligence and experience from these
associations and institutions outside the University, who would come back
to the University at certain periods to expose their ideas and principles.
THREE POSTSCRIPTS
1. Pressure is sometimes put on Universities to take a corporate stand on
some aspect of human affairs. In times of extremely grave crisis this may be
inevitable, but the University's contribution to society is far more valuable
if it is made through its individual staff and graduates acting as individuals.
The University cannot seek to exercise power without surrendering freedom-
its own freedom and that of its individual members. This would inevitably
affect the regard in which their teaching is held. It is therefore undesirable
to add the word "service" to the functions of the University, except in respect
of one kind of service: "to place the administration of human affairs ... in
the hands of educated men".
2. Some people hope that the boundaries between the University and the
community may dissolve; this view is held not only by students who consider
the University as an intellectual service station, but also by governments and
industrialists because it enables them to get expert advice from distinguished
professors on the cheap. But the University must remain an institution with
an identifiable function which takes precedence over the many other activities
it is inevitably expected to accept if it is to do its unique job for society.
3· In the past, one outstanding contribution of Universities was that they
endowed their graduates with a common core of culture. To wish for the
revival of this common core of culture is unprofitable nostalgia. Yet if the
University could give its graduates some similar common and shared endow-
2I
<i
ment it would be a valuable cement to society. This might be possible through
a common approach to complex social problems involving a repertoire of
model principles arising from the mastery of the symbols of communication.
SUMMARY OF THE FRENCH WORKING PAPER ON
TRANSFORMATIONS IN SOCIETY AND THE REPLANNING
OF EDUCATION
It is generally agreed that the primary aim of an educational system is to
help man to achieve happiness. But this objective is itself a source of confusion
if the relationship between man and his society is in the process of complete
transformation.
For a long time, he seems to have been in harmony with society. Not long
ago, helping man to achieve happiness meant helping him to understand the
world, to fit into it intellectually and to participate in its work.
For those who were admitted to it, school was a privileged place which
enabled this objective to be attained. Society evolved so slowly that knowledge
acquired during childhood or youth was sufficient (or a lifetime.
Today, however, we live not in a subsistence soci'ety but in a dynamic one,
in which a large part of the population is able t,
q acquire goods of lasting
material and cultural utility. This revolution has produced new anxieties, new
possibilities and new needs-anxiety on the part of young people, and the
democratization and permanence of teaching.
Parellel with this, the increasingly technological nature of society gives rise
to similar phenomena: fear of competition between man and the computer,
new perspectives offered by educational technology, and the necessity of new
ways of thinking.
Consequently a discord between man and societyhas come about. Will man
be able to master this evolution? To.do so, our educational system will have to
be radically modified. It is not sufficient to gain control of the existing evolu-
tion-we must also look ahead to tomorrow's evolution, and bend it to our
will rather than suffer what it offers us.
This is a subject for deep concern, for we are approaching a serious trans·
formation; in the course of human;evolution, man has developed his intelli-
gence at the expense of his physical capacities. But the computers, created by
man, now have an ability to store and analyze information far in excess of
man's own. What faculties, unknown or barely suspected by us, will man have
to acquire in the future? What new priorities will he have to adopt?
Faced with this transformation, we shall have to make certain choices.
This being so, helping man to achieve happiness by making the proper choices
becomes the major aim ofour educa;tional system. And in order to be in a posi-
22
tion to make these choices, we must first of all become the masters ofour evolu-
tion. What transformations will our educational system have to undergo to
this end?
EDUCATION AND THE DYNAMIC SOCIETY
On the purely economic level, we must relegate to the attic the myth that
social progress is achieved by revolution. Progress can be achieved provided
that we understand how to organize, not a sharing out of the goods at present
available to mankind, but a corrective sharing of goods not yet created. But
this implies the need for a new social contract, a contract of advancement in
which everyone is granted his share of the advantages and takes his share of
responsibility. This applies, of course, to cultural expansion as well as to eco-
nomic expansion. Education must give everyone an equal chance of advance-
ment.
But this also supposes that education is not limited to a specific period in
life, and that it is not restricted to schools and Universities. Education must be
continuous, and it must use not only individual resources but also the resources
of mass communications.
The democratization of education: in France, this has been achieved quan-
titatively but not qualitatively. The uniformity of the teaching received by all
students and the obligation for all of them to pass the same examinations has
masked inequalities due to family situations and backgrounds, particularly
because certain children are better able to express themselves and to concep-
tualize than others. This inequality can be removed only through a cultural
policy which does not give priority to literary education and dissertation.
The continuation of education: though the transformation of society makes
it imperative that education be a continuing process, little collective thought
has been given to this point so far. We mustimmediately and seriously organize
a system of adult education which is not just a series of training courses or
refresher courses. Ifwe are to do this, we must review our school and university
system. Why not right away reduce the duration of full-time University
education, in view of the necessity of updating and subsequently enriching the
knowledge acquired at Universities and higher educational establishments?
Moreover, it must be possible at any moment to change course, instead of
setting course for a whole lifetime on the basis of knowledge acquired at the
beginning. This reorientation must be facilitated by following common broad
streams for as long as possible; this would have the additional great advantage
of creating a "common language". In this connection, we must bear in mind
the cost in money and human effort which reconversion at present involves.
Furthermore, the .updating and broadening of knowledge and skills does not
23
/
necessarily involve going to school. Where adult training and education are
concerned, teaching facilities must go out to the people, and not vice-versa.
This applies also to the role played by the press, the cinema, television, and
administrative authorities. Such extramural education should be directed
mainly at areas undergoing development or industrialization, and benefit
those categories of people who are least well prepared. Every citizen must be
aware of his responsibility.
The continuing nature of education thus disrupts the teaching process.
No longer can teaching be equated with the transmission of knowledge. We
have to learn to learn. On the one hand, the amount ofspare time is increasing,
and all must be able to make best use ofit; on the other hand, people must be
enabled to adapt themselves to new occupations instead of being adapted to
suit existing ones. We must abandon the traditional idea that learning is a
boring and dreary business. Only a teaching system which is enjoyable and
creates a desire to learn can give people a taste for widening and updating
their knowledge constantly, and allow them to keep pace with the transforma-
tion of society.
EDUCATION AND THE TECHNOLOGICAL SOCIETY
The technological development of society affects man not only in his out-
ward and visible behavior and his manner ofliving, but also in his inner being.
It faces him with new problems, creates new hazards, and calls for new efforts.
Man will therefore undergo a transformation in himself; first he will have
to overcome his fears and anxieties, in particular the present-day fear of
intellectual overproduction which is at the origin of our University Malthu-
sianism.
Subsequently, all the educational possibilities of modern technology must
be made use of-for example video tapes, individual teaching programmed on
computers, and so on.
Man must keep up with the times ifhe is not to be slaved to the technological
society.
A NEW CONCEPTION OF CULTURE
The current changes in culture, which is becoming a culture for the masses,
have been violently attacked by intellectuals. For the conservatives, mass
culture is merely dulling and stupefying; it is a degrading and degraded
culture. For the left-wingers, culture can only be an alienating influence,
the expression of a reviled bourgeois society.
It is obvious that we are faced here with a double risk. But it is debatable
whether this evolution will lead to such a negative result. The present-day
24
creative vogue shows that the creators do not seek to flatter the baser instincts
of the public. The appreciation of works of art continues to be a hard and
demanding task. In the communist society, on the other hand, painting and
literature are conventional and boring. All the more reason for thinking that
in our technological society new cultural values are being added to the old
ones, by the very nat).lre of science and technology. Moreover, present-day
reproduction techniques and mass communications systems bring this culture
to a very great number of people. It is a mistake to imagine that this mass
dissemination necessarily brings about uniformity and conformism; on the
contrary, the current trend is towards diversity and non-conformism.
If these obvious facts do not strike the conservatives, it is because they
systematically refuse to consider culture in its new form. They are petrified
in the unchanging traditions of their childhood.
Such resistance was not seriously harmful as long as knowledge developed
only slowly. But nowadays, it tends to arrest the progress of teaching and to
neglect the constant advance of science and the transformations which this
imposes on the arts. Science and technology are the main targets of the con-
servatives' scorn. Their contempt is based on a distinction between "noble"
studies and others which they consider to be inferior. This ancient distinction
results in the last anaiysis in millions of square pegs in round holes-people
who have missed theiryocation.
This disregard of technology is all the more serious in that the need for
technical education is growing and will continue to grow.
The qualifications of today will be the under-qualifications of tomorrow.
What is more, we have here a source of conflict between youth and the older
generation; the most redoutable of the new myths are upheld by students who
are rich in literary and classical training but who are completely ignorant of
the technological world at which their criticisms are aimed.
The fact is that the process of reestablishing communication between society
and its critics must be started in the infant and primary schools, where the
child must be trained to make the effort of thought necessary to understand
the world in which it lives. This is all the more necessary in that boys and girls
must be taught discernment in handling the mass of information communi-
cated to them by modern methods. Conversely, a great deal of knowledge
which was formerly thought indispensable no longer corresponds to present-
day culture, and its teaching is a waste of time. One expression of all this is
the belief that knowledge must be divided up into arbitrary compartments,
or disciplines. But modern research has shown that the sciences are fertilized
by the arts, and vice versa. Of course, this is also true of the professions, as is
seen for example in the role of psychology in medicine. Yet there are many
25
gaps in the training of executives and professional men and women as well as
of teachers themselves. More generally speaking, training today calls for a
constant ability to update and broaden one's knowl(!dge, and hence it calls
for the ability to handle general ideas. Even if he is a specialist, the man of
today must not confine himself to being a devotee of a single discipline.
Modern teaching cannot accept the premise of a petrified culture.
A NEW APPROACH TO THINKING
If we hope to master the technical evolution of our; day, it is not sufficient
for modern man to know and understand technology. He must also acquire
the technological approach, that is to say the ability of passing from theoretical
knowledge to practical application and vice versa. This is bound up with the
three revolutions which have already been referred to: the industrial revolu-
tion, the revolution in communications, and the computer revolution.
The future development of the industrial revolution will mean that we shall
have to control rather than produce; react to possible difficulties rather than
merely act. Another way of thinking must emerge- a more universal one,
capable of rapidly calling upon accumulated knowledge. In this connection,
the development of mathematics is of capital importance.
The instantaneous transmission of information, especially through mass
media, poses the problem of the extraordinary imbalance between the mental
functions of transmitting and receiving. Formerly, each of us spoke and lis-
tened. Today, the speaker and the listener are no longer on an equal basis.
We are besieged by the transmission, and the combat is an unequal one.
But it is not a desperate one, provided that we learn how to use the transistor
and the television set as instruments of liberation. F9.'r this to be so, those re-
sponsible for broadcasting stations must cease using them as instruments of
political or economic conditioning; they must make u~e of all their educational
potentialities. It also implies that, from their young~st age, children must be
taught not just to receive what is transmitted to them, but to exercise the
necessary choice and judgement.
In addition, in order to achieve a certain balance between transmission and
reception in every-day life, man mdst learn to exp~ess himself. All forms of
expression must be encouraged, particularly artistic expression. As the example
of Japan shows, success is possible, but in order to achieve it we must avoid
compressing things into a prefabricated mould. It is not sufficient to protect
childrens' faculties of expression. The new man must be in a position to partici-
pate with greater authority and greater influence in the decisions which
concern him-hence the need for joint decisions between teachers and the
people they teach. ·
•.!
26
As for the computer revolution, this also creates a very important problem
for educators who are thinking ahead to the year 2000 or 20IO. We must be
able to communicate with the machine; but it does not use the same language
as we do, and we have to make a considerable effort to achieve the same preci-
sion in our thinking.
For example, every problem must be conceived by defining the purpose of
the operation. Teaching must adopt such a procedure, even if only for simple
general knowledge lessons.
NEW PATTERNS OF LIVING
Looking ahead to tomorrow's technological society, we may predict the
development of some contradictions and consider how education can help to
resolve them.
The first contradiction is between the models which we propose to young
people and their feeling that we leave them no choice. But everyone wants to
choose his own objectives and his own destiny, and the development of mass
education is accompanied by the need for a form of personalized education.
The school and the University therefore have to teach not only the possibility
of freedom, but its use also. In this connection, the new role of pupils and
students is an essential one; but no less important is that of their teachers.
The latter must not be mere dispensers of knowledge or distillers of curricula,
they must propose aims and expose themselves to possible contestation.
The second contradiction is between the increasing tribalization of society
and its deep-rooted need for communication. Technology certainly does not
generate uniformity, nor does the school generate unity. On the contrary, the
number of water-tight compartments increases while individuals are starved
of human relationships and true contacts, as is reflected by all the reactions
manifested in recent times.
Teaching must remedy this first of all by an effort to restore communication,
and teachers will have to try to understand and seek common languages.
Moreover, we must abandon the selective system of individual advancement,
which ruthlessly eliminates the less privileged before they have begun life, in
favor of collective advancement, which attempts to eliminate nobody and to
allow all citizens to enter life with the same chances. This corresponds to the
trend in big, modern companies where the joint action of complementary
forces, the matching of abilities, and team spirit take precedence-as reflected
in the tremendous changes that have occurred between the time of Alexander
and the epoch of Apollo XI.
The third contradiction, and perhaps the major one, arises between what
has been called the 'technostructure of our States and the mass of citizens.
27
,;
"
In human terms, it is the conflict between the technocratic masters of the
future and those who have to submit to their decisions in order to survive.
Here there lies a considerable risk for all societies which allow power to be
concentrated in the hands of a few men because they possess knowledge, in
spite of a widespread desire for democracy.
The possibility of participation demands first and foremost a reorganization
of our educational system, because it is the educators who will be decisive in
determining whether men learn or do not learn to understand one another,
to make themselves understood, to have their aspirations shared yet to abandon
some of their aspirations in favor of the aspirations of others, and to reach
joint decisions on their common problems. None of this comes naturally to
man. Modern democracy will only be achieved if we are all determined not
to leave the choice of the common destiny to the State technostructure, but to
take an active part in it.
A renovated education is therefore the price which we must pay today in
order to live in the technological society of tomorrow. But the transformations
in education which appear to be necessary are not conceived merely to change
man's position by giving him the means of achieving his ambitions. Their
effect will be to change man himself. Will we succeed in achieving this im-
provement, comparable to a biogenetic process? If we do, man will not
necessarily be the master of the society of tomorrow. But if we do not succeed,
he is certain to be its slave.
DISCUSSION
The discussion of this item of the agenda was opened by some preliminary
observations by the author ofthe British working paper and by two compatriots
of the other authors.1
The French participant who replaced the author of the French working
paper reminded the meeting that the administration of human affairs was in
the course of profound change. For centuries, it had been based entirely on
the powers and responsibilities of decision-makers. Under these conditions,
higher education could be reserved for an elite. Nowadays, he said, there is a
confrontation-sometimes violent-of ideas at all levels. Some social groups
are deeply concerned at the transformations which are necessary, or judged
to be so. In this context, the generalization of the dialogue assumes increasing
importance; the University must take on a new aspect, and three questions
1. The author of the French working paper was prevented from attending the beginning of
the discussion. The author of the American working paper was detained in his country for
personal reasons.
28
arise: must the University be open to everyone, or only to an elite? Must it
accept only adolescents, or should it admit men and women of all ages? Is its
purpose to transmit knowledge or to help man to become mature?
. . The author of the British working paper remarked that it was preferable
·to set aside problems of University organization or management, and to deal
rather with the "product"-namely graduates, for whom the University
exists. He suggested that the meeting discuss the following questions, already
touched upon in the working papers:
To whom is the University responsible?
Who is to be taught? (~nd, in particular, how can the University be at one
and the same time "popular" and "elitist", nurturing future innovators in an
egalitarian society?)
What is to be taught? (Professional education is already satisfactory, con-
sidered the speaker, but specialized competence is only a minor ingredient in
decision-making).
Who is to teach? (And how to preserve research, an indispensable element?)
How is teaching to be programmed in relation to time?
An American participant, who also holds a University post, emphasized
the pressure in favor of the admission of an increasing number of students.
This may be interpreted as the response to the needs of the modern economy,
but it poses the problem of financing, and of the disastrous results which in-
adequate funds may entail.
An even more tricky question is the balance between the objectives of the
University and the needs of society, notably in respect of teaching priorities.
Recent events have led to an awareness of these problems, even though certain
excessive acts have discredited the student cause. Knowledge, pointed out the
speaker, is above teaching itself, and nothing can replace the will to learn.
The speaker also remarked that the idea that rationality is at the basis of
our Universities is a relatively recent assumption. As for the role of Universities
where research is concerned, it must not be forgotten that their contribution
in this respect is relatively slight.
*
* *
In the discussion proper, several speakers referred to the agitation and
malaise which have recently been a feature of University life, but most of
them, rather than bringing up the transitory or anecdotal aspects of the sub-
ject, concentrated on defining certain permanent traits likely to have a lasting
influence-either positive or negative-on the University of tomorrow.
According to a British participant, who expressed himself optimistic about
29
the future, students desire self-fulfillment more than anything else; they want
to be able to make decisions themselves rather than allow themselves to be
influenced by others. When intelligent students feel that they cannot act on
their environment, there is a regression. Similar views were expressed by two
Canadian participants. The first thought that students rejected society, but
were not too sure what to put in its place. The second added that the material-
istic and technological image of our society was such as to dishearten students,
who also noted our incapacity to master certain problems arising out of this
technology (notably problems of the environment). Moreover, added an
American participant, we have given a bad example-at least in the USA-
by tackling the most vital questions twenty years too late, when violence has
already done its work and the activists seem to h~Ve more success than the
advocates of a rational approach.
But, as an Icelandic participant pointed out, violence is no new phenome-
non; what is new is the scale on which it occurs (although even this has been
somewhat exaggerated by some), even though it does not take place in a revolu-
tionary situation. This brings out the separation be.tween the University and
society, a point which was touched upon by numerous speakers.
The University cannot remain an ivory tower, stated a British participant,
especially if we accept the fact that education must be destined for all genera-
tions. The speaker said that he was personally in favor of a total fusion between
the University and society, the first stage of which could be achieved by a
multiplication of contacts. Referring to the students themselves, an American
speaker pointed out that in the present-day world it was almost impossible for
them not to be "political". But, he said, it is important to give them practical
experience before they set out on their definitive path, even if this concrete
social activity means that some of them leave the University. In support of
this argument, the speaker cited the example of brilliant American students
who had themselves felt such a need;. Another American participant considered
that many students in his country are in need of,therapy; their attitude in·
dicates a sort of lassitude, an impossibility of associating themselves with the
concrete needs of society, and this leads them to hold society in question.
The University can help them to avoid channeling this desire for change along
undesirable lines. Paradoxically, said the speaker; in order to make the Uni-
versity more human it is necessary to create certain activities which do not
make University attendance indisp
1
ensable. :
But, in the opinion of a French participant, if society is divorced from the
University, it may be because we ourselves consider the future of the world
as being exclusively cultural (the University as the image of this future world),
thereby neglecting its physical and sociological bases, which may be firm
30
enough. In this connection, the speaker remarked that in the eyes ofthe workers
the student movement forms part of the tactics of the trade unions but not of
their strategy. Moreover, as a British participant and a Norwegian participant
pointed out, certain reactions against student violence originated among the
ordinary masses. However this may be, stated a Turkish participant, this
emotional impact must be left out of consideration when we discuss the future,
and it is difficult to reply categorically in the affirmative or in the negative
when we speak of possible frontiers between the University and society.
The influx of students in the Universities was referred to by very many
speakers, some of them from the analytical angle but most of them in the light
of the controversy between the "masses" and the "elite". Correlatively, this
poses the problem of the ultimate purpose of the University. Several partici-
pants examined this question from the point ofview ofsolutions to be adopted;
this point will be dealt with later.
The influx of young people into the University, said one of the American
participants already quoted, may be interpreted as corresponding to the
economic needs of society. Alternatively, one of his compatriots stated ener-
getically, it may be interpreted as corresponding to a myth, carefully nurtured
by the graduates themselves, of the value of higher education.
One of the first problems raised by this influx lies in the fact that countries'
resources in men and money are not unlimited. According to a Swedish
participant, who supported his remarks with statistics relating to his country,
this is not an insurmountable obstacle. But, asked several speakers, even apart
from purely financial considerations, is there not a risk ofthe quality ofteaching
being sacrificed to quantity? (In this connection, an American speaker re-
minded the meeting that the growing importance of the teaching of women in
the future was not to be neglected either).
Like the author of the British working paper, many participants came out
in favor of the coexistence of the University of the masses and a more thorough
teaching reserved for the most gifted students (the "popular" University and
the "elite" University). A Belgian speaker summed up this point of view by
emphasizing that the two concepts were not contradictory; on the one hand
admission to the University must be open to all who wish to enter (and in this
respect we must not consider technical teaching to be a second class domain);
on the other hand, a modern culture must be dispensed, and the ratio between
teachers and taught must be increased so far as is possible. Furthermore, we
must always take care that the most brilliant students come to the top ("safe-
guard the road to the Nobel prize"). An Italian participant, supporting this
point of view, noted that the number of gifted individuals did not increase in
proportion to University attendance. The confusion between the gifted and
3I
the less gifted gives rise to frustration-and to collectivism which we see at the
present time-while it is important to select and encourage individuals capable
of assuming responsibilities and making decisions in later life. An American
participant also expressed his concern at the concept of mass education insofar
as it risks leading to a levelling down. One of the French participants already
qu:)ted echoed this and said that he was afraid that facility within the Univer-
sity would lead the technical and industrial society to create its own training
systems and to select its executives from outside the University system.
The idea of an elite itself was the subject of animated discussion. One
American participant went so far as to propose the elimination of this term
because of the bad connotations most often attached to it. Without rejecting
this concept, several participants-notably a British speaker and an inter-
national speaker-opposed "elitism" as a dominant principle of teaching.
We must not, declared the latter, consider the arrival of the masses at the
University with resignation; on the contrary, we must see great cause for hope
in it. And when we speak of the inflation of degrees, we may ask ourselves
whether this is not an instrument for creating jobs. Moreover, opinion among
young people no longer accepts the crystallisation between an extended
training of more or less University type and the training of an elite cut off
from the masses. In this connection, an American participant considered that
the younger generation in his country was not particularly sensitive to this
problem, so long as they have a minimum stock of knowledge and can see a
rising tide of egalitarianism in professional and public life. Another American
speaker, referring to the experience of colored people in his country, stressed
the primarily utilitarian nature of education and its role in equalizing human
conditions.
The principle of the selection of elites by and within the University was
held in question by some participants.
In addition to the speakers already quoted, an international participant and
two American speakers emphasized that the University must offer all candi-
dates the possibility of achieving self-development in the light of their capa-
bilities, avoid eliminating gifted minds, and allow a sort of natural process of
emergence of the elite, in all cases rejecting any idea of self-perpetuation.
This supposes improved methods of education, if necessary not hesitating to
have recourse to practical experience.
Taking account of all these facts, the meeting devoted a large part of its
discussions to the relevance ofthe University to the needs ofsociety-a question
posed by the American working paper. Many participants concentrated on
;etting forth clearly the major objectives which might be assigned to the
University.
32
Does the University correspond to the needs of society? In attempting to
reply to this question, an American participant considered that what the
University needed was something more rather than something different.
Trve, it is a good thing that the University should face up to concrete problems
such as housing, pollution, etc.; but an empirical approach to these problems
must not on that account bring them down to a level at which a sharper
intellectual approach is excluded. In point of fact, many speakers took this
opportunity of stating the need for increased diversification, greater flexibility
of teaching, and of student options. As a Norwegian participant remarked,
this search for relevance of the University must not be interpreted from the
narrow utilitarian angle. The rapid change affecting societies and techniques
must lead us to concentrate our efforts on suitable means of stimulating the
independance, creativity and adaptability of human minds. The various
technical options, in the opinion of an American participant, must remain
open; and in particular it is a bad thing to impose certain curricula and
certain examinations on students (this point was also taken up later in the
discussion by another American speaker). We ourselves, pointed out an inter-
national participant, have a view of this question which is too traditionally
unitarian, since we always think of "the University", whereas its pluralistic
vocation has steadily grown in recent years and must continue to grow if we
wish to give the mass of young people who want to enter the University the
possibility of achieving all their aspirations (and to constitute the true elite of
the future, not the elite in the traditional sense, and still less the "establish-
ment" of tomorrow).
In this connection some participants-and notably a Norwegian speaker and
an American speaker-energetically defended the cause of general culture and
the classical humanities which, they said, must not disappear under the rising
tide of technology, but which on the contrary are now assuming greater value.
A similar argument was developed by a Belgian participant (taking up an idea
raised in the French working paper) in favor of the fine arts and media of
expression which, he said, can greatly contribute to human happiness.
Conversely, but without adopting the opposite view to the one just expressed,
some participants emphasized the value of technology and specialization from
the University stage onwards. An Icelandic participant, already quoted,
stressed in this connection that the present-day critical attitude of students to
technology takes little account of the fact that it is indeed technology which
makes their studies possible! A Turkish participant pointed out that at the
University stage (not to be confused with education in general) a certain
degree of specialization is inevitable. On this subject, an American participant
contested the statement of the author of the British working paper that special-
33
ized teaching is already satisfactory at the present time. On the basis ofhis own
experience in security affairs, another American speaker emphasized that the
world of tomorrow is likely to be highly complex; in order to be able to take
account of all the different interacting factors a wide range of skills will be in-
creasingly necessary, and it would be a pity if the University could not provide
them. This view was echoed by a third American speaker who at the beginning
of the discussion had quoted some examples of spe~ialized teaching. This, he
said, is even more true for research, which is anl essential function of the
University. Other participants took up this last subject. "Will research remain
compatible with the University of the masses"?, asked an international partici-
pant. An American participant expressed the hope that University centres
devoted to research would not be side-tracked by 'more general discussions
outside their own discipline and would continue to re~eive substantial financial
resources for research. ·
In the light of these considerations, several speakers expressed in general
terms their conception of the role and objectives of:[the University in modern
society and in the society of tomorrow. Rather thaiJ. seeing the University as
being slanted on the students themselves, as suggested by the author of the
British working paper, a Norwegian participant! preferred to define the
University as a community of professors and students oriented towards the
search for truth in all fields of reality, with this conception inspiring both
teaching and research itself. A French participant assigned teaching a three-
fold mission; the transmission of knowledge, the formation of character and
intelligence, and integration of the student into society. The first objective,
he said, must not be underestimated ; this transmissi~n must be general, open
to cultural as well as scientific realities. On the second point, the aim is to
inculcate methods of thinking rather than scholastic knowledge (this point
was taken up energetically later in the discussion by a Dutch participant and
a Canadian participant). In the third place, young people must be taught to
work in groups in order to solve the real problems of the modern world. A
Norwegian participant pointed out also that the University may play the role
of supreme arbiter on certain problems on which politicians and even experts
may be divided. This is why it is so important that the University should not
allow itself to be dominated by small groups with marked political tendencies.
An American participant assigned the University five main objectives : (a)
seeking the truth; (b) helping the student to know himself and to excercise
his mind; (c) giving him historical and ethical perspectives; (d) involvir:g
him in real and lasting problems; (e) making him a good citizen in the widest
sense of that term. Normally, he remarked, the University can achieve only
one or two of these objectives, but this is precisely what brings out the need
34
for a diversification of types of education. An international participant con-
sidered that the role of the University comprised two main functions, namely
the transmission of knowledge and intellectual training; but he pointed out
that the University plays a unique and irreplaceable role in the former field,
whereas it does not in the second. It would even be misleading to see the
University as the natural training ground for leaders.
In the light of the problems facing the University and the objectives to be
assigned to it, several participants attempted to single out concrete reforms
or guidelines which might be adopted.
At the beginning of the discussion, a Belgian participant had put forward
certain suggestions drawn from the work of ten or so working groups set up
in 1965 in his country under the aegis of the "Industry University" foundation.
These suggestions related to the increasing number of students, the process of
. learning, and the involvement of the University in the study of the concrete
problems of society.
On the first point, the tendancy in Europe up to the present, said the speaker,
has been to limit expansion. This Malthusian attitude must be abandoned;
it should be possible to make a selection which is not an exclusion but a re-
' orientation which, for various but convergent reasons, must be made within
the institution itself. To this end, the latter must be able to provide both high
level University teaching and technical teaching with a more concrete slant.
With regard to the process of learning, continued the speaker, it is time that
we took account of the latest advances in psychology and used all the resources
of electronics. Since the most powerful agent of training is the individual
himself, it is his motivation for learning which must be developed first and
foremost. Moreover, there should be a symbiosis between life itself and the
place of learning. In particular, we must examine under what conditions the
system of higher education itself can produce services, and also how the system
of production of goods and services-both public and private-can become
a system of education. From this angle, the role of the teaching institution
and of the teachers becomes that of a counsellor, helper, guide and mediator
between the developing human being (whether young or adult) and his
·environment.
On the third point, the speaker expressed the wish that the University should
involve professors and students on a large scale in the study and implementing
of projects to improve the administration of human affairs.
A French participant, who wanted to see the myth of the University as a
social jumping-off point disappear, wondered what would be the financial
tost of measures aimed at doing away with the traditional distinction between
primary teaching, secondary teaching and the first stage of University teaching
35
and replacing these by a single school which could be attended by all young
people up to the age of r8 or rg. They could then be given practical experience
of the type referred to by an American participant, after which they would be
ready to choose their career in life-and for some of them this could mean
undergoing specialized courses of training. Such a solution, said the speaker,
would perhaps be less costly for the community than the mass of students at
present trailing through the Universities up to the age of 25 or 26.
With regard to teachers themselves, an American participant was in favor
of abolishing their titles and professorships, which he considered a cause of
immobility in the subjects taught. Similar views were expressed later in the
discussion by an international participant, who called the function of profes-
sors, as it is at present conceived, "clerical" or "ecclesial". He wanted them
to be recruted in a more diversified manner in the future, including the possi-
bility of "borrowing" temporarily from the outside world. Moreover, he said,
we must employ the men available more rationally, more effectively, and
more flexibly.
An American participant suggested that present University curricula be
modified and made more flexible, including more interdisciplinary seminars
from the first year onwards and encouraging pre-University communal
experiences or, failing that, undertakings during the long vacations.
An Italian speaker suggested a few guidelines which would make it possible
to resolve the contradiction which might arise-as the discussion had shown-
between individual selection and collective advancement, even though general
agreement seemed to be emerging on the role played by qualified teams in
modern society. Taking up this last point- already referred to by a French
participant-the speaker wondered whether it was not possible to form, at an
early stage of the educational process, working teams who would be assigned
tasks in place of those which ordinarily fall to individuals. These teams would
be formed spontaneously, on the basis of "elective affinities", and the teachers
would give them impetus rather than impose their views upon them. A feeling
of common purpose would arise, and the selection judged necessary would be
applied to the teams themselves. The best individuals would naturally emerge
from the best teams.
A German participant emphasized that the University of tomorrow must
involve itself more in the economic, technical and scientific world. To this end,
cooperative project-oriented undertakings should be encouraged, especially
on the international scale, involving governments, industry and scientific
circles, special care being taken to preserve the necessary independence
of the University (this objective could be attained by submitting these projects
to public discussion by those concerned) .
36
Most of the participants stressed the value which they attached, like the
authors of the working papers, to further education and to the contribution
. ___ leaders of industry might make to teaching. An Italian orator developed
sop1e observations on these two points. Th¢ question arises, he said, as to how
men who have already reached a fairly high position in their companies and
who may be considered as the leaders of tomorrow can be freed from their
jobs and "recycled" to the University for two or three years without affecting
the running of their companies or their own careers. This is easier in the case
ofbig companies which are widely dispersed geographically, for they are better
able to replace people who are temporarily detached in this way and they are
also better able to reintegrate them into the company subsequently. Conversely,
it presents great difficulties for small firms.
The contribution of leaders of business and industry to University teaching
is certainly an exciting possibility. The only doubt in the speaker's mind was
whether the intelligence and experience of certain business men were coupled
in all cases with the qualities of congeniality, human contact, or simply
"acceptability" indispensable to the dialogue between young and old, partic-
ularly in the climate prevailing today.
A Belgian participant expressed the wish that the University concern itself
more with the first steps of its students in professional life, notably through
contacts with employers and with the State. This follow-up could moreover
lead to continuing on-the-job training. The same speaker emphasized the
European importance ofthis question, European Universities having remained,
he said, too conservative, too protectionist and too nationalist, as reflected in
the failure to create the European University planned under the Treaty of
Rome.
Another Belgian participant drew the attention of the meeting to the
"Europe 2000" project, currently being implemented by the European
cultural foundation and which covers some of the subjects dealt with in the
present discussion.
Before closing the discussion on this item of the agenda, the President called
upon the two authors of working papers who were present to make some final
remarks.
The author of the French working paper first put forward five basic proposi-
tions:
-The sum total of knowledge today is greater than previously.
-There are also more people to receive it.
-Both masses continue to increase.
-The purpose of teaching nowadays is to learn how to learn and not to
receive ready-made knowledge, for there is too much of the latter to be
37
memorized, and moreover memorization can be assigned to machines.
The first four propositions, said the speaker, may be applied in a purely
economic conception of society. The fifth proposition goes beyond this;
the main demand is for training-the fulfillment, or even the revelation,
of the personality. And if we want an individual to' be able to participate
fully in society-as conceived in the doctrine of General de Gaulle-he
must have a fully developed personality.
Modern pedagogy give us the possibility of going beyond the idea of there
being gifted children and less gifted ones. In point offact, there is more talent
than we think, notably among the masses.
The second possibility, which occurs after infant sc~ool, is to utilize every-
thing that can be classed as motivation, especially in a system of teaching
which succeeds in breaking down the compartments between "literary" and
"scientific" and "technical". Moreover, we must not ,neglect the possibilities
offered, at advantageous cost, by programmed teaching.
The speaker supported the idea of a generalized hi~her education put for-
ward by the author of the Britl'sh working paper. This, he said, should be
conceived quite apart from any guarantee of employment. The great mistake
is to believe that the University produces the degree ~md that the degree pro-
duces jobs. We must break the link between culture and employment (more-
over, if we have an adequate level of culture, the ind~vidual may more easily
find employment, and even have a choice ofjobs). E~en the person who per-
forms a menial routine task has the right to be intelligent, to receive an educa-
tion sufficient for him to understand the world in whiCh he lives and to exercise
,,
his rights as a citizen.
We must succeed in integrating the University with life by all possible means
(some of them have been referred to at this meeting); the terms "elite" and
"selection" are not pleasant and neither are the conceptions they embody.
We must do away with the preconcei~ed distinction between the elite and the
masses. The situation can be better gfasped if we have recourse to the notions
of specialization, vocation, teamwork, and certain qualities such as character
and decision, which have no relation with culture. Moreover, talent can be
developed all through life.
The criticism aimed at the society which is developing is directed at all the
advanced countries; we must accept discussion with the revolutionaries, and
we must even oblige them to engage in it. For example, when faced with
proposals aimed at arresting expansion, we all tend to 'be Marxists, considering
man uniquely as a producer. We must see man as a non-producer, give him
satisfactions in other fields, and create a model of the developing society which
integrates the need for expansion-in other words, we must solve the problem
38
...l
not from the angle of the "manipulators" but from the angle of the people
who are manipulated. All advanced liberal countries should cooperate to build
this model on a human basis; the greatest advancement compatible with the
personality, notably through education- total and continuous.
The author of the British working paper presented his remarks1 as a sort of
"examiner's report" on the replies submitted to the questions which he had
raised in his paper. He began by regretting that no one had made any remarks
on one of these questions: to whom is the University responsible? How is it,
asked the speaker, that such a galaxy of personalities is not interested in this
problem, notably the American participants, whose country spends 2% of its
gross national product on higher education? This problem is basic for govern-
ment policies concerning the financing of education. We must realize its
consequences.
Responsible to its "clients"? On the European side of the Atlantic, the
United States are considered to be the consumer's paradise, the consumer
being the supreme judge of purchasing criteria. If we regard the student as
such, the University is responsible to him, and we may then consider offering
him his studies at a realistic cost and letting him shop around among the various
types of education available, the University itself receiving nothing. Some
groups in the United States and in the United Kingdom are seriously con-
sidering such a solution, and this would not be so very new, for in the 19th
century the students themselves provided the Scottish Universities with 3/4 of
their revenue.
Responsible to the "users of the product"? Here we have the "manpower"
aspect of the question from the employers' point of view, and the problem is
seen in this way in the U.S.S.R. This implies a control of grants, which are
allocated in the light of the studies pursued. For example, in the United King-
dom, it has been recognized that the development of the country necessitates
that two-thirds of students study science and technology, and one-third study
the arts. But the real proportion is so/so. We could modify it by a suitable
adjustment of grants, since 9S% of British students are grant-aided. But we do
not do so because we do not consider the University to be responsible to users
of its products.
Responsible to those which finance it? This would mean parliamentary
control, and this is dangerous unless it is limited, for one of the essential func-
tions of the University resides in a logical and reasoned criticism of society
and of the government. The powers of the financing authority must therefore
be carefully limited.
1. These remarks were made at the beginning of Sunday morning, April 19, before the
continuation of the discussion of the second item on the agenda.
39
"'
,
Responsible to itself? We may note that no major change in Universities in
the United Kingdom has ever been introduced without the outside inter-
vention of a Royal Commission. Professors are intelligent people, but most of
them are not very good at making political and social decisions.
The speaker then touched upon the question of mass education versus .
elitism. He expressed satisfaction at the excellent contribution made by the
discussions. In 1970, he stated, by comparison with the situation prevailing a
century ago it would be just as absurd to limit the possibilities of education
beyond the secondary level as it would be to close the door completely to further
education to school leavers. Mass education, further education-and this can
be at the University itself-are with us, prefiguring further education through-
out the whole of life. A first step in this direction can be the University open
to students of all ages, as are museums and libraries-just as further education
is already made available, notably in the U.S.S.R., in factories and offices.
The financial problem can be solved. The affluent countries can organize a
full-time education, and the less affluent can have recourse to evening classes,
occasional days off, correspondence course, and television.
But it is important to call this "further education" because a nation which
is not capable oforganizing its education as a series offilters, with the possibility
for those who are capable ofit ofreceiving a much more rigorous and costly higher
education, is headed for disaster. The homogenization of all further education
in a single mould would ruin the whole system and lead to a levelling down,
as shown by the various examples of Indian and African Universities.
True, the word "elite" can give rise to misunderstanding. But the speaker
urged that it be retained. If we consider, he remarked, that the education of
juvenile delinquents costs more than Eton, to deny similar attention to above-
normal minds would be inverted snobbery. This necessitates a very high ratio
of teachers to students, but can one imagine an aircraft pilot trained by mass
education in a class of 500 students?
Having said this, went on the speaker, we must leave the door open to further
education after leaving school and throughout the whole oflife (adult education
could provide a good subject for another Bilderberg meeting), in view of the
fact that part of the system can be safeguarded for the benefit of very gifted
students. Must further education and higher education be taught in different
institutions? Certainly not. Students may share the same central heating and
the same cafeteria, differentiation occurring at the classroom doors.
But how is this elite to be selected? It will, in fact, select itself. The speaker
cited as an example the violinist Menuhin who accepts as pupils gifted indi-
viduals who say that they are ready to work 5 hours a day. Ifsuch a selection
is elitist, it is certainly justifiable!
40
But the snobbery of the educational system is due to something else, namely
superfluous activity from which employers derive profit. The principal func-
of the University is to train people to think rationally and to reduce
:<mDrance; but the University does two other things: it confers degrees (for the
and classes of degrees (for the convenience of employers). In the past,
only the Chinese Mandarinate system worked this way. The practice of
classing degrees into first, second, third, etc., should be optional, and reserved
for those who are prepared to make a long .and special effort-as was the case
1 at Oxford and Cambridge in the nineteenth century-for this generalized
.system implies that the University is inseparable from competition, and this is
what understandably irritates students.
We must not demand too much of the universities. Their organization and
their staff allow them to deal with problems properly through rational thought
and logical analysis, but not by other means. True, this is only one part of
education. Irrational activities predominate in the art of living, even if only
in love and marriage ! '
Are other activities possible?
Social action: this is extremely important. Students must engage in it, but
we cannot ask the University to make it a degree subject.
Self-expression (spontaneous activity, living theatre, etc.): certainly, but in
spare time.
Character and morals: it is necessary, of course, to build character, but there
are no professors of character-building! In point of fact the whole teaching
process carries its moral content within it.
The petrification of curricula is a danger. In former times we could expect
universities to provide a common core of culture, a common language. This
is no longer the case. The fragmentation of culture is a fact of our times.
But perhaps we can find a certain unity in a training which allows us to make
a common approach to the solution of major social problems.
41
PRIORITIES IN FOREIGN POLICY
The groundwork for discussion of this item consisted of a paper concerning
"Young Americans' attitudes towards foreign policy for the 1970's" prepared
by an American participant.
SUMMARY OF AND INTRODUCTION TO
THE AMERICAN WORKING PAPER
The paper commences with a Harris Poll quiz dated May 1969 in which
1200 Americans of all ages were asked whether they would favour sending
US troops to the support of respectively, Thailand, Italy, West Berlin and
Israel, in case they were invaded by communist military forces; the affirmative
answers to these questions are (in that same order) as follows: 25%, 27%, 26%
and g%.
The author feels that from the perspective of the year 2000, historians will
conclude that in the quarter century after World War II the predominant
change in the distribution of international power was caused by the expansion
of American economic, polhical and cultural influence.
This expansion was primarily affected by two major developments: on the
one hand by the decline of European influence in Asia, Africa and even Latin
America, on the other hand by the communist threat to the independence of
nations around the globe. In both instances the us rejoinder was so obviously
defensive, that few Americans appreciated the scope of the us commitment.
Nevertheless, 25 years after the end of World War II, the United States found
itself, more by default than design, an imperial power.
"Imperium Americana" has demonstrated the following four differences
when compared to the traditional meaning of the word "empire": first, the
United States has rarely insisted on direct political control of the affairs of its
host countries or cLient states; second, the United States has been unique in its
extent of rather selfless, idealistic commitment to the maintenance of inter-
national order, generation of economic growth and encouragement of demo-
cratic government; third, the American empire has arisen in an era of dramatic
increases in national power and independence. Its size is, therefore, no measure
of its influence relative to previous empires; fourth, the basic guidelines of
45
post-war American foreign policy were forged by a relatively few individuals
who succeeded in gaining the support of most American citizens for their
policies.
That this American empire is becoming a thing of the past is the central
hypothesis of the paper. The author speculates that historians of the year 2000
might regard us "retraction" as the predominant change in the distribution of
international power during the last three decades of this century.
Reasons for this envisaged retraction of power might be the following:
a. The depth of the present disenchantment with policies of the past. (In this
context the poll at the beginning of this paper is, to a certain extent, cited.)
The broad bipartisan consensus that characterized American foreign policy
for two decades after World War II has, at present, given way to wide-
spread bipartisan confusion;
b. The probable course of international events in the 1970's and thereafter-
a large number of plausible sequences of events are consistent with a con-
siderable withdrawal of American power;
c. The attitudes of young Americans today towards foreign policy in the
1970's.
As its title already indicates, the principal task ~f this paper is to deal with
this last consideration-to be more specific, it purports to answer the question
I
as to what the deeper attitudes of the 25-34 year old very elite Americans are
towards foreign policy at the beginning of the 1970's.
A SHORT ANSWER
The current priorities of young Americans are, with the notable exception
of Viet Nam, predominantly not issues of foreign policy. Rather, today the
objects of the greatest concern are overwhelmingly domestic: i.e. the poor,
the Blacks, the cities, the environment, law and order, the quality of American
life.
To the extent that foreign policy is currently important to young Americans,
they would be more inclined to "cool" foreign affairs; in other words, they
would wish Viet Nam to be over, defence budgets to be slashed, and inter-
national entanglements to be cut.
A LONGER ANSWER
Young American's attitudes towards foreign policy today are defined in
large part as challenges to, and questions about the following axioms that
seem to have governed American foreign policy in the post-war era. (These
axioms are stated starkly and are, therefore, of necessity a caricature; but a
caricature can be instructive.)
46
,!Z
AXIOMS OF THE POST-WAR ERA
r. The pre-eminent feature of international politics is the conflict between
communism and the free world.
2 . The surest simple guide to us interests in foreign policy is opposition to
communism.
3· Communism is on the march.
a. Communist governments are rising and Western democracies may be
declining. When will the Soviet Union overtake the us in economic
and military strength?
b. Soviet intentions vis-a-vis Western Europe are essentially aggressive.
c. The main source ofunrest, disorder, subversion, and civil war in under-
developed areas is communist influence and support.
4· Communism is monolithic.
a. Communism has some unique adhesive quality that can paste over
national and ethnic differences.
b. Since the communist bloc is cohesive, every nation that falls to com-
munism increases the power of the communist bloc in its struggle with
the free world.
5· The us has the power, responsibility and right to defend the free world
and maintain international order.
6. Peace is indivisible. Therefore, collective defence is necessary. The new
international order will be based primarily on us assumption of responsi-
bility, especially in demonstrating us willingness to resist aggression.
7· The Third World really matters.
a. It is the battle ground between communism and the free world.
b. Western capital will generate economic development and political
stability with a minimum of violence.
c. Instability is the great threat to progress in the Third World.
8. The us can play an important role in inducing European integration
which will, in some unspecified manner, solve the German problem.
g. Military strength is the primary route to national security.
a. Nuclear war is a serious possibility.
b. Nuclear proliferation is a certain road to disaster.
While the us has many domestic needs, the first order of business is us
national security, which is closely linked with the security of the free world.
These axioms were in more or less sophisticated versions widely believed,
''· and for 25 years after World War II American foreign policy was (roughly)
·consistent with these propositions as guidelines. Against this background parts
47
of President John F. Kennedy's Inaugural Address (January 2I, Ig66) , that ..
set the tone of us foreign policy for the last decade, are quoted.
Today young Americans question every one of the aforementioned proposi-
tions, and many would go further to assert the contrary of each. The following
axioms of young Americans are submitted as as a broad-brush caricature and
are stated in a stark and summary fashion as were the axioms of the older
generation.
AXIOMS OF YOUNG AMERICANS
I. While there are crucial differences between communist and democratic
regimes, the distinction between communism and the Free World is not
the critical divide.
2. Opposition to communism is a misleading guide for us foreign policy.
a. To the extent that the us has legitimate foreign policy objectives, they
are not summarized by the term "anti•communist".
b. Why is communist Cuba worse than "free" Haiti or Greece?
3· The Soviet Union is an established, status quo oriented power.
a. Future relations between the us and the Soviet Union will be character-
ized by negotiations, co-operation and convergence of interests.
4· Nationalism is stronger than communism.
a. IfNorth VietNam captured Southeast Asia, would she be a greater or
lesser threat to China?
b. If communist China captured India, would China be a greater or lesser
threat to the us?
5· The us has neither the power, nor the responsibility, nor the, right to
guarantee the defence of the Free World.
a. In the Third World, military involvement is more dangerous than
military isolation.
b. What right does the us have to be supporting and enforcing its concept
of what is good for other nations?
c. The us should reconsider all obligations to defend other nations.
6. Peace is divisible.
7· What could happen in Latin America, Africa, or Asia (with the possible
exception ofJapan) that could affect the security or vital interests of the
United States?
48
a. No foreseeable objective in the Third World could justify the expendi-
ture of 40.000 American lives and $ roo billion.
b. Wars, revolution, and violence are inevitable in many parts of the
world and will be necessary elements in economic and political develop-
ment.
Europe has recovered and should now assume primary responsibility for
its own problems, including defence.
g. Increasing military strength will only bring increased national insecurity.
a. Strategic "superiority" is meaningless.
b. Nuclear war is incredible.
c. Nuclear proliferation may be inevitable.
10. A number of pressing domestic requirements should have priority over all
current issues of foreign affairs.
The author emphasizes that these particular axioms are neither wholly
believed nor disbelieved; some of the propositions are even contradictory.
It is, therefore, suggested that it might be useful to think of the two sets of
axioms as polar types. The substantial difference in views between the older
generation and the current generation of young Americans, as manifested in
both groups of axioms, are made significant by the crucial experiences in which
these differences in attitudes are grounded.
The crucial experiences of the leaders who forged post-war American foreign
policy were the following: the aftermath of the First World War, the unavoid-
able lesson of isolationism, Munich and the failure of the West, the confidence
of being unselfconsciously right in World War II, false hopes shattered by
communist aggression, and the loss of Eastern Europe and China.
On the other hand, the crucial experiences of young Americans are Viet
Nam (rather than World War II), the Blacks, the poor, the problems of the
quality of national life. Furthermore, on the international level, the demise of
monolithic communism, the partial convergence ofinterests between the United
States and the Soviet Union and the fact that except for the Cuban Missile
Crisis in I g62 the fundamental character of international politics in the period
of young Americans' formative experiences has been essentially orderly.
What has the VietNam problem in particular taught young Americans?
I. A militant disbelief in the older axioms. The American government's
attempt to stretch the old guidelines in order to justify Viet Nam has
devalued that currency.
2. A deep doubt about the reliability of the us government as a source of
information.
g. An awareness that the us government is no more moral than other govern-
ments.
4· A recognition that even the United States can "lose" and, finally,
49
I
5· A knowledge that the costs of "empire" are borne disproportionately by
young Americans.
The author concludes by suggesting that the major American foreign policy
issue for the rest of this century will be the extent of'us military and political
involvement in external affairs. It is therefore important to stress that what
will soon be known as the lesson of involvement will be no less rooted in the
consciousness of young Americans today than were the "lessons ofisolationism"
in the previous g~neration. This con_trast hi~hlights ~~~ dual danger we face:
the older generatiOn has enormous d1fficulty m escapmg the lessons of the past
which may now be somewhat obsolete, while young Ainericans may have in-
sufficient historical perspective to distinguish between' froth and substance in
current situations.
A GENERAL REACTION BY AN AMERICAJN. PARTICIPANT
TO THE WORKING-PAPER
f~
One of the American participants gave the followi'ng general reaction to
the contents of the working paper:
The not too optimistic report reinforces the speaker's feeling that American
students are turning their backs on the study of history in favour of the soft
fashionable disciplines (or indisciplines) of sociology. Consequently, the nation
faces the awful possibility of a generation without memory, fated to blunder
on like a child, failing to recognize the follies and fallfLcies that history could
have pointed out. .
The quoted comments of activist youth are in fact, for the most part;
frighteningly naive and usually consist ofno more than tags and invectives.
It is moreover disquieting that any generation can appear to take seriously
the "Sayings of Chairman Mao", a tedious collection of bromides and banali-
ties.
To the extent that members of the nFw generation do briefly study history,
they tend to limit their knowledge to ,the scribblings of certain "revisionist"
historians who support distortions of events by quoting Marcuse or other
likeminded brothers within their own closed circle.
However, the working paper principally suggests to this speaker that the
older generation of Americans, because of a lack of honesty and clarity in
stating what objectives it was seeking through its foreign policy, bears a great
deal of responsibility for some of the younger generation's aberrations.
One of the first great us post-war mi~takes was in the phrasing of what has
since become known as the Truman Doctrine, brought to its most eloquent
expression in President Kennedy's Inaugural Address (;~uoted in the working
L,\
so
paper). This doctrine- according to which the Unites States would help any
nation anywhere defend itself against aggression from whatever source-
gravely overstated what Washington ever intended to do and consequently
confused not only other nations but even those charged with international
relations in the us administration.
The quite honorable and straightforward objective of American foreign
policy has in fact been to preserve peace by maintaining a precarious balance
of power with the Soviet Union and, more recently, with Mainland China.
To achieve this, the us had, with the aid of its allies, resisted the fracturing of
the de facto status-quo, established during the early post-war period.
Nevertheless, while practicing balance of power politics, the us felt com-
pelled to disavow such a course of action. The speaker suggests that this be-
haviour may to a certain extent be attributed to, for example, the utterances
of the Founding Fathers, President Woodrow Wilson and Secretary of State
James Byrnes, all of whom, albeit for different reasons, wished to renounce
balance of power politics, spheres of influence, etc.
The speaker suggests that there was a particular contrast between formula-
tion and policy during Mr. Dulles' tenure of office when the "tough game in a
tough league" of maintaining a power balance was presented as a "crusade
against Godless Communism". In spite of his pious talk about the "Liberation
of Eastern Europe", Secretary of State Dulles was, for example, the first to
award implicit recognition to the Soviet sphere of interest when Russian tanks
rolled into Budapest.
Inevitably this false formulation has ultimately misled the nation into the
quagmire of Vietnam where Tonkinese aggression was mistaken for Chinese
aggression. And because the intervention in Vietnam was undertaken on false
premises, it is likely to teach all the wrong lessons not only to young Americans
but to youth throughout the world.
Yet the speaker is not as certain as the American author of a substantial
withdrawal of American power and influence. Judging by experience in the
contemporary world it is unsafe to predict that when the United States with-
draws from a given area, other nations will take up the burden of necessary
defense. Against this background it is not at all certain what Washington will
decide.
DISCUSSION
DANGER OF A US RETRACTION FROM THE WORLD SCENE
During the discussion there seemed to be a concensus amongst American as
well as European participants that the current trend in the United States was
51
directed towards at least some qualified American withdrawal or retraction
around the world.
A Netherlands participant expressed his fear that the world might possibly,
even probably, soon witness a us retraction in the international scene. Should
Washington more or less abdicate its role around the globe, the very security
of the United States might in the end be directly affected and endangered.
An American withdrawal would result in a vacuum that would no doubt be
filled up by other powers which would, more often than not, be hostile to the
United States. Eventually the United States would by its very aloofness be
forced into a conflict with such powers in order to protect its own interests.
The Netherlands speaker also warned that us retractions would lead to retrac-
tions by others, resulting in a disequilibrium instead of a balance of power.
An American and two British participants warned against the danger of
isolationism in the us. The fabric ofseveral parts of the world being dependent
upon American conventional and/or nuclear military defence, would crumble
if this shield were to be withdrawn. One of the British speakers was moreover
not persuaded by the hypothesis that the development of cultural relations
and communications would prevent a us return to isolationism and a neglect
of its allies.
An American participant stressed that he deplored the use by several
speakers ofthe word "isolationism". There was only, according, to this observer,
"a trend towards some withdrawal" in the United States. Nevertheless, Wash-
ington has not withdrawn from any of its 42 alliances; this then is not the
same phenomenon as the isolationism of the 30's during which period the
present us involvement would have been inconceivable.
Another American participant, on the other hand, agreed with some of the
conclusions of the working paper although he thought they might even be an
understatement. These conclusions are that a. the next 25 years will witness
a retraction of American power around the world; b. the preoccupation of
young Americans with foreign affairs is-Vietnam excepted-at the bottom
of the list and c. there will consequently be a concentration on us domestic
problems. According to this speaker, the United Nations is the only inter-
national organ which still has the capacity to stimulate some interest among
young Americans. On the whole, there is every indication of such a major us
withdrawal from international affairs as to amount to a return to isolationism.
Hence a study on how to prevent isolationism is one of the major requirements
of our time; in this context it will be necessary to make the relevant dilemma's
real to young Americans.
A British participant suggested that the prevalent mood among younger
Americans today is similar to that of young Britishers in the 3o's; the latter
52
attempted to rationalise and perhaps justify their fears of having to fight by
persuading themselves that Hitler's Germany was not aggressive. Likewise
L.B.J.'s credibility gap and the loss of faith in the accuracy of us government
statements may be a rationalisation of younger Americans' desire to remove
themselves from the dangers of a threatening and unpleasant world.
Another British and an American participant, referring to the working
paper, emphasized that distrust ofinvolvement overseas was not only a preroga-
tive ofthe younger but also ofthe older generation in the us. The British speaker
suggested that the current inward-looking sentiments in America, partially
caused by the Vietnam conflict, were similar to those existing in the UK after
the Suez debacle in 1956. He added that of course Vietnam was not the only
reason for us retraction; undoubtedly the manifold "Yank go Home" slogans
on foreign walls must also have had an effect.
An American participant stressed that the Nixon Doctrine is not a rationalisa-
tion of American withdrawal around the globe. Its purpose is rather to find
ways of maintaining us responsibilities toward the rest of the world while
taking into account .the actual changes of circumstances in us relations with
other countries as well as the fact that the balance of power is essentially a
psychological structure. In a sense the us role is being updated because other
countries now have a greater capacity than formerly to sustain their indepen-
dence and integrity~ Furthermore, the two superpowers no longer have the
ability, that still did exist ten years ago, to influence the actions of other
countries. Nevertheless, when us policies are adapted to these changes, this
should not cause a nm on the bank; the us administration must in any case
maintain the credibility of its commitments. If such a goal is to be attained,
this can only be dohe by enlisting the support of those under 30. In this con-
nection the question must be asked how an administration bent on sustaining
its commitments might cope with its constituents-also those above thirty.
In what manner c_
an the argument be made credible that if the United States
"packed up" the world would be a worse place to live in?
Two other participants, referring principally to the previous speakers'
remarks about the Nixon Doctrine, stated that it would be very recommendable
to examine what events in present day international politics might constitute
"a new Munich".
US RETRACTION IN WESTERN EUROPE
There seemed to be a concensus that in case us power is to some degree
withdrawn from Western Europe, it would be desirable if the affluent Euro-
peans of the 7o's could fill the gap with their own resources. A marked dif-
53
1~ '
h
ference of opinion existed, however, about the desirability of us military retrac-
tion from the European continent.
According to a British participant, there exists a growil)lg fear in Europe that
us participation will cease to be credible and that Wash~ngton can no longer
be relied upon to commit its forces. The result might be that Europe will
"turn in on itself" as an organ of foreign and defensive 90licy. Already Euro-
pean powers are making functional defensive adjustments such as the British
dispatch of the 6th Brigade to Germany to replace Canadian contingents and
the German offer to pay more in order to keep us troops in the Central Sector.
This British speaker is not happy about such a trend and mggests that confi-
dence in the us would be strengthened if the us would not reduce its commit-
ments.
A Norwegian speaker emphasized that recent events in Czechoslovakia have
demonstrated that there exists no short-cut to detente. Negotiations with the
Soviet block must be conducted from a basis of military strength and political
solidarity. Supported by an Icelandic participant, th¢ Norwegian speaker
stressed that force levels must not be reduced unless tin the framework of
mutual and balanced force reductions between East and West. Unilateral
American reductions in Europe will weaken the Western MBFR negotiating
position, upset the balance ofpower in a serious fashion, stimulate the reduction
of Western European forces, and lead td a lower level of conventional forces
so that the strategy of flexible response will become less reJllistic. Furthermore,
a us reduction of conventional forces might lead to Germany filling the gap
which would not be conducive to detente and might .iclditionally stimulate
the idea ofa European Nuclear Force which is contrary to the Soviet-American
non-proliferation policy. A British speaker added that West European nations,
even with the assistance of the Federal Republic, would not in the foreseeable
future be able to erect a nuclear force wh:ich would have a striking power that
could be compared to the size of the present us and Soviet nuclear capability
(including the "delivery systems"). To attempt to do so ;would lead to a waste
of resources on a preposterous scale. Furthermore this British participant
agreed with the previous speaker that the Western deter'rent would be under-
mined by unilateral us troop reductions that were carried out without previous
consultations with the NATO allies and without a contemporaneous increase in
West European military contributions. ·' ·
A British and an International participant feared thilt not only American
but also European troop-reductions would take place in the 70's. As Europeans
start doubting the total effectiveness of the NATO deterrent this might lead to a
defence disintegration; individual countries will comm~nce drawing up their
own defence insurance policies leading ~oward differertt (also nuclear) direc-
54
tions. The international speaker expressed his hope that the Europeans, while
almost certainly reducing their overall forces in the 197o's, might, particularly
at the technical level, simultaneously construct a more rational and "tighter"
defense organisation. Under these circumstances the total number of 2.ooo.ooo
West European soldiers could indeed to some extent be reduced in a responsible
fashion without endangering the conventional and nuclear security balance in
a detente situation. Answering a Netherlands participant's questions about the
future of the British and French independent nuclear deterrent systems, an-
other British speaker stated that he did not believe these forces could in the
foreseeable future be used as a dependable deterrence shielding the Federal
Republic. In other words, without Bonn being actively involved, an effective
European nuclear deterrence system could not really exist.
An American speaker warned that Europeans should not lash their hopes
for the future (with regard to us military presence in Europe) to a sinking
ship, while there are safer alternatives. When questioned by other participants
what these alternatives might be, the aforementioned speaker was unable to
provide a concrete answer. Supported by two compatriots, he did emphasize
that Europeans and Americans could most usefully address themselves to
possible actions that might be undertaken to place security considerations in
a healthy perspective. Backed up by another compatriot, he furthermore
warned Europeans against clinging to the present number of American troops
as the only evidence of the us commitment. In investing that symbol with more
weight than it deserves, the Europeans would be making a fundamental
mistake.
The aforementioned speaker also emphasized that Europeans should not
use the argument that they would not be able or willing to fill the military gap
created by us retraction; such an assertion would only play into the hands of
American isolationists.
A Canadian member stated that on the one hand there were enough us
.nuclear stockpiles in Europe to meet any Soviet scenario, while on the other
hand there were insufficient conventional forces to constitute a credible flexible
response (except against limited incursions) . Against this background the
speaker asked whether the North American commitment to the defence of
Europe remained credible by the manifested presence of us and Canadian
troops which might only be described as hostages.
A Norwegian member answered that the NATO conventional force levels are
strong enough to support flexible response today, but this might possibly not
be the case if other nations were to follow the recent example of unilateral
.troop reductions by a country close to the previous speaker's heart.
An international participant added that although the North American
55
military posture in Europe might seem insufficient to us, we have no way
knowing whether from the Soviet point of view this American presence
not raise the "risk-factor" to a level where aggression becomes an unaccepta(
course of action. A similar evaluation might, however, not be made by
if American forces are withdrawn and substituted by European
especially as the tactical nuclear weapons and the major strategic strike
behind Western conventional forces are also American. In other words,
present deterrent thinking should also be governed by the other party's esti•
mated perception of what we are doing.
A British speaker thought that the withdrawal of us troops from
might serve as an instigation for the Europeans to do more themselves.
members stated that the Europeans are currently too complacent about
cal, economic and military actions that need to be taken in the face of possible
us military retraction from the Central European Sector. An American
participant thought that if and when Europeans gave proof of their burden-
sharing, this would cause a favourable shift in us legislative and public opinion.
An American participant expressed the belief that there would be a period
of us withdrawal from Europe. This retraction will not constitute a rejection
of Europe in a positive sense but will come as a result of a severe crisis within
the United States, which threatens the internal security of the nation. After
having solved its internal difficulties the us will effect a comeback; eventually
Europe and the World will be better off as a result of this withdrawal-and-
return since the us will then be in a stronger position than previously.
A French participant stated that, although he could understand the pre-
occupation of some Europeans with the balance of power, he did not attach
a great deal ofimportance to a us military contribution in Europe, particularly
if Europe were able to constitute a veritable, well organised, military force of
its own. He added that from a realistic point of view it should not be possible
for France to have both a nuclear and a conventional force without destroying
its own national economy. Unhappily it does not seem possible to renounce
either of these forces so that France is confronted with a deadlocked situation.
Another Frenchman stated that he did not find the maintenance of us
troops in Europe entirely useless.
An American speaker asserted that the us administration attaches great
importance to the maintenance of us commitments in Europe. It has stated
repeatedly that there would be no reduction of us trooplevels in the European
Central Sector before the end offiscal I97 I (i.e. June I97I). As yet no decision
has been taken beyond fiscal I 97 I ; future force levels and strategy are still
under review by the National Security Council. Insofar as it is possible to
speculate on the outcome of the review it would, according to this speaker,
s6
an anticipation of the Administration's determination to maintain force
beyond fiscal 1971. !
Finally, another American participant speculated that a lowering of us
r.onventional force levels in the Central Sector might very well also positively
the force levels at the .other side of the Iron Curtain.
NATO
An international participant stressed three propositions: a. NATO is essential
security interests and needs of the free world; b. an organised collective
is essential to a viable NATO and c. a us force of current size is necessary
the organisation of such an organised collective force.
The international participant furtherinore stated that NATO goals are
, deterrence and solidarity. The deterrence, which consists of con-
.ventional, tactical nuclear and strategic nuclear forces, might become less
credible if and when the necessary forces were not in position. In this context
it would be appropriate tO question whether gaps in the NATO Central European
Sector, caused by a possible future withdrawal of us conventional forces, might
be filled by the European NATO allies. According to the speaker, European
leaders have suggested this would not happen. To the contrary, an earlier
decrease of American troop contingents in 1967 was followed by similar action
and "restructurisation" of other allied, NATO earmarked forces in Europe.
Moreover, even if the Europeans did provide forces to fill the gap, the inter-
national speaker doubted whether they could be really substituted for the
former us military role.
The international participant suggested that the Europeans might do well
to create their own centre of power; in such a case the Soviets would perhaps
show themselves more willing to reduce the causes of tension (i.e. the enormous
Warsaw Pact forces oyerhanging the narrow fringe of Western Europe).
This might for example be done by means of mutual and balanced force reduc-
tions. Only when this has come to pass, can the us military contribution to the
NATO Central European Sector be safety altered.
An American participant stated that the present Administration in Washing-
ton regards us participation in and commitment to NATO as the fundamental
cornerstone for any serious longterm effort to construct a more stable and
peaceful world.
A Netherlands speaker emphasized that for a long time to come NATO will
be a great necessity. He'added that at present there is a general shift ofemphasis
within the Alliance from purely military toward civilian matters, such as
East-West relations including a possible European Security Conference, the
studies on the environment, etc.
57
The Netherlands participant was of the opinion -that if the us were to
partially withdraw their forces from the NATO Central Sector, if the (naval) ·
balance ofpower in the Mediterranean were not improved, and if the influence
of the "new left" in NATO member countries continued to grow, the chances
of reaching agreement with the Soviet Union would diminish accordingly.
For it is, according to this speaker, only in a situation ofbalance that the Krem-
lin might wish to negotiate.
A Portuguese speaker noted that today's questions surrounding NATO
different from those in I949· The current question is: what kind of
do we want, a purely military organisation or also a~,ipolitical organisation
defend our political and ideological values? It is d~ubtful whether a
creating NATO today, would be signed with provisionsfidentical to those in the
I949 Treaty. Hence it is necessary that the near future should bring about a
reappraisal and reconsideration of NATO in the context of present political
realities. These realities are currently not only col}!
nned to threats
Europe and North America, but also consist of a substantial threat on a
scale. :j
An international participant stated that in the I~J7o's NATO could only
justify its existence by actively striving for detente. A British speaker felt that ..
NATO was becoming overwhelmed by its own success; because it had been
successful in preventing war during the past 20 yeab, people had really r
gotten what the basic "raison d'etre" of the Alliance:in fact is.
A French speaker declared that France should remain in the North Atlantic
Alliance; membership of the North Atlantic Council gives France an oppor-
tunity to explain its position. The foundations of the {\lliance should, however,
not be of an exclusively military nature, but should also extend towards
political and social levels. Furthermore, the Alliance should have a political
ideology; in this framework the French speaker deplored the situation
Greece. Moreover, the French speaker added, the time has come to redefine,
within the framework of the Alliance~ a new type ofsociety and thereby reply
to the aspirations of North American and European youth.
A German speaker noted that few Europeans think there is any political
objective which might make the Soviets run the risk of an all-out confrontation
with NATO. Against this background he wondered whether, as has been the
doctrine until this date, NATO should be ready for the extreme case (i.e. an
out Warsaw Pact attack against the NATO Central Sector and the flanks), or
on the other hand whether it should only prepare itselffor the more probable.
case (i.e. a smaller localised conflict in the Berlin area, the northern flank, or
the south-eastern flank). The speaker concluded by'·stating that we (NA
still do not know what a commitment really is; perhaps a higher us economic
ss
involvement in Europe may compensate for the withdrawal of American
troops from the Central Sector.
EUROPEAN SECURITY CONFERENCE
An American participant stated that the current us Administration's com-
parative lack of interest in a European Security Conference was caused by the
fact that Warsaw Pact proposals for such a meeting were not focussed on the
objective of European Security. The Prague Communique dated October 3I,
1969 only mentioned the mutual renunciation of force (redundant because of
article 2 ofthe UN Charter) and discussions on technical scientific, and economic
co-operation as possible agenda items for a European Security Conference.
The NATO allies, on the other hand, had at the Reykjavik Ministerial meeting
inJune Ig68, the Washington Ministerial meeting in April Ig6g, and the Brus-
sels Ministerial meeting in December I g6g offered serious negotiations on
mutual and balanced force reductions. The NATO Ministerial Council would
probably offer more specific MBFR proposals at its May I970 meeting in Rome.
The interest ofthe us Administration in these proposals lies in the opportunity
they afford the Soviet Union and its allies to indicate a willingness to engage
. in serious negotiations towards detente. For it is the kind of evidence, which
Washington seeks, indicating that detente can actually be brought about that
constitutes the only possible point of disagreement between the United States
and some of its European allies. In this connection the speaker emphasized
that the significance of this Administration's "era of negotiation" is that it
would afford "correct evidence of actual realities".
A Netherlands speaker stated that it is now generally accepted that the
United States and Canada, if they so wish, will attend a possible European
Security Conference. The GDR will also participate, such a participation will,
however, not imply recognition. The Dutch participant also referred to recent
NATO Ministerial Communique's proposing negotiations on MBFR, Germany
·and Berlin and to the Warsaw Pact's unsatisfactory reply in the Prague Com-
munique of October 3I, Ig6g. The speaker concluded by saying that as long
·as there is no agreement on a substantial agenda and no prospect of some
results-"even very modest concrete results"-it is far from certain that a
European Security Conference can be held.
A Portuguese participant was of the opinion that the Soviet Union has been
promoting the idea of a European Security Conference as a means of effective
propaganda. Moscow is fully aware that its proposals, expressed in the Prague
'·Communique, cannot be accepted by the West. By refusing mutual renuncia-
tion offorce and technical scientific and economic co-operation as ESC agenda-
items, the West is left with the burden of a negative stand.
59
GERMANY AND BERLIN
The discussion on this subject developed against the background ofa German
participant's extensive introduction (see annex page 83) and mainly concen-
trated on Chancellor Brandt's Ostpolitik.
An American participant stated that the us Administration does not feel
the degree of malaise toward Chancellor Brandt's Ostpolitik, that has been
attributed to it by some outsiders. If Washington has not in public appeared
more "hospitable" with regard to Herr Brandt's overtures towards the Soviet
Union and East European countries, it is only because of American sensitivity
about interfering in the affairs of other nations. Indeed, the United States is of
the opinion that negotiations by the Federal Republic with Moscow, Pankow
and Warsaw might have the same potential significance as President Nixon's
"era of negotiations". Also Washington believes that Chancellor Brandt has
not exaggerated the hopes of the Ostpolitik's possible success. Failure to
achieve at least some accomodation with the East would be instructive vis-a-vis
the possibilities of detente-the more so since the German issue is the most
central and substantive of current European problems.
A Netherlands and a German participant agreed that the policies of the
Federal Republic are crucial for the future ofEurope. The former believed that
if Chancellor Brandt persists in his Ostpolitik and has sufficient political sup-
port in the Bundestag, he might be able to diffuse the dangerous and hypocritical
situation currently existing in Central Europe. Simultaneously he would be
justified in pointing out Pankow's present inflexibility toward changing its
policies.
Another Netherlands speaker emphasized that the allies, given present
circumstances, can do little else but to assist Chancellor Brandt in his efforts .
to find some legal formula to recognise the GDR and the Oder-Neisse Line;
the Western democracies should, however, not force his hand by their premature
recognition of Pankow. There is, however, in general, according to this speaker,
no serious opposition against a recognition of the status-quo in Germany; the
only concrete obstacle is of a legal nature, i.e. a clause in the constitution of
Federal Republic stipulating "Alleinvertretung" or sole right ofrepresentation.
A larger majority than can presently be acquired within the Bundestag would
be needed to ammend this provision; in order to obtain that majority, psycho-
logical problems within the Federal Republic would first have to be solved.
A German participant pointed out that official utterances by Chancellor
Brandt are not only directed toward the amelioration of the psychological
problems within the Federal Republic, but are also, in fact, intended to im-
prove the special relations between the two Germanies and the situation
6o
within and around Berlin. The aim of ~onn's foreign policy is not only to
reach an agreement on ·some formula based on the status-quo, but also to
bring about real progress in East-West relations.
An International speaker considered some elements constituting the status-
quo (to which the previous participant had referred), as being unacceptable.
·In this context he referred to the Berlin wall.
AGerman participant warned that the Ostpolitik, which in itself constitutes
aconstructive policy, might entail the following three dangers: a retardation
· ofprogress towards unity in Western Europe, a further weakening of the West-
ern Alliance and a loosening of the Federal Republic's ties to the West. A
rather disengaged public opinion in Western countries generally tends to
regard the Ostpolitik asa predominantly German affair. It would, however,
be an overestimation to believe that Bonn can carry out the Ostpolitik by
itself.
The same speaker wondered whether the West would stand to gain by talks
between Brandt and Stoph at Kassel in May. At any rate Bonn would have
shown its good will by ~emonstrating its preparedness to make sacrifices for
detente. Simultaneously it would be instructive-also for other Western
countries- to test the possibilities ofreaching at least some agreement. Because
of the sympathy that the Ostpolitik causes in Western countries, the Federal
blic might be ev~n more "accepted" than previously and might thereby
accelerate the process of West European integration.
A Danish speaker e~phasized that the Federal Republic's efforts with
regard to Ostpolitik can only succeed against the background of a strong us
political presence in Europe.
Another German participant expressed the belief that Pankow's goals in
conducting talks with Bonn are r) political and legal recognition; 2) (as had
previously been stated) a loosening of Bonn's ties with NATO and 3) a reduction
of the presence in the Federal Republic of companies with transnational
interests (in this context IBM is especially referred to by East Germany).
The same speaker felt that there was a "certain exaggeration of hopes"
within the West German population with regard to the Brandt-Staph talks.
In this context he warned against a possible "back-lash". He, nevertheless,
also believed that Bonn should try to see how far it could go in reaching an
agreement that might be instructive to other Western countries.
Finally, a German speaker pointed out the following differences between
East Germany and other East European countries:
East Germany has the highest standard of living and is the second
cer in the communist world; it therefore has a relatively strong position
6r
in the Soviet camp and is no longer always passively receiving ·
from Moscow.
2. While East Germany preaches abstinence to all East European
in dealing with Bonn, it nevertheless quietly builds up its own very
trade relationship with the Federal Republic (and thereby profits ·
from the advantages of the Common Market). Inevitably the East
countries find this attitude unacceptable and are therefore starting to
with the West Germans-a course of action which inherently weakens Par .
3· East Germany, contrary to the other East European countries,
as was recently demonstrated at Ehrfurt, possess national communism.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Several speakers were surprised by the fact that the Soviet i
Czechoslovakia and its aftermath had been completely omitted from
American working paper. An Icelandic participant in particular stated
(American) youth has apparently not been impre~,sed by events in
slovakia, nor noticed that Moscow has once again'shown that it has
linquished expansion when there is no counter-force present to
action. A British speaker added that a lack of interest amongst us
Czechoslovakia might point to a certain (expandin;g) trend toward
isolationism. .
A us participant answered that .the American author had not
Czechoslovakia because Americans· equate Soviet action against that
with us intervention in the Dominican Republic.
COMMON MARKET
A number of speakers agreed that much has h~ppened since
Gaulle's veto against British entryiinto the Common Market. The
community has progressed from a state of paralysis to "a certain
movement" in several areas.
In this context a Netherlands participant referred to the problem
cultural financing (which has to all intents and purposes been solve~
wine agreement), the reinforcement of the Common Market structure
current striving for a future financial union via an economic union
efforts toward some framework of political co-operation), the ·
of the European Parliament (which will acquire some more r~""
budgetary field but will not have the right to reject budgets) and
the envisaged enlargement of Common Market membership
62
an encouraging progress in determining the conditions of the negotiations
there are also some accompanying dangers).
French speaker expressed the belief that .the problems surrounding the
~;budgetary power of the European Parliament would not be insurmountable.
furthermore emphasized that Western Europe should move energetically
only with regard to its internal organisation but also with regard to its
sian; the time is now ripe, according to this speaker, to deal with British
into the Common Market. President de Gaulle's opposition to the UK
ppucation had not been of a definite nature. In this context the speaker
by referring to the General's conversation with Ambassador
"In due course a man not entirely European was becoming a Euro-
; the trouble was that some well-known European statesmen did not
themselves to being pleased with such a conversion but immediately
the General for proof (of his conversion) and even for contrition!"
participant stated that the rather selfish Common Market external
policies (in addition to, for example, the Labour Party's decision to
British troops east of Suez) may have had an adverse effect upon
:nauonalist sentiments within the United States.
speakers reiterated that American withdrawal from the European
must be matched by increased European unity and particularly by
entry into the Common Market.
orwegian participant stated that British entry into the Common Market
be expedited if the European Community were to commence organising
Defence Structure.
a British speaker emphasized that another failure of the UK in its
to enter the Common Market would be disastrous for public opinion
Britain; already the common agricultural policy and the prospect of
did not appeal to the public and particularly not to the young.
speaker concluded by saying that it would.be wise to have, besides
States, another unified political entity on a larger scale where a
attempt could also be made to solve the perennial problems
environmental deterioration, technological progress, mass education,
speakers expressed the opinion that the Harris Poll at the beginning
(see page 45) was not entirely dependable. To a certain extent,
incomplete phraseology of the questions is suggestive and leads those
viewed in a certain direction; moreover, the problems are some-
since they are considered out ofcontext. An American speaker, for
6g
example, suggested that the poll had been conducted in an atmosphere of
relative international tranquility; if one of the four events suggested in
quiz actually occurred, there would undoubtedly be enormous exitement
that the answers in that case might be quite different.
Another American speaker, however, wondered what the results would
been if the same poll were conducted on a nation-wide basis (and had not
confined to 1200 Americans of all ages). He suggested that the general
might have been "about the same". Symptomatic is the public support
57 us Senators of the Mansfield resolution which requires the Adminis
to consult Congress before the former's actions might lead to further overseas
involvement.
This speaker nevertheless agreed with other, notably British, American
Turkish participants, that a rephrasing of the questions might have
different answers.
THE OLDER AND THE YOUNGER GENERATION
Several speakers agreed that within the United States there is a
foreign and military policy dispute under way which in fact is not a
issue at all. Paradoxically, according to two American members, us
policy, in particular, is being called into question by some of the very
who helped shape it. A British and a third American speaker emphasized
distrust of overseas involvement is not only a prerogative of the
generation. A Turkish participant agreed that in foreign policy there ·
cleavage between the older and younger generation; most of the slogans
rently used by the latter have been borrowed from the former. Also,
to the Turkish participant, the older people seem to be doing everything
their power to placate the young. A Netherlands speaker stated that
the us and the West European countries should not be given the
to induce their governments to change policies; rather, national aurmnm.r
tions should adapt their dialectics to present mentalities in order to
their current policies. A us participant added "en marge" that younger
cans would probably not very much care if, for example, us oil, copper
interests abroad were to be nationalised; they would, however,
object if these commodities were to be rationed inside the United States,
result of such a "take-over".
Another us speaker pointed out that not so long ago 25% ofAmerican
were in favour offormer governor Wallace as a potential presidential
For the first time in over thirty years the term "conservative" producetl
majority in the United States. More specifically, the majority consisted
populist-conservative movement which pitted its strength against the
64
"cosmopolitans" (i.e. students, inteliectuals, industrial leaders, etc.).
Still another American participant stated that us youth is seeking a new
state craft and demanding new leadership-not a balance of terror nor
foreign policy established by self-interest. It wishes the United States to
leadership in challenging and discarding old outmoded policies, and,
tl:.moreover, to seek a substitute for automatic military response as a solution
differences in views and ideologies. Young Americans, in fact, desire action
is visible and demonstrative: hence long-range diplomatic subtleties,
~::iMtigated by so-called diplomatic realities, will be practically unacceptable to
younger generation.
Finally, an American speaker asserted that, contrary to its elders, 65-70%
the American population under 45 is, because of their experiences, disinclined
fear Soviet aggression (while accepting that the Soviet Union would inter-
in its own sphere of influence without endangering Western Europe).
younger Americans do, however, fear, and will therefore resist, the ex-
of maintaining overseas troops, be it in Europe, Japan, Okinawa or
i'.l:""'w'a. Consequently, when the younger generation assumes leadership from
elders, it will ·most certa.inly reduce American overseas military commit-
and will probably insist on greater risks in its striving for detente.
6s
ECOLOGY
The paper that formed the basis for the discussi()hs on what has
known as the "environmental problem" was written.'by a German
THE IMPERATIVES OF ECOLOGY: T HE IMPACT OF
ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS ON THE FUTURE
OF INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
J. INTRODUCTION
!_
The problem of man's relationship to his physical and social
has moved to the foreground of political preoccupation in practically
country. Relevant national programs have been developed, while ·
organisations (oECD, NATO, UNO) are also beginning to concentrate on this
One of the striking aspects of the present debate on the environmental
is, however, the absence of much concern and speculation about its in
on the future of international politics. This may be due to the following
reasons: a. the tendency of most politicians and scientists to view the soluuons
of social problems and priorities primarily in the national context, and b.
the indeterminate nature of the problem and a lack of information on its
substance.
II. WHAT KIND OF ENVIRONMENT AND WHAT KIND OF FUTURE?
The issue may be clarified if one imagines a spectrum of environmental
problems: whereas at the one end one would find the , , u
agents (pollution or lowering of the ground water level), the other end would
be occupied by the socio-political problems (wild growth of cities,
of public services etc.). Between these two points the physical-technological
and the socio-political dimensions are mixed in varying proportions.
Because of the extensive nature of these problems, this paper limits itself to
the environmental problems which :;tre nearer to the physical-technological
rather than the socio-political end cif the spectrum. The author emphasi
however, that there are no environmental problems which are of a
physical-technical nature and which could consequently be solved through
mere application of a counterbalancing technology. . ·
The author will extrapolate from present trends irt-attempting to
66
,,.
to cope-with the environmental problems with a view to assessing
consequences for international politics and demonstrating the need
solutions, and for suggesting some modalitites.
THE INESCAPABLE PROBLEM
Environmental problems are of course principally a result of economic
growth, technological progress and social change. Three examples ofintriguing
cases that are amongst others responsible for the gradual destruction of the
biosphere are: a. the lead contamination of the air (mostly through gasoline) ;
the "normal" and accidental petroleum spills at sea and c. the emission of
some twelve billion tons of carbon dioxide a year plus carbon monoxide and
which may well initiate a change in world climate.
These developments, even though technological in nature, can have a
impact on social life, for example by causing a deterioration of the
and mental health of entire populations and areas or severe limitation
economic activities. Hence, unlike some other issues facing the international
, the environmental problem, which mankind can observe and
is bound to become worse, must inescapably be dealt with.
FROM WELFARE ECONOMICS TO ECOLOGICAL ECONOMICS
Even a minimum program to deal with the worst cases of destruction of the
requires expenditures of staggering proportions. For example,
plants and service facilities will have to make adjustments to counter-
act emissions of various forms of waste; cities and towns must invest millions
they will, in order to preserve or increase their viability, have to be
· cped and since they will, in order to safeguard their economic activities
also have to solve the perennial problems of pollution, waste-disposal and
mfrastructure; and last but not least, gargantuan efforts must be made to meet
minimum requirement of feeding people.
Our understanding of the interaction between environmental deterioration
and health, climate or social organization is only superficial.
Therefore, huge investments will have to be made in research, effected in
to acquire the necessary knowledge and to develop the necessary means
solve these problems.
Two outcomes are likely: firstly, the debate on the priorities ofenvironmental
and the distribution of the financial burden will be an important issue
all developed countries; secondly, the solution of the environmental issues
.cannot be left to self-stabilizing mechanisms-they require regulation, ex-
} penditures and redistribution of resources and national income. Consequently,
the ecological issue is almost certain to bring about a large scale intervention
67
•
by political authorities which in turn will lead to a qualitative advance of the
welfare state.
V. POSSIBLE IMPACTS ON INTERNATIONAL POLITICS
a. "Domesticism" vs. External lnvolvment
The question of environment is likely to further strengthen the
toward "domesticism" which can already be observed in a number of
tries. Such a strengthening is motivated by the fact that the demands of voters
traditionally focus more on the immediate issues at home rather than on either
future problems or on problems in more remote areas.
An increased trend towards domesticism might very well be conducive
inducing political incentives in East and West- specifically in W
and Moscow-towards a lowering of military spending and might
improvesomeofthe conditions for detente. Moreover, the
might also lead to increased cooperation between states. Ecological
which would have to be overcome by a government, are not only caused
origins within that government's borders; indeed national solutions can be
by third parties. For example, the best German program to clean the Rhine
will remain futile unless Switzerland and France cooperate.
b. Conflict vs. Multi-national Cooperation
As the environmental problem becomes increasingly aggravating
dustrial societies, it is also likely to lead to conflicts between states.
sharing rivers, lakes, oceans and neighbouring states suffering from
ground water pollution etc. are likely to encounter considerable difficulties
distributing their various responsibilities. But while the propensity for
rises, the incentives for cooperation are also likely to become stronger, espeuauy
where nations directly and visibly interfere with each other (e.g. river
tion); cooperation will be less likely when the difficulties appear
space and time or national boundaries are not crossed as in the cases
ocean, the outer air layers, or the global climate.
c. Regional vs. Global Forms of Ecological Politics
Political and administrative cooperation on ecological problems is most
likely to be attained by states that are situated in geographical vicinity to eac~
other, sharing for example a lake, a sea, a river or a frontier that cuts through
industrialized and populated areas. Both the Baltic and the Rhine are
possibilities, as there exists an incentive for ecological politics along
lines. On the whole he believes that Europe, because of the advanced state
68
1anzauon and the intensive social, economic and political interaction
among many ofits nations, has the highest potential for such regional ecological
This potential is significantly lower in other areas such as Australia
Japan (countries with few neighbours) and to a lesser degree in the us, the
and China (nations whose land masses "absorb" many environmental
problems).
It should, however, be stated that national and regional approaches (with
aid of private and semi-public groupings as well as ofinternational organi-
zations) to solve ecological issues can only be preliminary or complementary
a global approach.
APPROACHES TO DEAL WITH THE PROBLEM
The author suggests that "desirable futures can be invented". The haphazard
,way in which governments now deal w~th the question of environment bears
relation to such an active approach to creating the future; no clear model for
prospective society hasas yet been made and or even partially implemented.
Toward Multinational Project Politics?
The often too narrow political and bureaucratic structures of nation states
some extent still confine themselves to correcting ephemeral and often un-
related developments. They possess only marginal capacities to effectively
the results of modern science and technology for the overall welfare of
society. The environmental problems require for their solution a new synthesis
of government, science and industry which could be organized around those
·~ national or regional problems that are regarded as urgent and
a sufficient willingness to act exists. As an example the author suggests
· possible multinational Baltic Sea Project aided by common scientific bodies,
might be organized to study the future of the Baltic, its pollution,
life, the future of its fishing industry etc. Similar projects can be
lmagined for many other urgent matters.
b. The Role ofInternational Organizations
International organizations, through preliminary study, identification of
"cores" of problems and, last but not least, their coordinating function, could
play an important role as initiators of specific environmental projects. With
to possible coordination the author suggests that because of the inter-
connection between a multitude of problems, regional functional multilateral
cannot proceed very far without dealing with other problems that are
to their own subject matter. (For instance a project to clean an inter-
r:•,,nanonai river would have to be linked to the development of and regulations
6g
about new types of detergent.) It is here that an international organizanon
can tie together a number of such projects along regional and/or functional
lines.
A number of problems, such as the development!of the world climate, or
the preservation of the oceans, would, however, not require a regional but a
global approach. Under these circumstances regional initiatives might
many instances serve as a useful complement. But
1
regardless of the level
which international organizations become involved, most of them will have
make substantial adjustments in their internal structure and working methods,
for example, by synthesising the spheres of administration, research an1
production. '
VII. CONCLUSION
The author concludes by stating that in the process of solving the steadily
worsening environmental problems, the most difficul,i:: task of practitioners and
theorists of politics will be to make sure that the p*i'fuacy of politics and the
democratic nature of political control are maintaine(L
DISCUSSION
ENVIRONMENT AND ECONOMICS
An International participant agreed with the author of the working
that the environmental problems could not be solv~d by simply applying a
counter balancing technology. Inevitably, political decisions would have to be
made on, for example, the establishment of prioriti,es for the allocation of
resources. In other words, the environmental issue ,must be brought
the perspectives of economic thinking and economic policy. Until the present,
this has not been the case; several environmental elements such as water, air
and the absence of noise have nev~r been considered as economic goods. <
Moreover, economic policies have 1~sually been aimed at quantitative and
objectively measurable goals (such as the increase of GNP, national income,
employment and price stability); conversely qualitative goals were
systematically built into economic planning.
Thus in the 1970's Western countries should agree not only on quantitative
but also on qualitative economic objectives. To achieve this goal the environ-
mental issue should be brought into practical economic policy along
following concrete lines:
a. technological research on ecological problems should be continued;
b. assessments of environmental effects in quantitatiVe terms should be made
70
in order to establish estimates of the costs that would be required in order
to prevent, reduce, or eliminate ecological problems;
c. conclusions would have to be reached as to who (industry, agriculture,
consumers and/or tax-payers) would finance these costs and
decisions will have to be taken about the general allocation of resources
within the framework of overall government policy; subsequently the
application of these decisions will have to be executed through the appro-
priate forms of legislation etc.
A Canadian participant agreed with the previous speaker that the environ-
mental problem should substantially be brought into economics. He suggested
that if this were really to happen beyond the fringe of economic thinking,
such action would require a radical reformulation of economic theory. The
speaker stated in this context that some ro years previously he had attempted
to arouse the interest of several staff members of the Royal Commission on
Canada's Economic Prospects for the environmental issue. Unhappily he
failed in this endeavour, principally because the traditional economic structures
to which these staff-members adhered rejected any consideration of the quality
oflife, conservation, or any other ecological subjects.
The Canadian speaker furthermore wondered whether, as the author of the
working paper had been indicating in the paper, uncontrolled technological
and economic change should really more or less passively be considered as an
inevitable and given development for the future. He suggested that a "wiser
and more beneficial attitude might be to test large scale proposed technical
changes" before the bar of human criteria on their probable effects on the
environment. Certainly such a course of action would in the longrun be
cheaper than the expenses incurred by the ex post facto rectification of the
side effects ofuncontrolled economic and technological changes.
ENVIRONMENT AND SCIENCE
A Swiss participant stated that the environmental problem contains two
distinctly different aspects: firstly, the acquisition ofbasic scientific information
onthespecific ecologicalissues, and, secondly, the consideration of the-usually
political- implications of such scientific information. These two aspects are
interrelated. For example, the degree to which inconvenient and disagreeable
political sacrifices to solve, improve, or prevent environmental problems can be
made, is often dependent on the conviction among the public that such
sacrifices are in fact worthwhile. The necessary conviction can only be estab-
lished by a clear and unequivocal explanation by scientists of the nature, and
more specifically, the menace to society, of these scientific problems. In this
71
connection the speaker discerns a "certain danger" in the current fad
dealing with the ecological problems except by means of a few slogans
few appeals to common sense; such an approach will certainly not be
to the necessary conviction.
Against this background the Swiss speaker considers the question of
ment an excellent reason to appeal to the sense of responsibility
scientists and university officials; moreover, such a course of action
be a pretext in favour ofeffecting a much needed integration between
and society.
ENVIRONMENT AND MAN'S MENTAL HEALTH
A Frenchspeaker referred to recent agricultural studies in European
and specifically to the Common Market Mansholt-Plan, according to
there was a probability that, owing to agricultural overproduction,
farm-lands would have to be reallocated for other purposes. It would
desirable, according to this participant, if areas that became available could
utilized to disengage urban concentrations and particularly be geared to
construction of a new type of rural environment of a non-agrarian
Without such areas · for relaxation city-dwellers might eventually
rather neurotic.
On the subject of mankind's mentality, the speaker added the tollm.v;n"
"When Man has acquired the means to live (for example food,
housing, and leisure) then, he is confronted with another grave problem, the
reasons to live". In this context the speaker pointed out that this problem can
also be applied to the macrocosm of society as a whole in the following
developing societies are confronted with the problem of how to live (which is
principally a quantitative problem), while developed societies have the
problem of why people and institutions live or exist (which is essentially a
qualitative problem). Examples of the latter condition are the perennial
questions posed in developed countries-for instance "why must there be
universities?; why must there be a united Europe?; why must there be inter-
national agreements?; why must there be a free world?, etc."
These are "by definition" the questions of youth; and it is the extent to
which the older generation is unable to answer these questions that gives rise
to the generation gap. In order to forestall such a gap, a complex model
containing many variables and parameters must be found which can define
the "why" and which can subsequently lead to suitable answers. Undoubtedly,
the drafting of such a model, of such a definition of "why", is indispensable if
one wishes not only to let society survive, but also to let society have a will to
survive.
72
participant pointed out that whllit nude>' O'ealation i•
"'"ded a• an aeute di.ea.e, demanding immediate t.eatment, eeologieal
tend te be ,;ewed"' a e<eeping eanee< that may be dealt with in due
In thi• eonneetion the ,peak« abo .efe<«d to a ee<tain pa"ive mentality,
by the ,heto<ieal que.tion "What h>' po•terity eve< done fn< u•
we should do something for it?"
eounte< the feeling that we have time on ou< ban&, th~ pa<ticipant,
''"'""ned by a compatriot, pleaded fo< •ome emotionali•m in o«le< to in"igate
aetion in the envi<onmental field. He qu"tioned, howeve<, whethe<
"tiona! Bilde<be<g membmhip would eon•titute the app.opriate forum
these problems from the necessary emotional angle.
EMOTIONAL APPROACH?
Ame<iean ,peak« ,ugg<'ted that the eeologieal peoblem •hould be
within it.< p<nP" eontext. The<<~alway• a dange< that th.ough emotion-
a ee<tain i=< might get out of foeu•- In th~ eonneetion it i• p.ope< to
on< aee<><ding to the afo<ementioned pa<ticipant, that the envi<onmental
··qootion i• only "" of the >'P"" of the inte<dependenee of natio"' in ean·ying
out increasingly complex tasks.
Th"inte«lependenee ~~ndedinedby the muim that no nation canimpeove
i• tituation oxeept at the e<pen>e ofothm. In intemational monetaty <elation>
ont eountty'' meplu• i• anOth«'• deficit. In intemational politi" the ,ituation
• "en wo"" almo•t eve'ey p.oblcrn i• out of bound• to dioc«te autonomou•
rolution. Renee thi• •peak« doub" whethe<, if intetnational txehnoetat.< do
foe"' on tim one Mpeet ofintemational intcrdepondenee, thei< di•peopoetionate
roneenttation will in faet bring about the benign eon,equene<' that the authoe
ofthe paper has suggested.
A thied Aroeeiean paeticipant ,tated that the pee,ent di•eus<ion gave the
;mpeocion of being a divet'ion from the peimaty i~ue of wat and peace and
.,en a dive,-,ion feom the eeal ptoblem of envi.onment "" ,.,eh. While a geeat
dc>i ofattention i• focu•red on pollution and the d<"teuetion ofthe atmo•phete,
the "ey impoetant (alw eeologieal) peoblem•, ,ueh ., laek of ,hdtee and the
wmplex i"ue of tran"!'oetation ,eem to be falling into the baekgeound.
Aeeoeding to th~•peaket, a pmitive appeoaeh to envi.onment eould peovide
a ,ynth<"L' of many eoneeen•- induding an ineteO'ed eoneem foe the Thied
Woeld. In thi• feamewotk the Atlantic natio"' might, foe example, petfoem
a eon"euetive aet in P'odueing •imple peefabeieated ,true""" whieh eould
peovide ,neely needed •heltee in Aftiea, Latin Ametiea, and Mia. Thi< •peal<et
eonduded by "ating that hew"' deeply worried that the W"'t might theough
73
~ ' .
,i'
its emotions become so preoccupied with essentially insoluble problems, such
the complete elimination of pollution from the atmosphere, that it would
diverted from confronting those vital issues that it has already been a
to deal with but has hardly started to solve.
The foregoing speaker was supported by a British and a Canadian participant
who also emphasized that the Bilderberg Meeting should set the problem
environment into its proper perspective. The main problem that faces us is
so much environment, but rather the fact that there are still too many in
world who are hungry, ill, cold or discriminated 4gainst. Politicians
therefore not attempt to substitute the emotional environmental issue for
should be regarded as our primary national task'i.e. a striving that
individual can in the course of this generation find '.some happiness and
fulfillment in his life. We should, according to these iparticipants, not su
ourselves for the Supreme Being in trying to plan the world for the
generations.
ENVIRONMENT AND THE INDUSTRIES
A British participant stated that the author of the paper had
for different reasons, chosen the wrong three polluta'nts (see page 67) as
responsible for contaminating the atmosphere. In these three specific
the true facts are the following:
a. lead contamination of the atmosphere (mostry through gasoline)
1, Although the use of lead antiknocks has increased progressively over the last 40 year:S,
there is no proof that lead levels in the atmosphere are rising. Indeed, usA Public Health
Service Publication ggg-AP-22, the n~ost complete study yet made (1965) on the
states that the average lead concentrations in the atmosphere decreased in Philadelph~
and Cincinnati but increased in Los Angeles over the y(!ars surveyed. <;
2. The World Health Organisation's Technical Report No. 406 1968 includes the statement·
"no harmful effects have been observed due to lead in·ambient air, but further inves-
tigation is needed". i;'·'~
3· It should be emphasized that the present trend to eliminate lead alkyls from gasoline in
the usA is to facilitate the use of catalyctic convertors for the control ofcarbon monoxide."'
and hydrocarbons. It does not arise from any health considerations associated with lead
itself.
b. sea pollution
No political intervention will possibly be able to prevent a negligent sea-captain
hitting the rocks with his oiltanker. The oil industry ha~, with considerable success,
centrated on sharply confining spillage to cases of navigation errors. Techniques
"load-on-top" have gone a long way to minimizing pollution due to tank-washing
c. carbon dioxide emissions ·
74
The estimate of a man-made contribution of 12 billion tdn's p.a. is realistic. However,
Stanford Research Institute estimates' that biological decay etc. add some rooo
tons to the atmosphere every year. The fact that the overall concentration is ·
and may increase by 25% by the year 2000 certainly requires attention, but
note struck by the author ofthe paper must be questioned since it seems that the
Et:1·
: -~~~,~~T:r:,~~r~~~E:~~!!l~
of the radiation balance by fine particles has already reversed any warming trend due to
carbon dioxide. However, deeper investigation into this matter would be warranted, as it
may well be that an intense programme ofreforestation would minimise the carbon dioxide
(although it would increase natural pollution of the air by hydrocarbons).
A Netherlands speaker supported the previous intervention. He too con-
sidered the lead danger to be very remote. Furthermore, he also (see previous
. section) warned against the implication of overdramatization and the tackling
pf the environmental problem with emotions based on half-facts or very
disputable facts.
The Netherlands participant emphasized that environmental problems
in first instance be overcome by nationally educated and nationally
~Jl:·lmpa:mented policies. In this context he urged that OECD's projected collabo-
of scientists and economists to deal with the ecological issue (see inter-
li'•'·'""vual participant, below, page 76) should include industrial officials, who
address themselves to the feasibility, as distinct from theories, of possible
An American speaker stated that the oil industry, to which he belonged, had
some years invested a large amount of capital for research in combatting
eliminating pollution. Furthermore, this industry has constructed various
features in its more modern facilities which drastically reduce those
and effluants that might harm the environment. More specifically
spills, sulphur in fuel oil for power generators and (with the aid of
car manufacturers) certain automobile emissions have been sharply cut.
In general, the speaker stated, it is an established fact that the total pollution
~&'f,<~~sociated with the oil industry and its products can be reduced to very low and
levels.
It might, however, be more difficult for smaller and weaker firms to finance
and recover the costs involved in preventing, eliminating or reducing harmful
·onmental effects. Moreover, it will not be easy to reconcile public pressures
protect such enterprises with the imperatives of the pollution problem.
Norwegian speaker expressed his appreciation for the oil companies'
to prevent oil pollution at sea. The oil industry, by founding a common
that already has pollution under control, is far ahead of govern-
in this specific field. According to the speaker it will take 5 to 7 years to
international treaty on this subject among governments. The
ll\ Nnrwe:o-1~n participant concluded that both oil industries and shipowners have
their responsibility with regard to pollution and have acted in a
and diligent fashion.
A Finnish participant thereupon stated that the pulp industry in his country
75
consisted of two kinds of factories: firstly, the new plants which are by
equipped with a recovery system to prevent pollution, and, secondly,
older factories which for financial reasons cannot afford to rebuild
facilities to achieve the recovery of chemicals. According to this speaker,
financial problem of these older factories should be considered as a
financial problem to be solved on a national basis.
A British speaker, who had until recently been active in the electric
industry, mentioned that whenever overhead-lines, pilaus or powerstati
were erected in Southern England, this resulted in public indignation. y,
there never seemed to be any questions about the costs of amenity in · ·· ·
projects (for example the costs oflaying an underground instead ofan
electrical line). And when the (alternate) costs of the prevention of destrrw;M
the beauty of the environment were presented by the industry, these
often paradoxically be regarded as a trick to destroy amenity.
The speaker furthermore raised the question of the extent that a communi
should be charged in financial terms for the protection of the amenity of
rural site that is only inhabited or used by a handful of people. In this
tion he cited the example of the erection of a rather attractively aes1gnea
power-station in a practically desolated region. Far more people protested
against this construction than had ever visited the area.
ENVIRONMENT AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
An international speaker suggested that international cooperation should
take place not only on a regional basis, to solve for example local pollution
problems, but should also include the following, more universal, courses of
action: firstly, cooperation in research (such as has already been taking place
in the OECD since 1957 and in NATO since rg6g); secondly, cooperation in the
field of policy decisions on the question of who shall pay for the prevention,
lessening or eradication ofenvironmental effects (In order to prevent distortions
in free international competition, common basic decisions must be made as to
whether either industry, consumers, agriculture or tax-payers shall be held
liable for damage caused by for example the pulp, chemical or automobile
industries); thirdly, cooperation in the field of determining priorities in the
common battle against environmental problems; and, fourthly, cooperation
in the identification ofcommon interests and ofregions with common problems.
The OECD has, according to the International speaker, already been con-
centrating on ecological research for many years. Recently it has, however,
for the first time combined economic planners and scientists in a common
framework which will determine a first list ofpriorities and which will draft an
76
through which environmental problems can be consciously
into economic!policy actions of all industrialized states, including
with market economies.
More generally, the speaker concluded that the production of industrialized
will probably increase 5% annually; there seems to be no reason why
·this additional output of wealth might not on a coordinated basis also be used
to counter adverse environmental effects. At the same time, however, the
developed nations should, particularly in the framework of the Second Devel-
opmentDecade marking the 197o's, be careful not to reduce their responsibili-
ties towards the Third World.
An American participant stated that he favoured the Kennan proposal
whichrecommended that an international environmental agency be created by,
for instance, the ten larger powers. Such an agency, which should not be
within the existing UN and OECD structures, might have the following
of reference:
it must avoid duplicating the work of other international organizations;
it should review possible environmental actions from a standpoint of
mankind's ecological needs as a whole;
c. it could keep governments informed about minimum needs;
d. it might advise governments what measures should be taken;
e. it must assure that certain ecological standards are maintained or are
established; perhaps the agency could on an impartial basis even contribute
to the enforcement of established rules and regulations;
it does, however, not need to have its own executive functions except in
those cases when there is not other international agency taking appropriate
measures.
A Finnish participant stated that he was rather sceptical about submitting
environmental problems to large international organizations. Such a procedure
would be very time consuming. Circumstances require that action should be
taken as soon as possible in order to save future expenses. Particularly in the
paper and pulp industries, where adequate know-how exists to prevent
environmental impairments, the necessary measures should be applied prefer-
ably on a national and perhaps also on a regional basis.
A Canadian speaker believed that environmental problems could sometimes
lead to international cooperation but also to international contention. In this
context he mentioned the following two illustrative examples: the profound
77
pollution of Lake Erie was resulting not only in cooperation between the
and Canadian federal authorities, but also in increasing collaboration between
the littoral us states and Canadian provinces. On the qther hand, the discovery
of oil in Alaska, which American companies wish to transport by sea to us
markets, might result in the upsetting of the delicate ,ecological balance in the
North-West Passage, if and when this water-way is rp.ade legally accessible to
large oil tankers. Such a development would hardly be palatable for
nevertheless, us oil companies wish to transport Alask;m oil as cheaply and
efficiently as possible to the consumer. It is evident that in such a case inter-
national contention can hardly be avoided.
Another us participant pointed out that actions i~ the environmental field
by developed countries should not widen the gap bet"\Yeen the "have" nations
of the north and the "have not" nations of the south. ,He added that there will
undoubtedly be further attempts to deal with t~e global environmental
problem in international organizations. In this cont~xt the American speaker
emphasized that adequate preparations should be mide for the UN Conference
on the Environment at Stockholm in 1972: particularly students of inter-
national relations should pose questions about the nature ofthe organization or
organizations-besides the UN, the OECD and the one suggested by Kennan-that
might effectively deal with environmental problems.
ENVIRONMENT AND NATIONAL MEASURES
One American mentioned that he had recently sr;:rved on a White House
Commission on Economic Growth and the Envirohment. He believed that
this organ had achieved a fairly good balance between the following main
elements that had been considered, e.g.: population policy; cost and benefit
analyses of economic and other human activity; shifts in the composition ofthe
national product and the total costs involved; and finally, the necessity of
producing and consuming vast resources in order to achieve a better quality of
life, social reforms, and urban rehabilitation.
With regard to population policy, the committee had decided that a steady
growth in economic activity, accompanied by market interplay within a set
of goals and guidelines laid down by public decision:
, would be essential and
also feasible. The costs of such a policy would in the last analysis have to be
shared by the whole population in its capacity as consumers and tax-payers.
The speaker furthermore mentioned both national and internationai
preparations for the UN Conference olil the Environm~nt at Stockholm in 1972.
In this context, it had already become apparent that many ofthe less-developed
nations-particularly the producers of raw materials-are not anxious to be
78
I
[(,:!cleaned up", if such action implies serious retardation of their development.
Finally, this participant expressed doubt as to whether American federal,
and particularly local authorities can organize themselves to take the
steps in order to control and reduce the very large percentage of
total pollution and other causes of the deterioration of the environment for
they are directly responsible.
The previous intervention was partly contradicted by another American
participant who stressed that the following concrete action had been taken in
the United States: in I g67 the Air Quality Act was passed as a federal law ;
1968 the National Air Pollution Control Administration defined eight
homogeneous atmosphere areas for which it directed the governors of the states
to indicate public compliance in the ecological field under the following
conditions: "Within six months the states will, after public hearings adopt
ambient air quality standards and additionally devise a plan for the implemen-
tation, maintenance and enforcement of such standards". According to the
speaker, some federal funds were allocated to finance the costs of establishing
local units to combat inter-county pollution, but the general costs of the appli-
cation ofthese measures were left to industry and in some cases to the tax-payer.
This speaker concluded by stating that the net cost to the consumer for
cleaning up power stations all over the United States would be an increase of
approximately 3·5% on his electricity bill.
ANetherlands speaker added that go% of the available food and vegetation
throughout the world is consumed by insects; this amounts to a waste of
fourteen hundred million tons of food per year. Perhaps if individual nations
are not too squeamish about the less important (ecological) side effects of
preventing such a waste, this prevention might keep millions of humans from
being hungry.
An International participant stated that a recent oECD analysis had indicated
that the proportion of the us research and development effort, dedicated to the
environmental problem, currently only amounts to o.g%. However, because of
recent policies this percentage is likely to rise within the not too distant future.
On the other hand, the speaker did not believe that the Soviet Bloc, as yet,
regarded environmental problems as being of a very important nature. But
locally-for example in the cases of the Caspian Sea and Lake Baikal-this
was a different matter. Here, at least, there seemed to be some awakening of
concern. Against this background the international speaker thought that should
the East European and Western countries really be seeking subjects of mutual
79
f the Secretariat as
k d the members o
ers and than e l
interest, they might do well to choose the environmental issue-a topic with.
._··~.·.··.··_.·•.,_·_~---·.·.·
.
•.• ·
.authors of the working plarptheir excellent workR. 1 -u1
·ghness on behalf of abl
·j·:' · eters o · B.' oya J.J. • d to e
low political vibrations-and to accept the broad problems raised by the ~~'' well as the Interpr t'cipant thanked 1
s. h ersonally consldere
· · · · d States par 1 · wh1ch e P
author of the paper as a basrs for future cooperatiOn. ~7 A Umte . ulating Meetmg,
An.other phenomenon t~at had been noticed wit~i~.the OECD, was the fact 'f participal_lts for t~: s~: in recent years.
that m very many countnes governmental responsrbrhty for urban problems ..'· the most Interest! g
was until recently spread out among seven or eight national agencies. In any
nation it was difficult to find government officials with overall formal respon-
sibility for these matters. Only during the past few years have governmental
structures slowly begun to adapt themselves to dealing effectively with ecological
issues on a centralized basis. At last people are emerging who can take a
coordinated (i.e. from a political, economic, technical, as well as a juridical
approach) view of the whole issue.
AUTHOR'S FINAL REMARKS
The author of the report began his concluding comments by expressing
strong disagreement with some ofthe industrialists (see pp. 74, 75, 76) and regret
at their attitude. He thought industrialists should-not only in the public interest
but also in their own-make it a point to discover the elements of truth and
substance in the statements made by ecologists and then seek suitable ways to deal
with the relevant problems. On one specific point, he considered the industri-
alists' arguments with regard to the alleged lack of harmful effects of, for
example, lead, to be somewhat premature. The fact is, he said, that scientists
simply do not yet know what harmful effect lead or other agents might have
on public health; their current knowledge on this subject can be compared to
the visible part of an iceberg.
Finally, the author expressed agreement with those speakers who did not
consider the current active concern for adverse environmental effects as a
public hysteria. He too considered it the duty of responsible men to point to
the problem-as with cancer-at an early stage in order that a cure might
yet be achieved. But he also agreed with the American speaker who had stated
that the environmental problem should be dealt with in the context of other
problems.
*
* *
During the dinner offered by the President of the Swiss Confederation, His
Royal Highness expressed the gratitude of all those present to Mr. Umbricht,
Mr. Reutlinger and the other Swiss hosts for all they had done to make the
Meeting such a succes. The Prince also expressed his deep appreciation to the
So
81
]
~
1
1
I
1
j
l
Intervention by the German author of the working paper on the Second Item
of the Agenda.
Royal Highness, Gentlemen,
The steering committee had originally asked r:Pe to lead off the discussion
by making a number of observations on developm,~nts in Europe and the West
in general; but now, due to the vicissitudes of German politics, the represen-
tatives of the Government and those of the parliamentary parties could not
come. For that reason I am afraid that in the I 5 minutes at my disposal I shall
not be able to cover all the subjects mentioned in the questionaire distributed to
you for the discussion.
Therefore I shall try to focus in particular on the German question and its
consequences for Europe and the Western system, as well as on the develop-
ment of German policy and its implications for the West.
I would like to analyze the German problem and present German policies
from three different but interconnected angles: first, in the context of the his-
torical process; second, in the context of the Western system and East-West
relations in Europe; and, third, in the context of the goals as they are intended
by the Government, goals of the policies vis-a-vis Poland, vis-a-vis East Ger-
many, and vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe as a whole.
Let me from the outset declare my point ofview: I think I am rather biassed
in favour of the Government's policy. But I hope that, if I am carried away
too much by my prejudices, the members of the Opposition present will duly
add corrections to what I say.
Let me turn to my first point-the German problem and West German
policies in the context of the historical process. Although I share the lack of
inhibition, characteristic of political scientists, in making statements about the
environment and the present, I would not dare to make a prediction about
the future of the historical process, but I think the German problem has now
been with us for a sufficiently long time to allow for conclusions about a certain
trend.
Here, in my view, the crucial event in the last years that helps us to mark
this trend, is the Czechoslovakian crisis, the intervention of several Eastern
European countries in Czechoslovakia. This event demonstrated with cruel
clarity a number of things, particularly the fundamental and indeed irrecon-
Bs
cilable difference in interests, between the two Germ<j.r;t. states. It showed that
the interests of the two German states were completely integrated within the
respective systems of which they form a part-with West Germany supporting
the evolution of a liberal nonconformist communism in Czechoslovakia and
East Germany doing everything it could to preserve orthodoxy because it
views liberalization as a threat to its own system.
But more important, when one German state is willing to resort to the ulti-
mate means offoreign policy, in other words, is willing to go to war, to prevent
the very outcome the other German state regards as eminently desirable, then
it seems to me that the historical process of the division of Europe that started
in 1945 has come to a point where some of the models, images, and goals of
the past are called into question, and the division not only of Germany but of
Europe as well becomes very vividly demonstrated.
Indeed it seems to me that these events have callefi into question the goals
about Germany's political organization which have formed the unquestioned
basis of German policy for one generation. (We forget that it has now been
25 years since Germany was divided.) These goals no longer have the self
evident rationale that they had for German and Western politicians in the
past decades. Therefore, it seems to me the central historical question of the
Germans is posed again, but in a context utterly different from the early post
war period. And the question, to which the answer has always been of fateful
importance to the whole of Europe, indeed to the whole world, is what form
of unity if any should the Germans seek within Euro.pe.
Is Bismarck's model, which he t-reated in r87r, still a relevant model for the
Germans now and in the future years? Can it still be adhered to now? It seems
to me and to a growing number of the German public and policymakers that
since the division, history has ruled out this particular model as invalid. It is
in this connection that the Czech cris.is, clearly showing the different interests
of the two German states, is so important since it demonstrated the division as
being very fundamental. In sum, when you have two German chiefs of Govern-
ment meet and very active German diplomacy all over the East and the West,
you see unfolding a search for a different formula, different from the one that
was found in r87r and terminated in 1945·
That takes me to my second point-an analysis of the German problem
and present policy in the context ofthe Western system and East-West relations
in Europe. Here I offer one very simple but crucial observation. The twr
German states, as you see them, are not political regimes which created foreign
policies for themselves, but they represent foreign policies which created
political regimes for themselves. In other words, both states are the outcome
of a political confrontation, namely, the East-West conflict, which funda-
86
mentally shaped their constitutions, their internal issues of conflict, and their
foreign policies. The last became completely integrated in the foreign policies
of the respective systems the states were part of.
As you all know, in fact some of you were involved in the making of these
policies, all this was not easy-the acceptance of a West German state was very
difficult for the German political leaders in 1948 and 1949· For them a com-
pensation lay in integrating within the West, German policy on German unity.
The German policy of unification was part of the Western policy of strength
against Communism. Unity was to be achieved through a collapse of Com-
munism. Therefore there should be no recognition of East Germany, but
hostility and ostracism toward that state with West Germany being the sole
representative of Germany. Later, the Hallstein doctrine was added. Perhaps
the most important point here is that German unity was regarded as a pre-
requisite to a detente between East and West. This basic tenet was adhered
to not just by the West Germans but, for a while, by the West as a whole.
All this formed an internally consistent set of rules and policies, and now
all this has crumbled. Three developments played a crucial role:
First, the building of the Berlin wall, which demonstrated clearly the failure
of the East German regime to win the wholehearted support of its population,
closing the last symbol of the negotiability of the German problem for the time
being, and demonstrating that the East German regime was not about to
collapse.
Second, the advent of the Kennedy administration with its very different
policy of accepting the bi-polar system of spheres of influence, abandonning
the notion ofbringing about fundamental changes by rolling back Communism
and seeking areas of common interest with the Soviet Union.
This change called into question the very basis of West German foreign
policy, namely, that German unity should be the prerequisite of detente, in
other words, that the solution of the most difficult problem between East and
West should serve as the basis for detente.
Third, the example of French policy under General de Gaulle with its
active involvement in Eastern Europe had an impact in West Germany.
The result of all this is that the basic tenets of West German foreign policy
have changed very fundamentally. From the notion that unity should be
achieved through Anschluss, or through a collapse, or through a Westernization
of East Germany, one has now moved to the option of a special relationship
between the two German states, since they still adhere to one nation, but a
relationship definitely different from the insistence on a unitary state that
formed the basic concept started from in 1945· From the idea that the settle-
ment of the border question should be left to the Peace Conference, one has
87
moved to the idea that de facto one should settle on the status quo-the terri-
torial status quo, whatever legal formula one finds for it. From the policy of
isolation and no contact with East Germany, one has moved to a policy where
the West German Chancellor and the East German Prime Minister meet and
discuss their common problems. From the policy of the Hallstein doctrine one
has moved to a revision of it to the extent that West Germany has entered into
diplomatic relations with some countries that have diplomatic relations with
East Germany, and finally, from the notion that unity of the two states is a
prerequisite to overall detente, the Bonn Government has moved to the notion
that only detente and active German contribution to it can improve the
conditions for somehow overcoming the division, or at least making it more
bearable.
One point in this connection is worth noting, namely, that originally this
was not the policy of the Social Democrats alone but was more or less a tripar-
tite policy started before they came to power by Christian Democratic Foreign
Minister Gerhard Schroeder. It was continued under the great coalition, al-
though with the SDP pushing and the cnu following reluctantly; the latter's
Bavarian wing was often in opposition. This point is an important one, because
the present domestic debate tends to overlook that "Ostpolitik" started as a
common policy.
What we are actually observing here is a process of crumbling and transfor-
mation of all the policies that formed the basis of the German political system.
We are observing a process where Germany is abandoning both the claim to
one quarter ofits former German territory, and the claim to the old Bismarckian
model of the unitary state.
This is a policy which is immensely important to Germany itself and of
fundamental importance to the future of Europe. It requires a good deal of
courage on the part of the politicians who support it. It seems to me it is
remarkable and important for three reasons:
First, it has demonstrated that in spite of all these fundamental changes,
the democratic system was able to continue functioning without any major
crisis. The pessimists who ten years ago thought that the German democracy
could not stand fundamental crises or changes like this have been proved wrong.
Second, in this process which basically signifies a new openness towards the
East, and increased activity there, Government and Opposition have been
able to differ without endangering the ties and structures that have been built
up in the West. On the contrary, as I shall explain below, the process has been
accompanied by measures that have strengthened the ties with the West. This
is a very long process which should and must require patience not only on the
part of the politicians involved in Germany, but also patience on the part ofthe
88
outside world as well as a good deal of sympathetic understanding of the
immense difficulties involved in transforming a basic set of policies.
That takes me to my third point-the!goals of West German policies vis-a-vis
East Germany and the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, and their potential
consequences. Let me start with one comment, which again refers to the
Czech crisis. Besides demonstrating the depths of the division, at least to the
Germans, and probably to the West as a whole, it also demonstrated the
rigidity of the international system-the rigidity of the line of division between
the two parts of Europe, as well as the fact that any policy based on the notion
that one can change that division fundamentally or radically is not only
illusory but dangerous.
It is from this starting point that present German policy has to be understood.
If there is any hope for evolution, it lies in the abandonment of illusory goals
and the acceptance of the status quo, while seeking very gradual change within
it. This can be done by making the status quo more bearable and less dangerous,
particularly in divided Germany and in Berlin. Finally an option must be kept
open for a special relationship which takes into account that the two German
states still belong to one nation and would not like (at least this is the Western
view) to treat each other as foreign countries. This is one of the major German
goals. This formula is a simple one, it seems to me, and a very modest objective
if one looks at specific measures. In the long run, however, it is an ambitious
goal.
This holds true in the three areas where West German policy is active now,
symbolised by the towns of Erfurt and Kassel, Warsaw, and Moscow. In these
three areas, two tenets are being followed. First, to sound out possibilities,
something that in this sense was not done before. There were very careful
overtures but not at this level. Second, one is trying to keep any expectation as
low as possible, because high expectation with regard to these policies is very
dangerous and may preclude success. I think the historic picture of 1970 may
well be that of Willy Brandt in a window in Erfurt facing a cheering crowd and
making a sign subduing their enthusiasm. He was perfectly aware that the
situation was so precarious that any radical change would upset any policy that
might improve the atmosphere.
Now what are the specific goals in the three areas of diplomatic activity?
First, with regard to East Germany, it seems to me-and here I think one has
to be realistic-there is very little hope for success. This is due to the fact that
the East German regime is so utterly insecure and has to be immensely careful
in making concessions. (I hope that later on Mr. Otto Wolff von Amerongen
will elaborate on this point with his particular inside knowledge of East
Germany.) What one could expect from Erfurt, Kassel and possible future
8g
1
a·
t!
I
H
I'
jj,
i
il
·lj:
I.
i'
I
I
I
I
~.
meetings between the two German Governments is nothing more than a f cts, for you could argue that while very little has happened in terms of con-
gradual improvement o.f relatio:1s w~th regard to facilitating movement ·.··r,~sions and progress in the East, a good dea~ has ha?pened in the West. ~t the
between the two countnes and mducmg a somewhat more tolerant, more (!the Hague meeting, for instance, European mtegratwn got a new emphasis and
cooperative behaviour on the part of the East German elite, notably with \.,, new start. Another important event was the meeting between Brandt and
regard to West Berlin. ··i'\·resident Nixon. In fact, if one wants to understand Brandt's rather bizarre
Second, with regard to Poland, the soundings made by. German diplom~cy
1~ msistence on discussing American-EEC relations, he ha~ to see it in the context
can lead to no more than to seek a new formula for setthng the Oder-Neisse.z o
f active German policy towards the East, for Brandt IS very adamant about
,, f h 0
problem, although that means quite a lot. Germany is trying to accept grosso ~· pursuing these policies simultaneously. He is also perfectly aware o t ~ .m-
modo the present territorial status quo and to find a legal formula for it, one thar';:creasing malaise in the United States toward EEC and its commercial policies,
settles the problem in a way that avoids its becoming a serious issue ofdomestic~:/. and wants to secure the Western flank in case of possible conflicts.
politics. By finding this formula, the German diplomats would loosen up the '··. Secondly, even though to the outside there is no damage done in case of
situation in Europe, and induce a different beha~iour on the Soviet side. :j failure, in my mind the real problem and the genuine danger of "Ostpolit~k"
Third, with regard to the Soviet Union, the Bonn Government is pursuing1' ·arises from its domestic connotations and consequences. And here everythmg
several goals: first, to come to an agreement re,garding the non-use of force;;~ ;qepends on how the Opposition reacts in the future. It is not united behind
something which is crucial to Germany in its position as a divided country, and;i;, :this approach. One can see very clear differences between the various wings
a very close observer ofwhat happened in Czechoslovakia; second, to eliminat~!!~. gJthe Opposition. Some now oppose a policy which they have advocated in the
at least in practice ifnot in legal formulations, the so-called enemy clauses in tq~~ ·y~~t and which they know does not have any alternative. Thus some conser;a-
UN Charter, which give the Soviet Union and its ~orld War II allies the rigq;,JR jive politicians, notably from the South, who used to be very keen in statmg
of intervention in domestic German affairs-'-something about which the."•L that there is no unity in the sense of Bismarck's model, have now become
West Germans feel very strong!y, given their qposed position; third, t!i;esil'~ !id~mant supporters of that type of unity.
overtures attempt to prepare the ground for .a more durable formul~~l~it. '~~Much ofthis opposition is legitimate, but much depends on how it is pursued.
West Berlin, an initiative tied to the Four Power Talks on Berlin; and fin~lly!'f, .~DpJI~estic stability could be seriously threatened, if for the sake of contrariness
and equally im~ortant for the West G~rma~st t~ey are trying to indtit~~~, .PJ:,r,.se and of gaining pow~r, the ~pposition g~es against a policy that it
for~ula for a ~1ffere~t evolutwnary pohcy v1s-a'-VIS East Germany. They"~"~ fc~~l,~ally supports and to wh1ch there IS no alte~natlve. .
trymg to make 1t possible for East Germany to eyolve gradually toward a ~~{t?..~~~?- conclusion, it seems to me that the pohcy that West Germany 1s now
liberal regime. . . . !. .ii~;IJ· ,;·:~ping is an immensely difficult enterprise which has t~ be conducted with
If there should be no VlSlble results of this pohcy, one could argue t~a!;lf!-l'' }~xtraordinary amount of subtlety. Subtlety, because 1f one demands and
damage will have been done. At least one thing will have been achiev~,, t~ses for too much, one endangers the very success one wants to achieve.
namely to make clear where tp.e opposition to peaceful change in ~~{~· rc~use one is dealing with regimes, notably East Germany, that feel threatened
really lies. But, and this is important for the opposition within Germa~y/?fl'e. "~insecure, one has to put oneself into the other regime's shoes and try to
does create irrevers~ble facts. Now that Bran~t has met Stoph, certain..~~·~ · ,derstand this. .
can n~ longer be sa1d or d~ne that were pomble two years ago. And ·~t~~,, ~tandt's policy is one that wants to accept the status qu~ and to change 1t ~t
these 1ssues that ilie domestic debate between Government and Oppo.~1tW · ,;esame time. It is a policy that tries to keep the concesswns balanced, for 1f
turning. . . ;;~J,\'t;., ..~l'Germany accepts the status quo in Europe one must try to persuade the
Let me make two points here-and here my bias in favour of th~9Ay~,~ ', t to accept the status quo as well, notably in Berlin. Brandt's policy is
mental policy comes out very clearly. First, the new policy toward the·~.a§.~,,,,,, . , .'kely to produce immediate and spectacular results, especially since there
been accompanied by a concomitant. strengthening o~ ties with t~.(·~\f~, . )~/'domestic problem to contend with. .But it see~s to .me, it could be, and
Brandt has constantly stressed the necess1ty for strengthemng Western struc.~·.·' ·'' 1,,£~bly is, a contribution to a more ratwnal relatwnsh1p .between East a~d
The Opposition has, however, been arguing: ''Sure the Government 's!!,, ~~~ <, ·~~;:whether pursued in Berlin, in Erfurt, in Warsaw, m Moscow, or m
these things, but it does not do anything." This reproach is not borne
go 91
