r
I
I
I
I
I
l
I
BILDERBERG GROUP
YESILKOY
CONFERENCE
r8-2o September 1959
1
I
'
I
I
I
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY:
J. H. RETINGER
UNITED STATES HONORARY SECRETARY:
jOSEPH E. jOHNSON
*
* *
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI F. ITALY
ALPKARTAL, NuREDDIN FuAD TURKEY
ANZILOTTI, ENRICO ITALY
ARIBURUN, TEKIN TURKEY
ARLIOTIS, CHARLES c. GREECE
AsToR, DAviD UNITED KINGDOM
AuKES, A. G. NETHERLANDS
BALL, GEORGE w. UNITED STATES
BELGE,BURHAN TURKEY
BENNETT, F. M. UNITED KINGDOM
BERG, FRITZ GERMANY
VANDER BEUGEL, E. H. NETHERLANDS
BIRGI, MuHARREM NuRI TURKEY
BoHEMAN, ERIK SwEDEN
BovERI, WALTER E. SWITZERLAND
BRANDT, KARL UNITED STATES
BRAUER, MAx GERMANY
BuRGEss, W. RANDOLPH UNITED STATES
DEAN, ARTHUR H. uNITED STATES
DIKER, vECDI TURKEY
DuNCAN,]. S. CANADA
DuNLAP, CLARENCE R. S.H.A.P.E.
3
ENGEN, HANS
ERLER, FRITZ
EsENBEL, MELIH
FERGUSON, jOHN H.
GIDEL, NAIL
GORDON, WALTER L.
HEILPERIN, MICHAEL A.
HEINZ, H. j., II
HOCHSCHILD, HAROLD K.
HOEGH, LEIF
HOFFMAN, PAUL G.
KIESINGER, KURT-GEORG
KIPPING, SIR NoRMAN
vAN KLEFFENS, E. N.
MEHNERT, KLAUS
MENDERES, AnNAN
MoE, FINN
MONRONEY, A. s.
MORISOT, GEORGES j.
MUELLER, RUDOLF
NEBOLSINE, GEORGE
NITZE, PAUL H.
PAEPCKE, WALTER P.
PIETTE, jACQUES
PILKINGTON, SIR HARRY
PUGET, ANDRE
QUARONI, PIETRO
RocKEFELLER, DAvro
RUEFF, jACQUES
RYKENS, PAUL
SARACENO, PASQUALE
SARMENTO RODRIGUES, MANOEL M.
SARPER, SELIM
SCHMID, CARLO
SEGERS, P. w.
VON SENGER UND ETTERLIN, FRIDO
SLESSOR, SIR jOHN
SMITH, A. H.
4
NORWAY
GERMANY
TURKEY
UNITED STATES
TURKEY
CANADA
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
NORWAY
UNITED NATIONS
GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
EUROPEAN COAL AND STEEL
COMMUNITY
GERMANY
TURKEY
NORWAY
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
uNITED KINGDOM
S.H.A.P.E.
ITALY
uNITED STATES
EuROPEAN EcoNOMic
COMMUNITY
NETHERLANDS
ITALY
PORTUGAL
TURKEY
GERMANY
BELGIUM
GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM
0~
J
;
'
~'
SPAAK, PAUL-HENRI
SuLZBERGER, CYRus
TOKAY, SELAHATTIN
ToKu~, AHMET
DE VRIES, E.
WoLFF voN AMERONGEN, OTTO
YouNGER, KENNETH G.
VAN ZEELAND, PAUL
ZoRLu, F. R.
IN ATTENDANCE:
DARVALL, FRANK 0.
DREXELIUS, w.
DE GRAAFF, F. A.
GREY, RoBERT
POMIAN, jOHN
SAINT-MLEUX, A.
TEPEDELEN, z.
N.A.T.O.
UNITED STATES
TURKEY
TURKEY
NETHERLANDS
GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
BELGIUM
TURKEY
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
N.A.T.O.
TURKEY
5
I
.
.
.
INTRODUCTION
The Yesilkoy Conference was the eighth ofits kind, the previous ones having
been held in various European countries and in the United States. ·
It is not the purpose of these conferences to attempt to make policy or to re-
commend action by governments. Their sole object is, by bringing together men
ofoutstanding qualities and influence, in circumstances where discussions can be
frank and where arguments not always used in public debate can be put forward,
to reach a better understanding of prevailing differences between the Western
countric;s and to study those fields in which agreement may be sought.
The discussions are so organized as to permit a broad and frank exchange of
views to take place. They are held in conditions ofstrict privacy and neither the
press nor observers are admitted. No resolutions are passed and no statements
have to be approved
1
by the participants, who are free to draw their own conclu-
sions.
Those invited to attend the Bilderberg Conferences are chosen from different
nations and from all fields ofpublic activity and include statesmen, diplomatists,
business and professional men, intellectuals, and leaders of public opinion.. All
participants attend the meetings in a purely personal capacity and the views they
express do not necessarily represent those of the organizations or parties to which
they belong. The various topics on the agenda are introduced by rapporteurs who
have prepared papers on these subjects.. These documents are as far as possible
circulated in advance of the meetings.
In the following text the views expressed during the debates are briefly sum-
marized under headings which correspond to the different points ofthe agenda.
7
I. REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENTS SINCE THE
:-. }
SEVENTH CONFERENCE IN SEPTEMBER 1958
Openi~g the Conference, the Chairman thanked the Turkish hosts for their
hospitality and complimented them on the arrangements they had made. The
meeting then started with a general review of events since the last Conference,
introduced in turn by a European and an American participant.
The chain ofevents started by the Berlin crisis had dominated the international
scene during this period. It was clear, said one of the opening speakers, that the
primary Russian aim was the recognition ofthe existence oftwo Germanies: the
Soviets no longer wished to talk about reunification. Another aim, in the opinion
ofone ofthe American participants, might be ultimately to force West Germany
out ofN.A.T.O. and American troops out of Europe.
Berlin had also proved a lever for Khrushchev to pry open the door to the
United States. What were his reasons for wishing to be invited? Khrushchev's
vanity undoubtedly played a part. He needed successes abroad to confirm his
position at home. At the same time, recognition of his power and world status
would also be reflected on the government and the party. But it should not be
forgotten that he forced the door and is certainly unwilling tQ pay the entrance
fee. We should also discard the myth ofKhrushchev's softness. He might be more
liberal at home but in foreign affairs one ofthe speakers thought him worse than
Stalin, whose caution and cool calculation had now been replaced by a danger-
ously unpredictable brinkmanship.
It might be that Khrushchev's motives were to diminish tension and reduce the
cold war, but this begged the question, how much do the Russians need inter-
national tension? It undoubtedly helps tojustify the dictatorship ofthe party and
an authoritarian government and, since the end ofthe war, it had enabled Soviet
armies to occupy Eastern Europe and helped to establish Communist domina-
tion. Moreover, the cold war as a struggle with the capitalist system for world
domination was a basic tenet ofthe Marxist doctrine and would not be discarded
so long as the Russian leaders believed in Communism. Opportunism, however,
was also an inherent part of Marxism-Leninism. That is why Soviet leaders, so
long as their aims remained unchanged, believed themselvesjustified in adopting
contradictory policies. In the opinion of one of the speakers, they have now
realized that the cold war in the form ofdiplomatic tension combined with mili-
9
tary threats has ceased to be profitable Th h
of "peaceful co-existence" and " . . ey ave therefore adopted the slogans
. economic compeff " A h' .
m tactics, the threat to ourselves h . d I IOn . st. IS IS only a change
. . as remaine as great a .
rt might now be more difficult r t sever, particularly since
0 1
h 10r us o react.
n y t e U.S.S.R. and the United States hold the . . .
and keep the cold war "cold" Th ll power to dimimsh tension
suggested, had better keep in the ba~:~u~~ ~owers,. a.s one of ~he participants
complicate rather than to help matt g H r '1 ~r theu I?terventwn was likely to
ers. e 1e t Isolated I h' · ·
as most people in Europe took a different vie . . n IS opmwn, however,
States to bear this in mind. wanditwasimportantforthe United
. The attitude ofEuropeans towards East-W . . ..
Internal political lines and thi's . fl .est dealmgs tended to divide along
was re ected m gove 1..
thus the danger that American 1' . . . rnment po ICies.. There was
. . po ICies might come t b 'd 'fi .
wmg attitudes in Europe Th' f o e I enti ed With right-
. Is was one o those b d · ·
not important in itsel£ might well b ... roa opmwns which, though
other prejudicial ideas' Thus r . ecome so If It was held in conjunction with
· , 10r Instance the sam. 1 1
the certainty of American retal· t' . ' h e peop e a so tended to doubt
A · Ia IOn In t e event of R · ·
mencan participant strongly e h . d h ussian aggressiOn. An
mp as1ze t at Am · , d . .
completely unaffected by R. . , ·r enca s etermmation was
ussia s mam1est nucl . b'l' ·
aspects of this point were more full d. . ear capa I Ities. The military
Another subject for speculati'on y Iscthuss~dflm the second part ofthe debate.
f K · was e Ill uence of Ch· h . .
o hrushchev. To what extent d'd R . . ma on t e policies
Various hypotheses could be m di b ussiahand ?hma concert their policies?
and Laos. While Moscow certa~n~ a outt tde Chmese actio~s in Tibet, India,
national affairs Peking seemed t y ~an e to ~lay a leadmg part in inter-
' o pre1er to rcmam t 'd
as some suggested, ofkeeping out ofth U . d N .ou s.I e, even to the extent,
hand. e mte ations m order to have a freer
The problem ofChina was also discussed a . .
ing when two ofthe participants s ok fth t.a ~pecial session on Saturday even-
to that country. For all its inhu:an ::thl eir Impressio?s. during a recent visit
doubted achievements Fami· 1 1 ebssness, the regime could claim un-
. ne was arge y an· h d · d . . .
ceeding at an impressive pace d . . .Is e , Ill ustnahzatwn was pro-
' e ucatwn was bemg· dcv 1 d .
and the whole country was m b'l· d 1 e ope on a massive scale
0 I IZe a ong T t r r '
government policies Given th d 1 mi I ary mes lOr the fulfilment of
· e eve opment ofCh' d · 1 ·
one speaker felt that the u ·t d S h ma an Its P ace In the world
m e tates s ould d'f · · '
country. Its present policies could no b . m~ I y :ts attitude towards that
either have to be scrap.ped or Arne . t e mldahmtamed Indefinitely: they would
E nca wou ave to g t · h .
ven so, the problem was so com le th t . . . o o war Ill t eir defence.
inclined to favour a cautious a dp xd al partiCipants who shared this view were
h . n gra ua approach and
t e Immediate recognition ofChina a d 't d . . no one ventured to urge
n Is a mission to the United Nations. On
IO
the other hand, it was stressed that American policy could not have been changed
under pressure at the time of the Quemoy and Matsu crisis and since then the
situation has not improved much, with the islands still subject to periodic shell-
ings. China has maintained her aggressive posture and a sudden change today
would appear as a great victory for the Communist government and its policies.
It was noteworthy, said one ofthe American speakers, that,some Asians who had
formerly advocated a change in American policies were now privately urging the
contrary... In any case, there was no indication that recognition would not meet
with a rebuff; let alone modify Chinese policies.
The development ofthe Berlin crisis and the consequent East-West diplomatic
exchanges led some participants to comment on the political implications affect-
ing N.A.T.O. N.A.T..O. needed political unity as much as ever before and it was
regrettable that during the pastyear many divergencies had appeared at a critical
time. A common attitude towards the Soviet had proved difficult to establish. In
this connection, one of the speakers from the Benelux countries remarked that
N.A.T..O. might be harmed ifthe "six'' were to establish a common foreign policy
as this might lead to the formation of blocs within the North Atlantic Alliance.
The position and the shortcomings of France were also referred to and the hope
was expressed that following President Eisenhower's visit to General de Gaulle
the existing divergencies might be bridged.
Another source ofdivision in Europe was in the economic field. Several speak-
ers, both from the "six" and the "outer seven", hoped that a satisfactory associa-
tion between the two would soon be established. They wer.e encouraged by the
success ofthe financial reforms in France and the manifest good intentions ofthe
"outer seven". Scandinavian participants pointed out that their countries had a
clear interest in bridging the gap between the two groups and assured the Confer-
ence that theywere resolved to do so. They could only be reproached for having let
matters drift too long during the preceding year.The proposal to establish the sec-
retariat ofthe "outer seven" in Paris within the O.E.E.C. and the welcome given
by Britain to the news of the Greek and Turkish request for association with the
Common Market were cited as further proofofthe good intentions ofthe "seven''.
On the other hand, one of the speakers associated with the "six" stressed that a
similar spirit prevailed on his side. He believed that a clearer definition of aims
would help in the choice ofmeans. The Common Market attempted not to abro-
gate national sovereignties but to make them compatible with the necessities of
modern economics. Common institutions were needed to ensure an indispensable
economic solidarity and to apply the set of rules necessary for the functioning of
large markets. The techniques evolved by the Common Market reflected both
American and Commonwealth experience. He hoped that such suitable institu-
tional techniques could be evolved for associating the "six" with the "seven" and
II
12
even looked forward to the enlargement of this a . . . . .
area, at least in certain limited fields. ssoclatlon to mclude the dollar
Certain other subjects were also briefl .
Turkish settlement was heartening and t~ m~ntw.ned.. In Europe the Greek-
slightly improved, the positive neutralit of e Sltuatlon 1~ the Middle East has
towards the East Some mi·s· . . y some countnes becoming less biased
. · g1vmgs were voic d h .
Amenca. e ' owever, regardmg South II. UNITY AND DIVISION IN WESTERN POLICY
r. yYhat are the positive and negative implications ofrecent
strategic developments for the West?
Introducing the subject, one ofthe American participants outlined some ofthe
basic facts underlying the problem on the agenda.
There were now three nuclear powers and many others might follow shortly,
particularly ifno disarmament agreement were reached. Considerable technical
progress was taking place; missiles were fast replacing manned aircraft and a
wide range ofnuclear weapons was now available. The deterrent remained prin-
cipally in the hands of the United States, although Britain contributed a small
share. N.A.T.O. forces were being equipped with nuclear weapons, but at the
same time the conventional forces were weaker than in the past and weaker than
originally planned.
In order to narrow the debate the speaker then formulated some questions for
the consideration of the participants. The first set of questions referred to the
spread of the manufacture of nuclear weapons, i.e., the so-called nth country
problem. How dangerous was such a development? Was the suggested non-
nuclear club likely to stop it? How strong was the trend among N.A.T.O. coun-
tries to manufacture and possess independently nuclear armaments?
Although most speakers doubted the possibility of stopping the spread of
nuclear arms, it was conceded that it would be easier to achieve now than later
on when more countries had bombs of their own. Many speakers also doubted
that the spread would entail great dangers. Even if smaller countries did have
nuclear weapons there was no reason to think that they would behave in a more
irresponsible way than the big powers and, in any case, the smaller countries
would not embark on aggressive policies unless they had the backing of the big
ones. There was a danger, however, that since governments could bestuse nuclear
weapons as threats, their possession would encourage and put a premium on ir-
rational behaviour. In the event of a spread of nuclear weapons some speakers
envisaged situations where the big powers would have to put pressure on the
smaller ones, even to the extent of depriving them of the gains they might make
as a result ofnuclear aggression.
It was also suggested that ifthe non-nuclear club were adopted it would lessen
the incentive for a disarmam
Russia. ent agreement between the United States and
~onsiderations such as these cast a doubt on the . . . .
natiOnal agreement on the th possibilityofreachmganinter-
n country problem Th' 1 d
suggest that it would be safer to try t d 1 . IS e one ofthe speakers to
against nuclear aggression. . o eve op a strong world public opinion
It.w~s also suggested that nuclear wea ons w .
Theu mtroduction has in the . . fp ere a factor strengthening peace
fi
' opmwn o one ofth · · ·
ed the very concept ofwar for the ·e ld 1 e participants, radically modi-
ld h
. ' r cou no onger be a ·
cou t mk that victory in a nucle 1 ny VIctor. No aggressor
1
. arwarwou dfacTt t h 1 ·
ems which had originally confronted h' A .. II a e t e so utwn ofthe prob-
rent in the hands ofsmall countries wo IIdm. . gahm, even a .modest nuclear deter-
th . u give t em effecti .
e pnce an aggressor would have to a Thes . ve. secunty, by raising
the speakers to suggest that d' p y. e consideratiOns brought one of
. Isarmament could be '1 .
ventional forces were tackled fi . t A more easi y arnved at ifcon-
L
rs · n attempt had 1 d b
ondon Conference but it had b . k d a rea y een made at the
h
. ' ro en own on th ·
t Is would now be easier to achi e question of control. Maybe
Th eve.
e different reasons for the trend towards t .
nuclear weapons by N A T
0
. he mdependent possession of
fi . · · · . countnes were exam· d 0 f
ected m an extreme form in the d'ffi 1 . . me . ne o them was re-
I cu t position of Eu .
were not members of the North Atl . T ropean countnes which
under the N.A.T 0 umbr 11 ld antic reaty. Small countries which were
. . . e a cou contemplate . . t
sessmg nuclear weapons even if the th 1 d:esis ance to an aggressor pos-
ofthe armi.es ofnon-nuclear neutral: co::s~o~es Id not have them. The morale
to such a situation. ::I'he possessi·o f 1 ' however, be expected to stand up
h
no nuc ear weapons h fi
muc as a power symbol but th was t ere ore seen not so
. ' ra er as a prop for th 1 t·
an antidote to neutralism Th' . . e morae o the nation and
. · IS was particularly Im t fi h
countnes where some sections of bl' . . por ant or t ose European
d
· · . pu IC opmwn doubt d th · d
an ImpliCit reliance on the United St t e e WIS om of a total
to Soviet attack. This feeling· of .a es now that it had also become vulnerable
. . uneasmess was a matt .fi .
partiCipants. One of the speakers saw theN AT 0 er .or concern tosomeofthe
b~tw.een a much greater integration and a. rr:uc.h . dilemma as an alternative
Withm the alliance and providin . individu I gr~ater ~egree of solidarity
nuclear deterrent. g a countnes With an independent
On. the other hand, European states could not ffi .
effective conventional deterrent Th f h a ord the cost ofproviding an
· . · e use o t e nude d
JUStified on economic grounds It 11 ar eterrent was therefore
countries to develop and maint~in :~~~~ua y wasteful, however, for European
That is why one of the A : . pendentnucleardeterrentoftheirown
mencan participants tho ht h h . .
should share with its allies the rna · £ . . ug t at t e Umted States
nu acturmg know-how and provide them with
I4
the necessary nuclear armoury. Similar arrangements might even be made with
some ofthe neutral countries, particularly as he believed that the spread ofthese
weapons was inevitable. The present policy, he thought, was likely to lead to
frustration and disappointment.
As regards N.A.T.O.. strategy, another participant pointed out that there was
no possibility of a limited war in Europe. Even a conventional attack would be
met with tactical nuclear weapons. This had been decided upon long ago and
was no longer a problem for the N.A.T.O. Command. In any case, every attack
in Europe would in fact be aimed at the United States. An aggressor would there-
fore run the overwhelming risk oftriggering offthe full weight ofmassive nuclear
retaliation. The only outstanding question was whether to meet a conventional
attack with strategic retaliation, but then such a question could be decided by the
N.A.T.O. Council.
The automatic use oftactical atomic weapons did not dispense, however, with
the provision ofconventional forces ofsufficient strength. It might be argued that
such forces were needed to make the threat ofnuclear retaliation really effective.
They were also necessary to protectallied and neutral countries outside ofEurope,
where N.A.T.O. powers might be called upon to intervene. The ability to do so
effectively had an important psychological effect and would prove a powerful
stabilizing factor in the international scene.
These considerations also bore some relation to the uneasiness, referred to
above, fdt by some people in Europe about American readiness to intervene in
the present conditions of nuclear parity. IfKorea had happened under such cir-
cumstances, would the United States have responded with equal promptness?
One of the American participants pointed to the case of the Lebanon, which
showed that the resolve ofhis country remained unchanged.
The effectiveness ofthe Strategic Air Command, the American deterrent, was
discussed. The temporary lead the Russians may have acquired in the field of
missiles was considered of no strategic significance since the ability of S.A.C. to
strike a devastating retaliatory blow was unimpaired. The future development of
Polaris and the Minuteman and also of the B7o bomber would bridge the gap, if
any, that might exist at present.
The last question put to the assembly was to consider how far we can rely on
Russian motives in our defence calculations rather than on their estimated
strength.. Although, as one of the participants said, a considerable evolution was
taking place as a consequence of urbanization and education, which resulted in
social differentiation and also in the "intellectualization" of the people, it could
only have long-term effects. It was also noted that the concept of patriotism was
changing-it contained less mystique and more pride in Soviet achievements and
in being more like other people in the West. To be sure, the Soviet leaders had to
15
rely to a greater extent than before on the goodwill ofthe population, but it was
unre~sonable to expect that they would not be obeyed. Until the time when free
electwn~ we~e ~eld one should not expect the government to be really influenced
~y public opimon. !n the meantime, we should use to the utmost the opportuni-
ties f~r c~ntact, which were greater than expected. This might involve, however,
certam nsks and therefore, as one of the speakers suggested, we should strive to
prepare ours~lves better to face these contacts, in particular through strengthen-
mg co-operation between the non-Communist parties and organizations such as
t~e trade unions. It was also stressed that we should play on the desire ofthe Rus-
sian people for peace. If the Soviet people were to realize who the real trouble-
mak.ers wer~, they wo~ld.e~ert pressure on their government. Maybe, therefore,
President Eisenhower s VISit could be used to explain the peaceful intentions of
the West and, at the same time, tactfully point out what the real situation was.
2. What are the Western oqjectives in international econo-
mic development and how can we achieve them?
Discussing aid for economic development, some of the participants expressed
concer~ about our whole concept ofaid and its underlying philosophy.
, The.Importanc~ of the moral element and of the responsibility of the richer
countnes for helpmg the underprivileged was stressed. This element should be
pre~ent not only because ofits intrinsic merit but also because it tended to neu-
tralize some ofthe existing prejudices against the West.
I.t was strongly emphasized, however, that for the industrial countries with
theu f~st-expanding production capacities and increasing dependence on f~reign
trade, Immense advantages could result from a rapid acceleration of economic
development throughout the world. Economic progress was a mutual process.
The task was enormous and hopes have been raised high. If nothing was done
some speakers feared that within a decade we would witness a great disillusion-
ment with most painful consequences for ourselves.
We should avoid directing our aid primarily in reaction to Soviet moves. To
try to beat the Russians to it whenever we suspected them ofmaking a move or to
let ourse!ves be drawn into bidding against them could only result in defeats and
dem~rahz~ti?~ ofthe recipient countries.. At the same time, we should maintain
certam pnonties ~nd give preference to our friends. It was a question ofjudge-
ment ~nd ofkeepmg a proper balance. As one ofthe American speakers pointed
out, md should be used to develop the kind ofstrength we want, which, inciden-
tally, was also an argument against distributing it through the United Nations.
It was fu~ther ~tressed th~t i~ this matter we should always strive to preserve the
Western Identity of the md grven, and not hide behind anonymous fa<;:ades.. For
16
these reasons the O.E.E.C. was favoured by some speakers as an agencyfor distri-
buting aid, although it was pointed out that its future was clouded ~y the s.t;>lit
between the "six" and the "outer seven". It was also recognized that aid, commg
as it does from national budgets, was much easier to obtain on a bilateral basis.
The supply was scarce, as in every country there were vast competing. needs.at
home, and the amounts released were disappointingly small in companson With
the requirements ofthe underdeveloped countries. , . .
The importance of the psychological aspect of the vanous forms of md an~
economic co-operation was also emphasized. As in the case ofM.I.D.E.C., expen-
ence has proved the value ofan international approach. Politics were fr.eq~ently
involved and the recipient countries did not wish to feel dependent. Th1s d1d not
mean, however, that bilateral agreements were necessarily less welcome as they
could be concluded simultaneously with several countries.
The particular value ofinternational agencies such as I.B.R..D. or t~e ~nited
Nations Special Fund was that they were able to enforce a stnct apphcatwn of
business and banking.criteria to their operations which individual countries found
difficult to do for political reasons, a point which was stressed by many speakers.
Tribute was also paid to the personal ability and authority of the heads of these
agencies-qualities which considerably contributed to their success. . .
The project for setting up the International Development Ass~ciatlOn w~s
greatly welcomed. One of the participants who had played a promment par~ m
its promotion stressed that it would considerably enlarge the scope offinancmg
facilities for the underdeveloped countries without impairing the standards estab-
lished by the World Bank. It could make loans more cheaply because its.borr~w­
ing costs and its operating expenses were relatively small. At the same t1me, l.1ke
Marshall Aid it would promote convertibility among the soft currency countnes.
The provision oflong-term loans at 2 or 2! per cent interest rates based on purely
banking criteria would meet an urgent and unfulfilled need. Furthermore, such
loans could be combined with other forms of lending or aid. The danger was,
however, that the funds originally put at the disposal of I.D.A. would prove too
small.
The problem of aid has been much discussed and much studied. What was
needed now was an act ofwill on the part ofthe governments and some speakers
noted that this question was referred to during the recent European trip made by
President Eisenhower. It was also pointed out that the United States, partly as a
result ofthe drain on its stocks ofgold and the growth ofits national debt but also
as a result of a lack of appreciation of its efforts, was cooling off on foreign aid.
The United States would be much more willing and could be persuaded to do
more ifEurope were to play a greater part. In this connection it was pointed out
that in Germany a greater awareness ofthis problem was apparent.
Among the material factors ofeconomic development the provision ofmarkets
was considered more important than aid" The recession experienced by the indus-
trial countries, resulting in the fall of commodity prices and reduced sales in-
flicted on the underdeveloped countries a loss of earnings several times gr:ater
than all the aid and loans they were receiving. The necessity to find some means
ofreducing this fluctuation ofcommodity prices was referred to on several occa-
sions. It was our greatest weakness and the reason for much recrimination against
the West. Again, it was pointed out that our efforts were mainly directed at
financing production facilities, particularly of commodities and raw materials
while at the same time much too little was being done to develop markets fo;
these products.
On the other hand, the governments of the underdeveloped countries were
primarily responsible for certain matters" Among these was the control ofinflation
which affecte~ exports, and the creation offavourable conditions for foreign in-
vestments, which, as the example ofMexico proved, could achieve a remarkable
degree ofdevelopment over a comparatively short period oftime. They must also
foster the process ofcapital accumulation. This was an important problem which
was frequently mentioned; in this connection it was pointed out that in an increas-
ing number ofcases because ofthe shortage ofcapital it was no longer sufficient to
provide only the foreign exchange cost ofdevelopment schemes; finance for local
expenditures also had to be provided.
Pol~tical factors were as important to economic development as capital and
techmques. One ofthe chiefconditions ofsuccess was that the recipient countries
should earnestly seek to develop their resources and should be ready to follow
appropriate policies and make all the necessary sacrifices. In particular, it was
strongly stressed that they themselves should assume moral responsibility for the
development projects carried out on their territories. This was a precondition
of success.
The hopeless position of small economic units was also mentioned and it was
sta~e? that every encouragement should be given to the formation of larger
entitles.
Some speakers referred to the problem ofrapid population growth following in
the fo~tste~~ of economic ~evelo_rment and threatening to absorb all progress
made m ralSlng the real natiOnal mcome. One ofthe participants observed how-
ever, that in this field forecasting was difficult and pointed to the encou;aging
ex~mple ofJapan,.wher~, if the trend of these last few years persisted, the popu-
latiOn would remam statwnary, and to India, which had a smaller proportional
increase than the United States.
One of the participants stressed how little was known about the resources of
most of the underdeveloped countries. We were only beginning to learn about
18
whatcould be exploited and how. This was the kind ofwor~ which.wo~ld be b.est
carried out through the United Nations Special Fund. Th~s orgamzatlon, .which
was doing a particularly important work in preparing pre-mvestment studies, re-
ceived numerous expressions ofsupport. This brought one of the speakers-:-~ho
recalled the success of the International Geophysical Year-to suggest a Similar
year ofstudy ofworld resources and requirements so that a ?udget ofthe present
position and ofthe likely situation in ten and twenty years time co~ld be drafted.
It was pointed out, however, that so far we did not even have sufficient knowledge
to undertake such a project usefully.
Economic progress in the poorer countries depended as much on the develop-
ment of human as of material resources. This point was brought up by several
speakers who stressed that there were vast potentiali~e.s in most.people which
were concealed by lack of education. Schools and trammg establishments were
essential to economic progress and we seemed to be lagging badly behind in wh~t
could and should be done in this field. We only had to look at the Commumst
world to realize how inadequate were our efforts and this alone should spur us to
envisage the problem on a much greater scale. . .
Having regard to the needs, all our efforts so far wer~ grossly msuffic~ent. Th.e
problem of poverty was not a new one, having been With us for centunes, but It
has become more urgent and more dangerous, chiefly as a result ofthe Co.mmu-
nist challenge. Some participants doubted whether it was altogether possible to
achieve significant results rapidly enough. Money and techniques could be pro-
vided quickly but they were only part of the answer. It was conten~e.d that eco-
nomic development depended to an even greater extent on the p~evallmg ge?eral
level ofculture and civilization. Our rationalist philosophy, which gave us mtel-
lectual discipline, and our moral philosophy, which provided the basis for our
juridical concepts, were directly responsible for our material achievements. It was
essential that we should make this point well understood. Also, as regards our
economic system it should be made clear that it formed a whole an.d that it could
not be made to work if only some ofits elements were adopted while others were
discarded.
At the same time, we should be cautious and pragmatic in our approach, for
our experience ofthe processes ofeconomic developmentis still limited. One of~he
participants cited the example ofltaly, which was sometimes called a federation
between a developed and an underdeveloped country. Here there were n~ ~~on­
tiers, no political risks, a common currency, a high level of cultu:e and CIVIliza-
tion, and a fully developed institutional structure. A problem existed, n~v~rthe­
less. In the southern part of the country the development of economic mfra-
structures was comparatively easy, but difficulties arose at a later stage. H?w
could industry be made to follow? How to develop the process of accumulati<?n
rg
oflocal capitaland stimulate local enterprise? But perha s the
arose out ofthe sudden breaking up ofthe existing bal p . greatest proble:m
. . ances lll the so . I
nomic structures. Many delicate problems arose. in sol . .th Cia and ceo~
· · ' vmg em th d
mg and expenence oflocal people proved much more r. 1th e un erstand~
USC!U an th
the developed north, whose experience was frequent! · 1 e counsels of
d
. . . d'ffi 1 y Irre evant In th
1t10ns 1t was 1 cu t to foresee what kind of structu . . h · esc con~
. res rmg t fi II d
They would certamly not be Communist but equally II h na Y evelop.
the bourgeois type such as we have known in industrial7ed t ely would not be of
y eve oped countries.
3· What are the elements in the evolving· pictu · .
. re m tropical
Afnca that may affect Western unit ;>
y.
This subject was discussed on the third day of the Co r.
. . Dlerence. In th fi ld
economic development mentiOn was made ofthe familiar d'ffi I . e e of
d
. . . I cu ties such a I
pro uctiVIty, an antiquated system ofland tenure, Jack ofb 1 . ' s ow
h . b'I' f k .c • a ancem the ceo
t e msta 11ty o mar ets 10r the mam exportable products d ..nomy,
ments. ' an lack of mvest~
A number of participants believed that the split betw h " . ,
" " . h h d een t e SIX and th
seven mig t ave angerous consequences for Africa Th' . . e
. Is opmwn w 'd I
shared. One of the speakers regretted the inclusion within th C as WI e Y
ofoverseas territories which was done to appease certain Euroe ea~mm~~ Market
sures. It affected adversely the relationship of the Common i.r [oht~cal p~es~
countries and burdened it with the illusion that a commo
1
. ar et With third
d b h
" . " d h . n po Icy could be p
sue y t e six towar s t e1r overseas territories The . ur~
. · present s1tuaf
unsatisfactory as the development funds earmarked for Ar. · Ion was
1nca were spe t d
the control ofthe colonial powers in support ofparticular fc f n un er
often reflecting political considerations. orms
0
collaboration,
As for Africa, its development would suffer ifit were to b d' 'd
. e~~oo~
hues as Europe. On the contrary, as some participants stre d same
. . . sse ' we should t
promote the creatiOn oflarge economic umts. That is why ·
1 ry to
regwna org · ·
for economic co-operation and aid were often commended Th . amzatwns
d
'ffi 1. . h 0 . ere were howev .
1 cu ties m t at respect. ne ofthe participants conside d . '. er,
fA
r. . . . re unrealistic all t lk
o mean Umty. There was no cultural, lmguistic or even · 1 . a
· . . ' racia umty
there any common traditiOns. Differences were numerous h'l h 'nor were
. ' w I e t e only
mon factor was the attitude towards the white. com~
Generally speaking, the economic division ofAfrica which I'k 1
as a result ofthe split in Europe, strengthened as it was by ali was. I.e Yto develop
d
. . . b . ngmst1c and cultu 1
IVISIOn etween the French- and English~speaking territor' . ra
b
. . Ies, was considered t
e a senous problem and a potential source of friction for th b 0
Western Alliance. e mem ers of the
20
In the economic field mention was also made ofthe shortage ofadministrative
cadres and ofentrepreneurial skill. In this connection the work of the Capricorn
Society, which has set up a school in Nairobi for training in citizenship with a
view to forming personnel for local government, was mentioned, and also the pro~
ject of the Rockefellers Brothers Fund for developing small industry in Ghana.
Numerous references were made to the great need for educational facilities, par-
ticularly fo,r secondary education, but at the same time many participants were
encouraged to find that Africans were not only willing to be taught but were also
fast learners.
Two further points which were mentioned in the previous debate on the aims
of economic development were also stressed. The Africans themselves must as-
sume responsibility for the success of all development projects. Unless the new
governments felt strongly about them they were likely to get bogged down and
run into trouble. This applied to private ventures as well, which needed to enlist
the support of the Africans. The second point was that economic development
depended largely on raising the general cultural level ofthe country. In particu-
lar, our moral notions, which provided the basis of our laws of contract, had to
be absorbed.
Illustrating the general problem of teaching Africans our techniques and our
civilization, one of the participants mentioned how difficult he found it to
suggest books which would explain the working of our economic and political
system. Such literature existed on Communism, whereas he was hard put to
suggest to Africans any suitably concise books dealing with democracy and free
economy.
In the political domain one ofthe major questions was whether we could expect
democracy, and in particular our parliamentary institutions, to function success-
fully in Africa where conditions were generally very primitive. On the whole
speakers felt that it was more realistic to expect the emergence of authoritarian
regimes and that, in any case, democratic institutions should not be the touch-
stone ofour policies. Naturally we should uphold the democratic ideal but at the
same time we should co-operate with the new African states whatever form of
government they might come to choose. The democratic system in the new coun-
trieswas subject to great strains, some ofwhich were economic in origin. We could
best help, therefore, by providing some reliefin this field.
Perhaps, as one ofthe participants suggested, we should concentrate on foster-
ing respect for civil and human rights, as regards which enormous progress has
been achieved in Africa in the last fifty years, rather than insisting on political
democracy. This was also directly relevant to the problem of the multi-racial
societies we wanted to see established, and we should act while Europeans were
still in a position to control or influence the administrations ofthe African states.
21
Ill
jj
,I
i\
,:
,,
i
This idea met with large approval, and it was even suggested that we make the
preservation ofhuman and civil rights a condition ofour aid.
Another problem was to establish co-operation with the new political leaders.
It was stressed that we should accept the idea ofworking with the new men and
strive to win them over to our side. Whoever they could now rely upon for help
would become their friend. In this context several participants strongly favoured
meetings and conferences between Western and African leaders which might
greatly improve mutual understanding and help in establishing partnership.
Although no such meetings could be organized within the Bilderberg Group,
several speakers asked that members should individuaiiy support such projects
whenever possible.
We should mention in this connection an observation made by an American
participant that, in spite ofali differences between Africans-and especiaiiy the
language barrier-Africans kept in touch with one another and were keenly
aware of developments throughout the continent, whereas it seemed that Euro-
pean settlers and governmental agencies were largely orientated towards their
home countries and were far too little informed about the situation in other parts
ofAfrica.
The new leaders, said one of the participants, were primarily out for power.
Once they achieved it, the divergence between their aims and interests and those
ofthe Communists was complete. Unlike the Communists, we did not seek their
subservience and we could therefore find much ground in common. On the other
hand, it was contended that we should not give indiscriminate support to ail in-
dependence movements, as some of them, such as the Algerian rebels, adopted
methods which held out little hope for the future. The situation in Indonesia
should serve as a warning.
The links and similarities between the nationalist and Communist movements
were mentioned in several speeches. While some speakers pointed to the identity
oftheir immediate aims, others emphasized the necessity ofdrawing a line. It did
us no good to speak too much ofCommunism, but, on the other hand, we should
avoid creating conditions for its spread.
The Belgian Congo was also discussed. One of the participants said that the
Belgians considered themselves "anti-colonialist" and felt that they had a right
to be there in so far as they were promoting economic development and social and
political progress. At the present moment, in view ofthe mounting pressure ofthe
Africans for independence, the Government had to act quickly and accept risks
in introducing reforms. In Leopoldville, in the centre, and in the north the prob-
lem was mainly social, but the Lower Congo was influenced by Brazaville and the
problem there was mainly political. The Government was trying to speed up the
22
.. t atJ."on to introduce political reforms, and at
· · · " of the admmis r ' th" h
"Afncamzat!On d d f I" . g At the root ofevery mg, ow-
. the stan ar o Ivm · ·
the same time to Improve 1 . The participant who spoke on this
bl f human re at10ns. ld b
ever, was the pro em o ld ceed and that violence cou e
subject hoped that these reforms wou sue
avoided. d" .the Federation ofSouthern Rhodesia,
Some concern was expressed regardIng 1 t and ofhaving· to change policies
b ftoo little an too a e
as it seemed to e a case o . . Africa considerable effort had
A r p t guese prOVInCeS In '
under pressure. s !Or or u t conomic and social progress. These
. h l t decade to promo e e
been made dunng t e as f p t g·al and it was not envisaged that
. .. .d . d to be part o or u . .
terntones were consi ere . d This made one ofthe participants
d de to mdepen ence.
they should one ay acce . . r ·long· outside the stream ofdevelop-
h . . nlikely to remam !Or . 1"
observe that t ey were u h "fPortug·al were to persist in Its po Icy
. fAr. · din t at case I .
ments m the rest o !HCa, an . t mong· the Western countnes.
. lf · 1 t d and without suppor a
it would find Itse ISO a e . h t ati"onalist movement existed as yet
d · mtedoutt a non
On the other han , It was po . . . hope that it will not develop.
and the example ofGoa in India gav~ so~: ress towards independence was un-
In Africa as. much ~s elsewh:rt~~ue:thfs was generally recognized, it ~eemed
avoidable and meversible. But 1 g d" . t d this fact or accepted all Its con-
that the European countries have not yet Igesl eti"mes We were still thinking for
. · brought up severa · .
sequences. This pomt was . I question ofconsiderable Import-
. f es ofmfluence. twas a . b
instance m terms o zon . d h d to win over these countnes y
· · t emphasize we a
ance for, as one partiCipan ' . development which was far from
. . d t ly solely on economic ' . . . h
political means an no re . d 11" . amples of disastrous policies whic
. R h" t ry provide te mg ex . ·
certam. .ecent IS o 11 th "mplications of new SituatiOns.
f h · .f "led to accept a e I ·
1
were the result o avi~g ai 1 d the progress ofnationalism in coloma
That is where the Russmns who we come
. . r. ble to score over us. f
terntones were O!ten a h ld mor·e attention to the concept o
· d that we s ou pay
It was also mentwne d ta es including strategic ones.
Euro-Africa, which presented many a van g ~e ofinterest in African affairs by
Several participants spoke oft~e r~cent uhpsdurbeen set up new publications had
. bl" Many new mstJ.tutes a ' .
the Amencan pu Ic. . . d h ·hout the country and particu-
. bemg orgamze t roug h
appeared, semmars were . . of the speakers appealed to t e
. · · I this connectiOn one · .
larly in the umversities. n t their case as otherwise the Amencan
Europeans to make a greater ef~'ort to plreshen ld be remembered however, that in
. ld - "ded picture. t s ou ' r
public wou get a one SI . . h db cant and that at present there!ore,
the past American interest m Afn~a a ee~ s t 1 marginal Largely the result
. . b .t was still proportwna e y . .
even in spit~of the ~om, 1. . taken b the American negro, it is now begm-
ofa sudden mcrease m the mterest Th" '! t rn has aroused some suspicion on
ning to have political consequences. IS m u
23
the part of the Europeans. It was pointed out, however, that while Americans
passionately believed in the right ofself-determination and self:.betterment, at the
same time they recognize that there existed such a thing as premature indepen-
dence.
Before declaring the Conference closed, the Chairman announced the retire-
ment ofDrJ. H. Retinger as Secretary General ofthe European Group. He paid
tribute to the great work done by Dr Retinger who founded the Group and or-
ganized its activities in Europe. For the past two years Dr Retinger has sought to
retire but his friends persuaded him to postpone such action. Now, however, much
to the regret ofall the members ofthe Group, they would have to accept his deci-
sion. The Chairman then proposed that Dr Retinger be made Life Patron ofthe
Group. This proposal was warmly applauded.
Replying, Dr Retinger thanked the assemblyfor this honour and the Chairman
for his kind words and expressed his appreciation for the friendship and support
which he and all the members of the Group have shown him during these years.
The Chairman then announced that Dr E. H. van der Beugel had been invited
-and, he was glad to say, had &cccptcd·-to be the new Honorary Secretary
General of the European Group.
PRESS STATEMENT
, f, f the Bilderberg Group has just been conclu~ed at
A three"day con erence ofi h' h dealt primarily with economic and
. T k The con erence w IC
Yesilk~y~. ur ey. h F W ld was presided over by H.R.H. Prince Bern-
strategic problems oft e ree or '
hard ~fthe Net~erla:ds. . f the Bilderberg Group, which meets occasi~nally
This was the eigh~ meetmg o I h official status and all participants
to analyse internati~nal pro~leml. tn ~: ~oose who participated in this confer-
attend in apn _unoffiMci.Inai.ls~::~~~der=~n~ Foreign Minister Zorlu ofTurkey.
ence were nme
20 September 1959
ANNEXE
Remarks by an American participant
who recently visited Africa
Your Royal Highness, somewhere in the course ofmy recent quick tour through
Africa a phrase ofRalph Waldo Emerson's came to my mind out ofthe depths of
my memory: "Things are in the saddle and they ride mankind." It seems to me
this phrase describes very aptly what is happening in Africa today.
Things are in the saddle and they ride mankind-they ride not only the Euro-
peans, they ride the Africans as well. The competition within countries between
Mricans, the competition between Africans in different countries, to move ahead,
this seems to me to be a part ofwhat is happening there. I only say this to under-
line the point that was made by two of the rapporteurs in their papers and the
points made by several others here about the speed ofchange that is taking place.
I have a very real feeling that there is very little that can be done to stop "things"
and that people have to try to ride them. '
My second remark relates particularly to the multi-racial areas that I visited-
and to a certain extent, even though I recognize that the European population in
the Congo is nothing like the proportion that it is in Southern Rhodesia and
Ke~ya, I think this applies a little bit to the Congo-and here I come to a point
which was made by another American participant. It seems to me that one ofthe
~ajor.problems ofthe Eu:opeans (and this, I think, is a problem ofthe Europeans
m Afnca, the Europeans m the metropoles, and others, such as the Americans) is
to ~o what they can to see that the ill will that has a danger ofgrowing among the
Afncans does not get completely out ofhand. Ifit does, both sides will suffer. And
there are signs ofill will, unfortunately, at the present time-at least, I found a
few.
And in. c?nnecti~n with that, one idea occurred to me. I have no knowledge
whether It IS practicable, although two Europeans, one in Kenya and one in
Rhodesia, seemed to think that it might be, to do something in this field. If the
Europeans, while they are still a political majority, which they are, in fact, in
Southern Rhodesia and in Kenya-! don't say a majority in numbers but a
political rr:ajority~can find some way of establishing the concept of civii rights
and equahty of nghts bifore they lose power, then they may have some status
afterwards.
One ofthe things that struck me was that all Africans equate the word demo-
cracy with "one man, one vote". Now all of us here know that the eq~ation of
democracy is a much more complicated one. All ofus kno:V that ~rote~t10n ofthe
riahts of the individual and a substantial degree of equahty of nghts IS a part of
that equation. We in the Western world had human rights o~ civil rights.i~ some
form and to some degree before we had "one man, one vot,e . Whether It IS pos-·
sible to m~dify the present easy equation ofthe Africans to get them to recognize
that it must be a more complicated equation, I don't know. But I do suggest,
especially to the members of the International Committee ofJurists, that it is
something to think hard about in relation to Africa. .
A secon:d specific proposal I would have relates to the need.for Europe~ns m
Africa to know more about what's going on in other parts ofAfnca. The Afncans,
despite the language barrier, which is certainly there and very real, are in touch,
very much in touch with each other: Africans in power, Africans ?ut o.f~o':er,
who are political leaders or who hope to be political leaders. Sometimes It IS d~ffi­
cult· at a recent conference Sekou Toure and Nkrumah had to have Moumier,
the Communist from the Cameroons, as their interpreter because they couldn't
get anybody else, but at least they were in touch. The Europeans are not i.n touch
with other areas in Africa, they are in touch with the home country. The hnes run
from Leopoldville to Brussels, from Abidjan to Paris, from Lag.os to London. They
don't run across. The Europeans, it seems to me, are very Ignorant of what IS
happening in the other areas of Africa. One African told me they were ':ilfully
ignorant. I don't think so; I think they just have not seen the need offindmg out
what is happening in other areas than their own. The Africans do learn, ~nd unle~s
the Europeans have some awareness-I think one of the papers m~ntwned this
briefly in relation to the Congo-it's going to be a very much more difficult prob-
lem for them.
One last point, Sir, I would mention. We talked yesterday at some length about
the demographic problem that we are faced with in dealing with the underdeve-
loped countries. A friend of mine, a student of manpower trai?ing who kno';s
India, Pakistan, and Egypt fairly well and who has been to Afnca re~ently, said
that he has some hope about the possibility ofbringing about economic develop-
ment in Africa at least in the West African countries, because as yet the demo-
graphic proble~ there is not as acute as it is in Asia. In other words, it may be
possible to bring about the shift into economic development before the "popula-
tion bomb" hits them. This, it seems to me, is possibly an element ofhope.
