BILDERBERG MEETINGS
..
BURGENSTOCK
CONFERENCE
!18-stgMay I gOO
• • •• - -~ .,;-. -- ;too. - '"'
J• 1" •• - ,..,_ _..~ ,_~ __ ,~-- ~••• - \ I=··': '
.
..
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINcE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL IN EUROPE:
ERNST H. VANDER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL IN THE UNITED STATES:
JoSEPH E. JoHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
PAUL Rl.JuNS
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL IN EUROPE:
ARNoLD Ts. LAMPING
ACHILLES, THEODORE
AoNELLI, GiovANNI
Alluons, CHAR.LES C.
AltoN, RAYMoND
BALL, GEOR.GB
BAUMGARTNER., WILl'RID
BBLL, ELLIOT v.
B.ENNETr, FREDERIC
BBR.o,FRrrZ
B&YEN,J. w.
BDUUtNBAOH, KURT
BLAJSSB, P. A.
Bon, BARON RENi
BoVBR.I, WALTER.
C.uro, Low
CAVBNDDB·BENTINOK, VIaroR.
UNITED STATES
ITALY
GREECE
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
GBR.IIANY
NETBBR.LANDII
GBRMANY
NETBEli.LANDS
BBJ.oiUK
SWlTZBlUoAND
BBJ.GIUK
UNITBD KINGDOM
s
~HuoN
Dmsr. lf&anualr
DuPuY. Pmluut
Eu.mt.Fmrz
FA.LDlmJIDr, ERNST
Fonu_ WILUAM c.
GUJUIINS, Sm CoLIN
HALL PATCH, SUl EDMuND
HE.u.P;v, DENIS W.
lhn.P.BJUN, MlcHAEL A.
HEINZ II, lh:mvJ.
Ho&GB, Lmr
IVDOTB, AxEL
jACQON, c. D.
KmsaroEa, K. G.
VAN .Kr.unN&, E. N.
KRAFT, OLE BJSIUI
MAI.AGODI. GIOVANNI
M.UJOLDI, RoiiERT
MA.RTJ:H, .EDwAJW M.
McGu, G.u.E
ArW..r..uma. joi!AN
Mnsnr, GJJloLAKO
M11!U.BJt,Rvoou
MUJlPJIY, RoBERT D.
Nuouum, GsoaGE
PmTra,JACQ.OZS
Puw.LJ. Al.naTO
PoamDov, GEOROJ!I
Q.UAJl()NJ, .Pimto
RlmmAllDT, EBERIIARD
RoDmouu, M. .M. SAitlmNTO
8cBAmara, IWG
ScaoaD, c.w.o
Soorr, Hwa
St'foy-c D"OP~ .._J.C.
S!w.s,l'~
~J.I...J
~~
DBN¥.wt
GUMANV
CANADA
GJtRMANY
GUJ~ANY
UNmED STATES
UNITED KlNGDOM
UNITKD .KlNGDOM
Umtto .KlNGDOM
GRADUATE INsnTuTE 01'
lNTER.''iAT. STUDIES
UNITED STATES
NoawAY
SWEDEN
UNITED STATES
GERMANY
E.C.S.O.
D.ENMAR.K
ITALY
E.E.C.
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
NoawAY
ITALY
GEJlMANY
UNITED STATES
UNlTED STATES
FRANCE
ITALY
FL\MCB
ITALY
SWll'ZEllLAND
PORTUGAL
SWl'l'ZERLAMD
GIWWIY
Ulll'l'JU) STA.'l'lll
BJu.oJm&
N.A.T.O.
UJilDD KINGDOM
SWBJ>:ur
WJLIIIWI", A1TBVIl
WoUF vmf .AimJlOHou, Orro
ZBLLEJUJACB,J.ums D.
IN ATIENDANCE:
Focn, E. G.
DE GRAAPF, F. A.
VOM DER Mtbn.L, J.
Ltt Rov, B.
SAINT-MLEux, A.
GE1U1ANY
Ns:rBD.LANJ>S
SWlTZERLAND
NETBEllLANilS
N.A.T.O.
INTRODUCTION
The BQrgenstock Conference was the ninth o£ its kind, the previous ones
having been held in variow European countries and in lhe United States.
It is not the purpose ofthese oonf'ereru:es to attempt to make policy or to ~
commend action by governments. Their sole object is, by bringing together
men ofou13tanding qualities and influence, in circumstances where diacussloua
can be £rank and where arguments not always med inpublic debate can be put
forward, to reach a better undemanding ofprevailing differences between the
Western countries and to study those fields in whichagreementmay be sought.
The discussioua are so organized as to permit a broad and £rank exchange of
views to take place. They are held in conditions or strict privacy and neither
the press nor observers are admitted. No resolutions are paued and no state-
ments have to be approved bythe participants, who are free to draw their own
conclusions.
Those invited to attend the Bilderberg Conferences are chosenfrom different
nations andfrom allfields ofpublicactivityandinclude statesmen, diplomatists,
business and professional men, intellectuals, and leaders ofpublic opinion. All
participants attend the meetings in a pumy personal capacity and the views
they express do not necessarily represent those ofthe organizations orparties to
which they belong. The various topics on the agenda are introduced by
rapporteurs who have prepand papers on these subjects. These documents are
as far as possible circulated in advance ofthe meetings.
In the following text the views expressed during the debates arebriefly sum-
marizedunder headings whichcorrespond to the different points ofthe agenda.
0
7
I. STATE OF THE WORLD SITUATION
AFTER THE FAILURE
OF THE SUMMIT CONFERENCE
In opening the meeting, H. R. H. Prince Bernhard thanked his Swiss hosts
for their hospitality, stressing in particular the excellent choice ofa meeting-
place: He also recalled the rules applying to Bilderberg conferences, with
especial reference to the avoidance ofleakages to the Press.
The subject for discussion was introduced bytwo statements, the first made
by an American participant and the second by a European one.
The American participant spoke ofthe reactions produced in United States
opinion by the U.2. incident. Both Press and public agreed that it was a very
ill-chosen moment to announce the continuation of these flights (although if
this standard were to be adopted, some factor or another would always
militate against such Bights); it was also felt that the various statements made
after the incident had been hardly wise; in the early stages meteorological
research had been invoked as an excuse; later, it had been given out that "the
President was unaware of what was happening" and, finally, it had been
announced that the flights would continue, thus causing confusion in the
Atlantic camp. The speaker dismissed these attitudes as "boyscout behaviour".
On the other hand, he stressed the extremely valuable intelligence that had
thus been obtained, constituting as it did a powerful reinforcement to the
Atlantic concept of the deterrent, all the more valid in that the Russians now
knew that flights of the U.2. type had been undertaken for some four years
already. The Soviets now realize that the dispersion of targets they have
carried out over their territoryisno real safeguard. The speaker also explained
that, very probably, the pilot had only been forced down after engine-trouble
had caused his aircraft to lose so much altitude that it was within the range of
Russian anti-aircraft defences. The speaker believed that the balance offorces
was favourable to the Atlantic camp, and that the likelihood ofwar had been
temporarily removed to some extent. However, it had to be admitted ~t,
if Mr. K.. had decided to torpedo the summit conference, the pretext for domg
so had been handed to him on a silver salver.
The same speaker also mentioned some important consequences of the in-
9
cident-the resuscitation ofthe Eisenhower "open skies" plan, the realization
that the policy ofdiplomacy based on smiles ha~ ~Ued.for good, the s.alutary
effect produced on American parliamentary oplDlon Wlth regard to aid bu~­
gets and the increased firmness now visible within NATO. On the whole, 1t
seemed that American opinion now saw things far more clearly and was more
disposed to cohesion in the face of the coming struggle, particularly on th.e
economic plane. Incidentally, one could say that Mr. K. had overplayed his
hand; it was equally certain that his attitude would ~ave an effect on ~e
American presidential election. K.'s candidate was obVIously Stevenson, Wlth
Rockefeller and Kennedy after. Whatever the repercussions might be, it was
ofno assistance to any candidate to be K.'s favourite!
The European participant began by sketching an outline of events since
the Yesilkoy Conference (late September, l959)· The whole period had been
dominated by the "Summit" and by a certain atmosphere of optimism (the
famous "spirit ofCamp David"). However, Mr. K., while admitting that the
problems might be solved in not one, but a series of conferences, ha~ blown
hot and cold. For his own part, the speaker had never ceased to believe that
progress had been very slight (disarmament, nuclear tests) and that, when it
came to the essential problem-Berlin-there had been no progress at all.
Public optimism was based on the idea ofa Krushchev who was the enemy of
the Stalinists and who needed a period ofpeace in order to carry out his five-
year plan, without forgetting the threatening shadow ofChina on the horizon.
In the face ofthis optimism, it could beasserted that the thaw that had occurred
inside Russiahadleft: the doctrineintact, and had been accompanied by a more
aggressive attitude towards other countries. It was clear that Mr. K.'s aim was
to appeal to the populations of the West and of the world over the heads of
their governments, in the hope ofmaking the former revolt against the latter.
As for the U.2. incident itself, two theories were possible:
- either Mr. K.. had realized, as a result ofhis trips abroad, that the summit
conference was bound to end in failure, and had wished to avoid this in
order DOt to be forced to carry out immediately his threats (a separate peace
treaty with Germany, etc.},
- orhe eqecta his technicians to produce some decisive military noveltyin the
near future, wbich would put him in a better bargaining position.
It might alto be true that he does not know what to do for the moment and
neec:b time tOr thought.
We DlUit then:f'ore make the best use of the breathing-space allotted to us.
In this c:oonec:rion, tbe speaker feared that further nniles from Mr. K. might
reYive "optimism"• with itJ attendant dangers. One positive element, in any
ew:nt, Wll the abaudoammt of tbe idea that tbe "Summit'' was a panacea.
10
The speaker thought that the West needed a success in the field of military
technology.
In the course ofthe discussion, a British speaker, who attempted to describe
the prevailing sentiment in his country (although his views were not entirely
shared by another British participant) showed a certain optimism in spite
ofappearances. He thought the failure ofthe summit was due rather to errors
ofjudgment both in Washington and Moscow, and pointed out that a certain
moderation had not entirely disappeared from East-West relations (the C 47
affair in East Germany, Mr. Gromyko's attitude in the Security Council, and
the fact that the experts were continuing their Geneva talks).
The facts which had led the parties to seek a solution remained unchanged.
The speaker was in favour ofcontinued peacemaking efforts by the West, and,
in this connection, recommended the admission of communist China to the
United Nations. He also stressed the risk to the West of waging an all-out
economic war on the battlefield of the under-developed countries. He said
that Britishpublic opinion was inincreasing doubt about the wisdom ofAmeri-
can leadership, while realizing the West's increasingneed ofAmerican military
strength: the consequence was an ever stronger tendency within NATO in
favour ofgreater European influence on that organization. At the same time,
British public opinion was coming closer to that of the Continent.
Several participants mentioned the favourable effects that recent events had
had on Western public opinion. There was evidence of greater realism and a
greater belief in the value of traditional diplomatic methods.
One had also to bear firmly in mind that it is Mr. K. who has given the
current initiative and the style to the cold war, a fact that does not call for
eitheroptimism orpessimismon our part but simplyfor an extreme flexibility of
attitude, as both camps still seemed to agree that a total war was improbable.
Several participants spoke ofthe reasons that had, in their opinion, led Mr.
K.. to torpedo the conference before it even began. Some speakers maintained
that the pressure exerted on Mr. K. within the Soviet Union was not imagin-
ary, but appreciable: it came, not so much, or not only, from the military, but
also from certain members of the Central Committee who would be ready to
attack their leader if the expected results of his spectacular travels abroad
failed to materialize soon (cf. the recent reshuffling of the Secretariat of the
Soviet Communist Party). It should not be forgotten either that Mr. K. is a
highly-conceited individual, and it may be that he expected to be called to the
telephone by Ike immediately after the U.2. incident. Another cause for
concern is that he has no idea how the West will react to his behaviour (for
instance, his harbouring of illusions about the possible effects of his attitude
towards the American elections). He will never be content until he has !ega-
II
-- - --·-.
lized his country's wartime conqueslll; and from this point ofview, the German
treaty is, and will remain, his chiefobjective-hence the permanent validity
ofhis ultimatum. Perhaps the outcome will be the convening by the US~R,
after the American elections, ofa general peace conference ofall the ex-bellige-
rents, including the "two Germanies". As the West will not give in to such a
demand a separate treaty will be signed; and nothing dramatic will happen in
Berlin, which will, rather, be slowly strangled.
The West then must draw up as accurate a balance-sheet of the situation
as possible. Once this had been done, there could be two alternati_ves-ei~her
to offer the Russians solutions that they found acceptable, or to bnng forc1ble
pressure to bear on them. One ofthe speakers described this choice as tragic
and inextricable.
Another speaker went further in his analysis of the internal situation in
Russia. He pointed out that, from the point ofview ofpure doctrine, Mr. K.
had shown himselfto be a "heretic" when he declared, at the XXth Congress,
that war was not inevitable. (This opinion as to heresy was not generally
shared, however). The same speaker also said that the problems raised for
the Soviet world by co-existence were just as numerous as those of the cold
war: among other things, the Soviet people was nowadays less inclined to
accept sacrifices than it had been when it believed illlelf to be encircled by
capitalislll; and ill! natural sympathy for foreigners was on the increase.
Mr. K. himself had encouraged this attitude, to the great annoyance of
the communislll in Africa and Asia. It was also a striking fact that, until
President Eisenhower's press conference of I I May, Mr. K.'s tone had been
relatively moderate. It was certain that the reaction in the USSR against the
thaw had grownstrongeras the American statementshadsucceeded each other.
The West should .know how to analyse the determining factors in ill! own
attitude.
Ifone looked to the future, said the speaker, two questions arose:
a) did we really want another summit conference?
b) ifso, what should we do to make it a success?
However, before replying to the second question, the speaker mentioned
several drawbacks which, according to him, were characteristic of summit-
co.nference diplomacy. The problems of to-day were of such a nature that
they required specialized technical knowledge on the part of the nego~ators
ofa kind not to beexpected inheads ofState. And what was to be done if the
co.nference failed? An ambasaador who failed in his negotiations could be
recalled; a Cabinet minister could fall; but when heads of State reached a
deadlock, thete could be no solution. Then there were factors of a personal
......,.,
!
~ .
·~-..~
order, states of mind and of health which, in negotiationa between heads of
State, might assume. exagge_rated proportions. The speaker expressed his
preference for the diplomatic method combined with a firm but ftexible
position-firm, inasmuch as weshould harbour noillusions about the possibility
ofreaching a true compromise with the communistworld; but fiexible, because
the W~t should mak~ a greater_e!fort ofimagination than it had in the past.
In parttcular, the attttude tradinonally adopted by the diplomats-Geneva
was a case in point--<lfrefining to base a discussion on a note prepared by the
other side, should be toned down.
It was certain that the West could learn a lesson from recent evenlll by
trying to lessen ill! own internal conBiclll (this had led to the recent British
turning towards Europe).
T~e ~peakers wer~ unanimous in thinking that there could be no question
ofytelding over Berlin; on the other hand, several thought that we should not
reject a solution which would enable the Russians to save face. In this context
we should avoid "playing with fire" as far as possible. '
Several speakers returned to the idea ofa "balance-sheet", and defined the
task of the West, in the near future, as being the careful elaboration of a
position on the Berlin issue, to counter any intransigence on the Russian part.
At the same time, counter-measures should be worked out in preparation for
a new diplomatic offensive.
One participant pointed out that Mr. K.'s heresy with regard to the per-
manent aims ofcommunism had consisted-ifsuch had really been his purpose
-in promoting higher living standards and in relaxing military tension. It
might be that, faced with the danger of a crisis caused by the impossibility of
keeping these promises, the Soviet leaders had found it expedient to return to
the cold war in order to avoid coming under pressure. As the initiative has
always belonged to them, it was still time for the West to change this state of
things by holding a bayonet to the Russians' throam (for example, by suggesting
the implementation of the measures formerly agreed on at Yalta).
It should also be remembered that Mr. K. was a tired man, and that his
state ofhealth might have exacerbated the ambitions ofthose who surrounded
him and upon whom he must depend.
An American participant, who failed to agree with his country's rapporteur,
drew negative conclusions from the recent evenIll: if one considered, he
said, that an effort had been made by those responsible for American political
life in order to make public opinion more conscious of the implications ofthe
last world war, the shock produced by the summit failure had brought to the
surface again all the negative elements which were stern and unbending in
their approach. This fact was aggravated by the opening ofthe electoral battle
t a time when there should be serious soul-acarchingso that the United States
ould define a long-term, constructive policy in concert with its allies. How-
ver, as another American participant remarked, the Congress was now far
nore disposed to accept the cxccutive's request for funds in order to strengthen
he defence potential ofthe free world. He did not believe that we were faced
vith a rebirth of isolationism. The American Congress would doubtless be
,reparcd to favour new and positive steps, both in the United Nations and in
-JATO.
It appeared clear that Eastern and Western policies would continue, the
irst attempting to widen the scope of communist domination, the second to
Jefend the cause offreedom. The hardened attitude ofcommunist parties in
.he 'Western countries showed that, for some time past, there had no longer
JeCD any illusions in the East about the results that could have been obtained
u the summit (it is a fact that Mr. K. had committed himselfto a considerable
:xtent with regard to the East German Government). In the light of.~
ntuation, the West should show signs ofstrength and move towards a pos1nve
policy, seizing all opportunities of negotiation that might present themselves
.>nee a clear picture had been formed.
One participant, returning to a previous speech, stressed the fact that
the United States was not trying to impose its lead~hip on the West.
On the other hand, he quoted some examples of a recent past during which
events had driven the U.S. to take the initiative-the reconstruction ofEurope
after the war, the Korean crisis, the Berlin airlift, and Atlantic collaboration.
The speaker did not wish to go into detail about cases where the initiative
certainly did not come from Washington, such as action in the Arab countries
and Suez. In this connection, one might wonder whether the development of
events had not demonstrated that the United States had not perhaps been
entirely wrong, either at the beginning or even later. It might, however, be
true to say that the United States had too easily yielded to allied pressure in
admitting the possibility of a JUIJlDlit conference.
On this ICOI'C, an American participant warned representatives ofthe other
Atlantic powers against showing undue defiance ofthe Americans, who could,
after all, cooceivably reach an undentaDding with the Russiaus in disregard
of the intc:rall of the rest of the world. He also recommended a clear
Western declaration on Berlin, guaranteeing the former status, for example.
ADOther American participant thought that perhaps not enough attention
had beca paid by either side to what could be done in the matter ofextending
arms control. 'l'hae might be C()JJUDOil ground here for East and West, who
could combine to baailh far and devote inc:rcaJcd rcaourc:a to railing the
geoera1 ,..n.t.m ~ liYiDg.
One of the participants was requested to aum up the main iAuea in the
discuaion. He found that there were three:
1. Waa Mr. K. an heretic, or not?
2. What should we do about Berlin?
3· What should we think about American leadership?
Although opinions were divided on the fint point, it could not be denied
that something new had happened to the Soviet way of thinking since their
new leader ca.n;'e upon the scene: a Russian public opinion was beginning to
grow up, and 1t was counter to the notion of a police state, which was the
doctrinal position. Mr. K. was playing a deep game, and one could not predict
what would happen. On the Berlin problem, it was clear that we had reached
a deadlock from which it would be difficult to extricate ourselves. We should
not dismiss the idea ofa compromise, but the USSR would have in return not
only to make concessions, but to make such concessions as were apparc~t to
the man in the street. On the third point, the speaker said that, rather than
speaking of lead~hip, the West should concert its efforts so as to be ready
for the next "sale coup" which might come from the East. It would however
be better still if the latter received a warning in the shape of n~ West~
initiatives, and, i1;t this respect, the failure ofthe summit conference had opened
up new p~pectives.
15
II. NEW POLITI CAL AND ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE WESTER N WORLD
Discussion under this heading was mainly concerned with the problems
raised by the development of the European Community of the Sbc and the
creation of the European Free Trade Association of the Seven, and with the
American attitude to these problems with the scope of developing world trade.
The discussion was intrOduced by three papers - one by a participantfrom
one of the Six coUlltries, the second by a participant from one of the Seven
countries and a third document drafted by an American Otpert.
In the first report, after stresSing the interest ofstrengthening economic co-
operation within the Atlantic Cramework,-especially towards the under-
developed countries-the author recalled the history of the Community of
the Sbc (E.C.S.C., Euratom, E.E.C.) from the beginning until the recent steps
taken to implement the E.E.C. The report also discussed the liberal policy
envisaged by the European Common Market with regard to the rest ofthe
"Y<"Orld, and the difficulties which arose in deciding on a common policy for
agriculture, tranSpOrts and monopolies. It was also pointed out that the
Treaty was based on the solidarity of Europe and certain African territories,
a fact which raised the problems of the relations between other African terri-
tories and the Community.
Most ofthe report ·was devoted to the extern.al relations of the Community:
a common Customs tariff (which would represent a considerable decrease
for France and Italy, and an increase for the Benelux countries and Germany),
and a current proposal fur a 20% reduction in this tariff with respect to
countries outside the Community. Reference was made to the British effort
to set up a wide free tradearea and to theattitude ofthe Six, who insisted on the
obligations the member countries had imposed on themselves and which found
no counterpart in the British proposals. The fundamental factor was the
willingness of the Six to carry out a common policy in a number of fields.
Finally, there was a new fact-the appearance of a balance of payments
deficit in the United States, which made that country far more sensitive to
anything that rcaembled discrimination against it. The rapporteur recalled
the studies now being undertaken for setting up a new organization to rq>lace
the O.E.E.C. (the Twenty plua the E.E.C.). He also 5p0ke of the political
J6
aspects o~ co-ope~tion between the Six and present schemes to strengthen the
commuruty (election of the Assembly by universal suffra ...:_,
.•• . . " . . ge, roouuorcement of
,.., powers, co-operation m .orCign pohcy and the mt:rgt nd gth ·
of the three existing executives). ' ng a stren enmg
Th~ second report, that by a participant from one of the Seven countnes
dru;cnbed how that group was brought about by the failure ofdiscussiom on th~
free trade area at the end of 1958 and the r...tection of ec · · 1 • •
b
· di • -J ODOllllC ISO aUODI:Sm-
agreements etweenm vtdual members ofthe Seven and th, E E c ·
· · fli · pallia · c · . . constrtut-
~~ an UISU Clent tlve. It was true that the alliance of the Seven looked
~c. a counter-measure agaimt the E.E.C. but the Seven insisted on thcir
willingness one day to promote large-scale European economic integration.
The system of the European Free Trade Association was that of a lassie
free trade area as defined~ the GATT Ill-"t m'tact th · · ch
. · · · · "'' e sovereign ng ts of
the member States, although 1t wa..~ recognized that certain decisions uld be
talcen by a v~te ~fthe majority. Ifthis new arrangement was less detai~d than
that of the SIX, It was partly because the Contracting Parties did t · h
l d fro thb". DOWlStO
ay own, ~ . e egmmng, lines of conduct concerning concrete problems
that would ansc ~ the future; tru: w_hole apprqach was a pragmatic one.
J ust as ~e previous repon had UlSISted on the p~itive external policy of the
E.E.C., this one devoted several pages to the prospects opened up b th
~uropean Free Trade As~ciation: the maintenance and devclopm~t 0~
mtr~-European trade, suffietent communication between the two groups to
avOJd double investment (this being true also for transatlantic invest ) d
tt thin ors an
an a empt at som~ .g more ~an the mere concept of co-existence \the
rapporteur stated, m this connccuon, that 46% of intra-European trade took
place between the two groups). The author also said that the very wide for-
mula a~~pted ?Y~e ~uropeanFr~Trade Association wouldallowtheE.E.C.
to p~c1~ate m 1t Without losing its own characteristics, and especially its
political auns.
In co.nclusion, the speaker mentioned certain pqints: the acceptance of
the reality of the E.E.C. by the members of the Association, their conclusion
that new channels could be explored in the search for a general European solu-
tion, the avoidance ofany p~ure by one group on the other, and the develop-
ment of world trade and aJ.d to under-developed countries.
Th~ author.of the American paper also went back to the past, recalling the
Am.encan attitude to Europe since X945· The two main objectives of the
Uruted States had been to get the European economy working again as
rapidly as possible and to integrate Germany into that pattern. The Marshall
Plan had playec:l a very important pan in bringing about these two objecti.w:s,
and, when Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet had launched their scheme for
a European coal and steel pool, it was clear that an important step was about
to be taken in both directions. But this newstep had necessarily led to another,
in the shape of the common market and Euratom, which bad been hailed
by the American public as the keystone of the whole edifice. On the other
hand the European Free Trade Association did not represent the same aspira-
tions, at least not in the political field, and this had led to a certain American
hesitation with regard to it, the more so as the obstacles it raised to their own
external trade were not counterbalanced by any political advantages, as in the
case of the Six.
However, although it sometimes seemed as though the United States were
a many-headed monster, pursuing different policies simultaneously, there
could be no doubt that the new situation of their external finance had given a
new lease oflife to objectives that had always been those of the American eco-
nomy that is to say an ever-increasing development of world trade. In this
respect, extreme vigilance was becoming apparent both with regard to ~e
trade policies of the Seven and the present or future steps taken by the SIX
over theircommon external tariff. Nor should the needs ofother non-European
countries be forgotten Uapan and Latin America, for instance). .
It was not therefore impossible, said the rapporteur, that a certam amount
of"agonizing reappraisal" would take place in America after the presid~ntial
elections. This would not mean that they would adopt a negative attitude
towards the E.E.C., but American pressure might be exerted within G.A.T.T.
and the international Monetary Fund in order to bring about a general
lowering of world tariffS. In this respect, the attitude that would finally be
adopted by the E.E.C. would be of the greatest importance. • .
The various points were rapidly recalled by the rapporteurs at the be~g
of the discussion. The representative ofthe European Free TradeAssoCiation
expressed the firm hope that the present transactions with a view to wid~g
and transforming the O.E.E.C. would bear fruit. The ra~porteur of ~e SIX
insisted on the political aim pursued by his group of countries, and mentioned
the supranational characteristics that had been introduced ~to the system; he
also said that this political orientation ran counter .to the 1dea of a ne.utral
Europe, which was a danger in the actual state ofaffaus. He added that, if~e
concept of the European FreeTradeAssociation was to be that of ~e clasSic
free trade area type, then the E.E.C. could not go very far to meet 1t.
A very full discussion took place after this: the various opinions expressed fell
under two headings:
a) discussions about the economic organization of Europe and the speeding-up
of the Common Market;
b) the attitude ofthe United States, and the problems ofnon-European tates
especially the developing countries.
5
'
The economic organization ofEurope
As several particip~ts, both £z:>m the Six and Seven groups, remarked,
the European Econorruc Commuruty was now an accomplished irreversible
fact, whatever might have been, in the past, the doubts as to its ~tence tba~
had inspired the attitude of some among the Seven countries.
Several speakers from countries ofthe Community supported the statements
of their rapporteur, and pointed out the main characteristics of the E.E.C.
Two points were especially stressed:
- The Community of the Six could only be clearly understood if one realized
that the various institutions of which it was composed presupposed, in the
near or distant future, a greater degree ofpolitical integration, to which the
measures mentioned by the rapporteur might be the prelude. Did this
assumption foreshadow the danger of a greater split among the countries
of Europe, as some speakers seemed to fear? Certainly not, replied one
participant, who pointed out that the fact that some European countries
belonged to NATO while others did not introduced a far greater differen-
tiation.
- The articles of the Rome treaty were an indissoluble whole, some of them
being the "entrance fee" enabling countries to profit by the advantages. It
thus followed that a country outside the scheme could not extract from the
treaty only those clauses which suited it, while arguing that it was granting
"reciprocity" because that was not a true counterpart. Similarly, the tariff
policy adopted by the Community was only one element ofa vast political,
economic and social system, from which it could not be detached.
Did this mean that the community of the Six was "rigid", on account of
the wealth of detail appearing in the treaties that had set it up, in contrast
to the " pragmatism" of the Seven? A speaker who was particularly familiar
with the workings ofthe Common Market said that pragmatism could equally
be applied to that organization.
All those who spoke on this point mentioned the necessarily liberal character
of the Common Market with regard to external trade, some speaking ofit as
though it were to be hoped for, others as though it were already a certainty.
In defence of their thesis, the latter brought forward the recent E.E.C. proposal
to reduce its common external tariffby 20 °0 ifreciprocity was granted. More-
over, one ofthese speakers declared, this measure would not exlude additional
arrangen~ents between the Six and the Seven with regard to specific comma-
19
ditic:s that played no great part in trade between the European nations and the
rest of the world, especially the United States. The E.E.C. had proposed to the
Seven a discussion within the framework of the "Seven plus One", whereas a
failure would probably result ifobstinate efforts were made to resusr.itatc the
former Maudling Committee. This view was not shared by another speaker,
who thought that a useful resumption ofnegotiations could take place within
that Committee if its members were willing to reach agreement.
Tt is certain that the accelerated implementation of the common market
decided upon recently had provoked fresh fears in the countries that did not
belong to it. They feared that such acceleration would make any agreement
between the Six and the Seven a mere illusion.
One participant tried to show that such an acceleration would, on the
contrary, increase the likelihood of a multilateral European solution, since a
strengthening ofthe economic position of the Six would enable the E.E.C. to
show itself more Bexible towards the non-member countries. Another speaker
said that the development ofthe Common Market had not, so far, been accom-
panied by any sign ofhostility towards the countries outside it, and that there
was no reason to think that this state of affairs would alter. Besides, it was
wrong to exaggerate the importance ofthe discriminatory element within the
Common Marketscheme. Once the common tariffwas in force, the expression
conld disappear from use.
Even ifone was not concerned about the political future of"Big Europe"-
and several speakers did express such c<lncem-a number of participants felt
that every effort must be made to avoid the crystallization of the two economic
blocs. This wonld have serious cfi'ects in several spheres: to take investment
as an enmple, it might oblige investom, both European and American (and it
was clear that the latter were becoming increasingly interested in Europe) to
make a far greater overall effort, whereas ifthere were a single, greater econom-
ic unit, much overlapping could be avoided. Moreover, the common market
was beginuiDg to produce visible changes in several trade currents, and an
advantage 8C!:nling to one country could only do so at the expense ofanother.
Eva1 ifthe exiateoce ofthe Free Trade A.sociation provided a "compensation"
for the e&partaa ofita mcmbu countrica by Himulatiug frc:ah trade in ita turn
(aoditwaadifJiculttodraw upa balance-UleetofthU at the presenttime) itwas
JW:ly thata leladyuarzaic DWket than thatofto-daywould no longer mask the
difiruJri... but pnRDt iDAead prvb1cms that oaly closc:r co-operation could
~ ID.aatwcrto~ fellza. ~ bdouging to the Six pointed out that
-~ oC "double bm:ilmeot'' had al'Wa11 ailted and that its conae-
. . .._._l:le-.,..8iated·..~ aureptaof~ they stated. that
b -c..- ~ .stfnm1aard :t- 81 importmu: dumpa witbJD Us OWD
framew:ork, and that it ha? finally been recognized that these changes were
benefictal to the Commumty.
Ifit was recognized ~t ~he E.E.C. had a common policy in the wider sense
of the word, whereas ~his 1S not _rrue of th: Free Trade Association, several
spe~kcl'll thought ~ha~ It would .st1l1 be po!ISlble to examine anangcments for
laymg down certain lines of action for both groups in the future. Agriculture
was quoted as ~ne possible sphere for such an effort, and also ~conomic aid to
overse',"' countne:s.(~e below) and the external tariffpolicy (which would come
about ifthe Association adopted the appropriate clauses of the Rome Treaty).
This l~d to the question of the in'titutional setting within which such-co-
operation could work. A Scandinavian participant suggested that a very close
comparative study be made of the respective clauses of the Rome and Stock-
holm Treaties; he felt that this would show that there were more points in
common than was generally thought, after which it would merely be necessary
to incorporate those points into a permanent agreement. An American
speaker, who follows European economic evolution very closely, suggested two
possible approaches: either, as mentioned above, extending to the Seven the
character of a Customs union already possessed by the Common Market, or
including the latter as a body into the European Free Trade Association as its
eighth member.
However, a continental speaker thought it advisable that, in the light of the
political implications of the Six, any negotiations between them and the
Seven should be preceded by a formal declaration as to the final aims of both
parties. An American speaker added that any merging of the two groups that
did not include politicalimplications would be considered unsatisfactory to the
United States.
However, all the economic and even political problems governing the future
development of Europe could not be resolved by a confrontation of the ideas
of the Six on the one hand and of the Seven on the other. Several speakers
underlined the special circumstances of certain countries. For example,
Austria, Swedenand Switzerland had to be very careful not to appear to com-
promise their political neutrality in the slightest degree. On the other hand, it
seemed that British public opinion was more prepared than formerly to envi-
sage a strengthening ofties with the Six; and one participant pointed out that
the reasons that had led the latter to bind themselves so closely were almost
all valid for the United Kingdom also. However, real political willinpcss
was needed on both sides, and before that could happeo certain "ghoaa must
be laid''. T he Six and the United Kingdom must be given enough time to
reach agreement; in the meanwhile, difficulties ofa commen:ialnature&hould
not be allowed to prejudice political relations. In this ccmnectiOD, the special
ar
position ofthe United Kingdom as mentioned by several speakers, who stressed
that country's importance in the European context. But, as one speaker said,
it was not certain, in the present state of things, that a British request to join
the ix (whether it wert; as has been suggested Euratom and E.C.S.C., or
E.E.C. within the scope ofArticles 237 and 238 ofthe Rome Treaty) would be
so favourably received by the latter, some of whom might suspect that there
was a fly in the ointment.
If the political unity of the Sbt is considered desirable (and most of the
participants thought it was) itwas not certain that the Common Market was the
best method ofachieving this aim, said one speaker, who pointed out that the
unity in question was making slower progress than the dismantling of tariff
barriers. However, said a Scandinavian speaker, one had to admit that the
Six constituted the nucleus of a great united Europe, who should remain the
long term objective and be the task of an entire generation.
The attitude of the United States and problems
of non-European countries
If the problems raised by the two groupings of the Six and Seven should
be examined by the countries concerned, there is a new and capital factor in
the now more direct association of the United States and Canada in the de-
velopment ofthe European economy, as shown in their intended participation
in the future Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(O.E.C.D.), which is shortly to replace the O.E.E.C.
In a very detailed speech, an American participant gave a comprehensive
picture ofthe attitude ofthe United States with regard to European economic
achievements. In passing, he pointed out, as several other speakers had done,
that the behaviour ofMr. K. had done much to strengthen the links that bind
the West, especially in Europe, and Mr. K. he said, should be thanked for that.
Herecalled thepartplayed by the O.E.E.C.just after the warin re-establishing
ecooomies and promoting the freedom of trade. That task had now been
accomp1ialled. and the choice was not between the new organization and the
~ oae mother wonh, the status quo), but between that new organi-
za.tiOA aud a regrellion. The only difticulty was that which might occur be-
tweaa ~ O.E..OJ)• .,udthe G.A.T.T. or the L M.F.,which the United States
ft.int'prced. 'Plop:at ofconvertibility, especially, had abolished
UliliUIII:idlosJ tbt' ~ dismminau.cm apinlt United States exports.
i,w• ._..af._ 610..)) would haVe to iiu:e went far beyond the
quarrel of the Six and the Seven and were m
' ore concerned with th · ·
of small countries as compared with big 0 e pootton
Anal • nes.
ysmg ~e policy of the United States, the speaker said that this had
changed constderably, the Americans now reco · · r.
steps to be taken should include safeguards ~g
. gt or ~~ple that. the
H bl
. . ams resmcnve practlces
owever, a pro em of pnnople arose-that of del · ·
· . . egatmg to an external
orgaruzatton matters which were traditionally "thin th
U · d s Co Wl e competence of the
. rute tates ngrcss, such as the control ofcommercial olic . Final!
rmportance ofth~ external trade ofthe United States was ;eat:r than tl.: ~e
of the t_?tal prev10usly quoted would lead one to suppose. On the one hando
the Uruted States could not allow the deficit in th-:~ bal f '
th ~ ance o payments of
. e past two years to continue; on the other, their whole policy ofpromoting
mvestment abroad an? sus~g the development of the world economy
woul~ thus be called m questlon. The United States thought that the in-
dustnal development of the Community of Six would --•- "t · · 1
. . tW1A.e 1 an mcreasmg y
mteresttng ~arket for American e..xports, and that was why they were paying
close attention to the common e..'Ctemal policy of the E E C hich h uld
. . ..,w so not
o~y be liberal, b~t also constructive (agricultural problems). Moreover, the
eXlStence of the SIX group enabled the United States to negotiate with them
concrete arrangements ~n points ofdetail that had notso far been satisfactorily
set~ed. As for the solution adopted by the Seven, it raised no objections in the
Uruted States, so long as it proved to be entirely compatible with the rules of
~e G.A.T.T., to ~hich the United States were increasingly attached as an
mstrument for the Implementation of a non-discriminatory world trade.
Other speakers, both American and European, insisted on the need for
the whole free world to distribute more widely the expenses in the common
int~rest which have laid at the root of the difficulties experienced by the
Uruted States, for the past two years. This was true, not only of military
expenditure abroad, but also of aid to under-developed countries, which
should not only be maintained but even considerably increased in the years
to come. It was within this context that a solution should be sought, rather
than in a massive increase ofAmerican exports, which would not be particu-
larly suitable for European countries.
The problem ofinstitutions arose again here. One speaker doubted whether
the O.E.C.D. would be able to deal with the tasks of the future, and asked
whether NATO would not be a more appropriate setting. In any event, a
stop had to be put to dividing up ofaction in this field between the United
States, the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe. .IDstead of that distd-
bution, there should be a correct division oftasks underthe policitalpatro.aqe
of the Atlantic organization.
A Scandina,~an speaker recommended the reduction of ta?.tfs on _the P•\rt
of the industrialized countries within the framework of G..\.1.T.; this would
accelerate the de,elopmcnt of tr:\de in the backward countries. Pre\~ously,
se\·crnl speakers had insisted on the special responsibilities for Afi-ica assumed
br such countries as Belgium, France, Great Britain and Po~ug.1l.. ln the
first h•o cas~.s. this f."lct was reflected in the Rome Treaty, which laid down
preferential treatment for the produce of the Afric,m ter~to~es. For its part,
Great Britain granted Commonwealth preference (and th1s dtd not ~nly apply
to ra\\ materials, fur from it). A British speaker suggested that the S1x and the
Seven should agree to coordinate measures in this connection. . . .
Although Africa was often mentioned in the c~urse of th_c .~u:eussiO~, 1t
was also recognized that the l:nited States has special responSJbllittes, m:unly
in Asia and Latin America. .More generally, it was stressed that, in tltc face
of growing aspirations in all under-developed countrie:', it was csse?tial that
the West should give the impression ofbeing able to gUJde them whtle at the
same time granting them satisfaction. Simultaneously, each Europe~ country
should recci\c a certain liberty ofaction so that it !night develop certam bonds,
especial!} in the cultural sphere. .
\Vhatever solutions !night finally be adopted wtth respect to the O.E.?.D.
and its field of action, it was indispensable that there should be no hiatus
between the end of the O.E.E.C. activities and the beginnings of the new
organization, two speakers particularly stressing the need to continue the
contracts of the excellent technical teams set up by the O.E.E.C.
If, by some Jnishap the statute of the O.E.C.D. were not to be ra?fi~d by the
United States (an American participant pointed out that protectJorust forces
might eventually win the day over the liberal forces if there were no improve-
ment in the balance of payments before that time), than, as one E~p.ean
speaker said there would have to be a reinforcement ofthe mutual obligations
ofthe free ~orld that would go further than the rules laid down by G.A.T.T.
and the I.M.F.
In summing up certain of the points raised, the Secretary General of the
European Group drew a few conclusions:
1) The problem of the Six and the Seven was not purely European. It was
ofcapital importance for our American friends and no solution should be
adopted to which they could not subscribe.
11 Dapite this, there was room, in certain conditions, for several intra-
Europeaa arraDpDCDtl.
s In t:be light of the different pomta of view c:xprased, it was noteworthy
that.Uapeakcn had thought that certain friction~ between the Six and the
Seven could be smoothed over, provided that the problems arising were
precisely circmnscribed.
l'vlany speakers had stated that an ovcr,\.ll settlement of the "Six-Seven"
problem could only take place if there were a common aim, a de.~ire for
political co-operation. Other speakers, however, did not feel that a multila-
teral association called for such a common viewpoint. It might be tried tocome
to an arrangement on selective points of specific economic friction between
the two groups. It was important that none of the participants believed that
an economic co-operation could be limited to purely commercial and trade·
elements.
It had been advised not to dramalize the issues. But this did not mean that
the future negociations on both. sides should not show proof of "de Ia bonne
volonte".
It was worth noting that the discussions which had taken place had enabled
full light to be shed on the arguments for both sides and this meant that, unless
there were very important developments a new discussion of this problem in
the Bilderberg combination should not be necessary.
The complete text of the Secretary General's conclusions is appended as an
aJllleX.
Before adjourning, the participants expressed, through the Session Chairman,
their warmest wishes for a quick recovery to H.R.H. the Prince of the ~ether­
lands, who had been prevented by a sudden illness from presiding over the
second day's meeting.
PRESS STATEMENT
On May 28th and 29th a Bilderberg-conference, presided over by H.R.H.
the Prince ofthe Netherlands, was held in BUrgenstock near Lucerne.
6o Participants, from 12 countries of Europe and from the U.S.A. and
Canada, attended the meeting. Participants came from the political, in-
dustrial, labor and professional fields.
The conference started with a survey of the present political situation, after
which the economic problems ofEurope were discussed with special reference
to the future relations between the European Common Market and the
European Free Trade Area, and ofthe United States and Canada to them.
Prince Bernhard was to his great regret unable to preside over the sessions
of May 29th owing to indisposition.
!JOAls! rg6o
ANNEX NO. I
Summary of the discussions on Saturday 28th May
by Mr. C. D. Jackson
Ever since our friend van der Beugel asked me to do a little summing up
30 seconds ago, I have been scrambling desperately in order to have something
to say. I think that the salient points are the discussion as to whether or not
Mr. K. is a heretic, what are we going to do about Berlin, and the question of
American leadership.
A warning note has been sounded this afternoon and this morning about
the question that we really had to do something about Berlin. It is very true,
that it is extremely difficult to think one's way out ofthe Berlin "cul de sac".
It is so easy to say: Well, let usjust get out and see what happens. But we have
settled ourselves with a kind of mystical symbolism in the case of Berlin that
just cannot be disregarded, and it seeiDS to me that the concession, the com-
promise, the device, the formula, that we would work out with the Russians in
order to find a "solution" to Berlin would be very dangerous and make no
sense ifwe were not to get an equal and comprehensible concession from t}le
Russians. And when I say comprehensible, I mean notjust comprehensible to
another foreign minister, but comprehensible to the man in the street. Other-
wise, we will be both physically and psychologically out-flanked in Europe.
H our Berlin concessions are too great or without adequate quid pro quo, the
West Germans will have to make some kind ofaccommodation with the East
Germans, which means the Russians. Then NATO will inevitably begin to
go down the drain. NATO may continue to exist on paper, but it will haw
no teeth. n may have some beautiful gums. but not muCh to chewwith.
Now Mr. l{"s I tho:ught that the ezc:banae ~ llQJiie' e£
:Jalbfota>W
the State-religion of Marxism, of which Mr. K. is the high priest. And how
long or how far can you tamper with a State-religion without raising a certain
amount of hell ·with the Cathedral in which the high priest operates? 1\Ir. K.
is engaged in an extremely interesting game, he is trying to have his cold-war
and eat it too, and it may be a trifle indigestible as it has appeared at times.
Now that is not something that we should take too much comfort from.
I wish that I could leave this room, thinking with another speaker that Mr.
K. might not be there in a month or two. That would bejust wonderful. But
I don't dare think about this any more than I think about our new favorite
topic, which is that the Chinese and the Russians are going to be at war in
the ne.xt couple ofmonths.
Now I must return to this matter of preparing for some new diplomatic
initiative on the part of the Russians as explained by some of the speakers.
There is no question but there is going to be another move: The West has
fallen into the habit ofscoring points by getting out of tight fixes, heaving a
great sigh ofrelief; and then going off to have a Martini at 5:30. That 5:30
whistle never blows in the Kremlin, and these gentlemen are hard at work at
the moment preparingthe next "salecoup" which is sureto come, and probably
very soon. I would hope, in concert with our allies and our allies in concert
with us, that we could get around together at all levels and try to think through
an initiative on our part. This word initiative is worth much these days and
we have had it heaved at us for a long time by a great many people. Unfortu-
nately, we have not taken a great many initiatives because many ofthem are
awkward and difficult, but I think it is essential that we should get ourselves
into an initiative mood, and I think that the break-up ofthe Summit in Paris
furnishes us with such an opportunity that we might not have had otherwise.
Now, to wind the matter ofU.S. leadership, I am frankly and flatly on the
side ofthosespeakers who do not believe Washington has been too unsuccessful
in that respect. I cannot present my personal experience as comparable to
that of my compatriot who stood up for the American leadership or to some
of the other foreign service gentlemen here, but having done a stage in the
White House, having done a stage-briefer-in the State Department, I can
8IIUft: youthatthe omni..prescmeofBritishdesires, no matterwhat thesubject,
ap]~ing. at timeS, and it really makes little difference whether
filllQdt._uta;.WAtt~Toriea. Itcanbe pxotbundlyimitating, and besides
,~=~;=~~OUI'=~ By now, we almost have a
I!! 10 Dmcli aa-ftlifdli!il an eyebrow,
imijJJ.•IMiM._ ~!Or mlii:t.4 ttot
ANNEX NO. II
Summary of the discussions on Sunday 29th May
by Mr. E. H. van der Beugel
I shall be very short, which is not difficult, I will be serious which is rath
~ore difficult at this ti~e ofthe day, and I will be objective whlch is still mo:
difficult for me. Summmg up cannot be a repetition of the arguments. This
pro~ably mea~ that practic~y everybody who has intervened during this
day s debate will feel that his particular point of view has not been dealt
with, ~ut.it cannot be otherwis.e. I was e.xtremely grateful to ~[r. Rijkens
for pomtmg out one fact which seems rather important in this kind of
gathering, i.e. that the Six did not speak with one voice, that the Seven did
not speak with one voice, and that even between fellow-countrymen there was
what I should like to call a slight difference in accent, with the possible excep-
tion of our United Kingdom friends.
When I now try to sum up what we have done today, I think,
that one result of our discussion is that it has been established beyond any
doubt that the problem between the Six and the Seven is not a purely European
problem. There has been some doubt in the minds of our American friends
whether it would be appropriate for them to intervene, and I think that it has
been established here that the problem we have discussed is a problem of the
greatest interest to our friends overseas. For several reasons. In the first
place, I think in practically every speech it has been pointed out that an
eventual solution cannot be found without the active assistance, support or
even agreement ofour overseas friends. In the second place, as to the organi-
zational structure, which is now being discussed in Paris, it is definitelycertain
that this orpnization cannot work without active participation of our U.S.
and Canadian friends, and in the third place, from the point ofview of the
U.S., it has been made very clear by some American speakem ~ evea:fbr
theinternaldevelopmentofthe U.S., events in Europe. not oaly as to a¥:d th
underdeveloped countries but in the greater ~ an VOlJ~
The second point I should like to male is. thU: aa ~ ..._..
vcnrion has mad<:. it clear that, notwithstanding this first point, there i~
some room under certain conditions for .ut intra-European arrangement.
I sny: under certain condition-<, tilking into account our global responsibilities.
J think this is a very import:mt point because some ofm have feared that the
external relations of the Six could OW} be global or not at a.ll, and if that were
r.rue. there would be no room for an) specific European anangcmcnl.
.'\ow, as my third point 1 should like to ntcntion what we cau c.xpcct
lor the future. There. 1 think. it is not possible onl) to mention common
ground. I thi.o.k that ifwe n1akc a fair sumrnlng-up. it is necessary to mention
different points of view. There is common ground fortunately, but in a
rather limit.ed field. The common grow1d is that practkal!y every speaker
thinks it possible to make arrangeme~ on specinc and selective points ofeco-
nomic merion between the Six and tht Seven. But that docs not- touch the
!teart of the matter. It is in itself an important achievement, but it docs not
touch the heart ofour discu,;sioos. The heart ofour discussion was that (and J
think thnr t< a fair summing-up a very substantial part of the opinions ex-
press~d !~ads to the conclusion that an overall settlement of the Six and Se<~en
problem can onlv be found when there is a common political aim. In other
words, that an economic co-operation of real magnitude is only possible if it
ullinlat~r leads to some fonn of political co-operation. That is one very
impod.int ~chool of thought which h& been expressed here today. On the
otheil.and, there are those who rhink that achieving a multilateral association
in Eu.rppe docs not require a political aim. I think. that it is highly
improbab,e~ that this rather deep difference of opinion can be solved in
a \CI") short time. I think what we shall see in the future is an effort to come
to an arrangement on selective points of specific economic friction between
the two group!, but I do not think that the discussion of today can lead to any
opomism with regard to the possibility ofan overall settl~ment in the very near
future. What I thinlt was a rather important element ofour discussion is that
both groups, even those who think that some form of economic co-operation
will do, have recognized ~ fact that even this economic co-operation cannot
be limited to what I should like to call commercial and purely trade-elements.
We have been advised not to dramatize the issues which have been
dilculacd, aDd I think this is a very wiae advice. We have seen a rather
importuu debunldug'' of the tragic prospects of a split in Europe. Never-
~ Mr. auDrman. I should like to say that not dramatizing the thing
~ a10t aeaa lbat wclhoald aot take thit thing vuy seriously, and our
4iliate.aa 1eed. to llb611opc that thcle rcspoldiblc:: for the ncgotiationa
••.fdiioa 49 Wltk *t ~ :Pmu:h c:all ''de Ja bonne volonu••.
•:Ai~rit«J.alldi!l!'-rJ
·.,.._IJI"'l•~ 1 t.ll.ir4 ~ r fiDd m,.elfin asre=ent
with a French ~articipant when he said that we have reached the phase
where we. pr<.~ctiC;~l!y know all _each other's arguments, and personally 1
d? not tlunk lhat tt would be WlS'e lO discuss this specific matter again in a
B1ldcrberg Conference unless there are really very imponant new develop-
ments. Nevertheless, T think hat these talks have definitely ch::ared our
points of view.
0
ANNEX NO. III
lnJTodt.lctitm tm O.E.C.D.
B.1 Mr. E. M. Mllrlin
I Wllllt to talk primarily about the organisation ofEurope in the economic
field and about some U.S. attitudes toward the issues in this area.
F'.ust I ahoald like to say ao~thing about the development ofthe successor
~on wthe O.E.E.C. b.own currently as the O.E.C.D., the Organjaa-
tion for ~omic ~on~ DeveiQPment.
We have made cmuiclembleprogress towud developingthe outline~~ ofsuch
an~ andhad a relatively~meeting dl¢Dg thispastwe.ek.on
the~~ whichI att=Jdcd.
~~still a good pro'blcms -~ ,,......
@~at like to sta~~!tl
1 because of jtq role lll the sbc-seven negotiatiOI18 and at lcaat one xruvorCOilllUy
was seriously considering withdrawing. I mightadd that thia country~
fo~ally j~t this paat week in the meeting that it still had this under active
c;o1l81derauon.
What all~ means.I thinkin approaching a J;leW organisationia thatwe arc
not face~ wtth the.chOicebetweena new otga,Disadon orstandingstill. We. are
faced wtth a ~OICC ~ a new organisation or moving backward and
eventually havmg nothing. We and others felt that it was not an acceptable
alternative to let the present organisation die on the vine, but that it was im-
portantto havea strongorganisationinEuropedealingwitheconomicquestions
in an overall fashion. We thought thatifone looks to the future instead ofthe
pOISt there were problems coming up in thesixties which could be dealt with in
this way: Theincreasingimportanceofeconomic growth, maintaining a degree
of economic stability the importance of doing what we could do for the less
developed areas WQsWldlltds oflijtingarenot rising as rapidly as ourown
and the proviaon of" larger organisation or framework ofa strong ~
within which the~ between the Sbt and the Seven could perhaps be
bettersolved. w~• thought thatit was UJeiW. to have suchan.organisation
as this as the one framework in which the neutrals could find themselves in
association with the West, aa.~t thing in our view.
Wealso thoUght thatto have this organisationdisappear wouldbellmarko£
Western disunity which we wished to avoid.
Now when we looked at the p:roblcnia coDling 1,1p fOr the tUuu:e and ~
possibility ofa:eatiuga.strong orpnisation to deal with"them.we~~
theh!:stwa.yto~adjjt1U&tQ~W~ the~tiouab~
which we ~to Clinct it to the ~of~~ tathel: than or~
~tan,d that,sinee,~pblemlweJ."econes,Wbichon.the.:whole~U.S.
and ~as~as~ ~a Plil~l~ill~
w.e.~~jomd~~~~..
:bl~--~ ~
N~itlsJD.4hia~~i'h¢GtW,p;D.oarllalm.o.ved~DGW
,'~·bajtd:l:biJis~~~icl<~tleiU.-8.-~
\\ hk h ronc<'mnl our Cougres> as well-we have tolerated, acceptco 11s desir-
able and nec~.ll"}" for·' period ofnearly fifteen ye:u-s, C.'<len.,ive di.,crimination
ngain:;t l :-.. exports on the part of the European members of the O.E.E.C.
\\'e thou~ht thi> \\"a.S desirable md necessary to help them in their wartime
recon<tntcrion, but "ith the comingofcon\ertabilityfor most ofthese countries
this justificauon had disappeared. Therefore we felt that whatever trade
arrangements might be continued, those which bad regional discrimination
built mto them, could not be accepuble as a solution to the future problems
that we face ahead of us.
On the other hand we found that a good many of the European countries
·were very attached to the code of liberalisation and the other trade arrange-
ments which have been built up in the O.E.E.C. They felt that these arrange-
ments were more comprehensi\e, more detailed than the rules and regulations
under G_-\.T.T. They also felt that in the smallergroup ofEurope there could
be more effective pi'CS1Ures to enforce them than in a global area like G.A.T.T.
where many of the countries would not be particularly interested in actions by
one European against another. Now they have agreed, however, that regional
discrimination as they define it-and I am not sure whether we agree on the
definition-should be a thing of the past and should not be continued. These
countries are however not prepaied, in other trade matters to give up what has
been 1et up for the past. but feel there may be problems in the future which will
require the framework they have had and therefore itshould be retained.
Now this difference has been the central issue ofthe meeting we had this past
week and will continue to be so for some time. I thinkit is important to note in
this connection that this unot a Six and Seven issue. As far as the U.S. is con-
eerned DO position that we have taken and no language that we had wished to
have in the treaty was related to the question of attitude toward the Six and
SeveD problem. It was also interesting that the three countries which took the
lead iD wanting to retain the full scope of the O.E.E.C. regulations were
drawn from both the Six and Seven camps. ADd the three countries which
primarily toOk the lead in the discuaion along the lines ofessentially the U.S.
palitiaa were also drawnfrom both camps. Itac:emed to be much more a small
wnas a Jarae country split thaD a Six and Seven split.
I mayay 1101111: mua fouad h abo amusing that one of the countries which
waamoatactmiaaupportoftbeO.E.E.C. code ofliberalisation has traditionally
beaathe_,.dl8iculttokeepia liaewithO.E.E.C. rula. And the onecouutry
daatfJIObiDCIIt~ia&¥OarofG.A.T.T. u a solution to aU problCIIII
._ieal......hldiepa.ttalycanfbJ'111qujdsmwithrespect to G.A.T.T.
...... -- eadecl with--dqree of-IWXlCII, the u.s. rc-
...... w ,.._.,..• ~ oftbe fedmg on the pt or
many of these countries about the old 0 E E c ·
. . . · · · . . arran~emenu: we modified
our post?on CODSlderably: ~e agreed for example:, that it would be desirable
to have m the new OrganL'Iabon a trade committee th:Lt this trad
should be em en:d t deal 'th ' c commutee
pow . ~ W1 •~uch Six and Seven probkms as still existed
when the new organuanon comes 1nto effect, lh:~.t it hould be a form m which
there could be what we c;ill trade confrontation '1n other wo ds
b · · . • r one country can
nng complamts aga1nst the trade practices of another. We alro agreed that
we ~~uld ~ prcparf'd to go through the code of lilx-ralisaoon and 5e1: what
provtSJOns m 1t sc:em to us still appropriate for the future and what pro..,isions
were accepuble m our terms.
N~w th~ is where one of.our difficult problems arises. Our Congress is ex-
ce~gly Jealous of delcgaung any power over U.S. trade policy to an intcr-
nauonal.body_or even_to the executive branch ofthe U.S. government whir.h .,.,ill
operate man mtemanonal body, and the tight rope which we have to walk is to
~ to see how much we_can buy without Jll't'Jurlicing the possibilities ofratifica-
tion, because our adhtSlon to this new organisation will have to be ratified by
the Congress. Now we feel that the r<'.al issue as it has dC'.·<'Jopcd is one ofthose
awkw~ ones, which, thoug~verydifficult in principle,can be solved in practice.
Essenually, as I would sec1t, our Congress is reluctant as a matter ofprinciple
to delegat~ to an inte~ati~nal organisauon control over U.S. trade policies,
control which they reahse wtll probably never be exercised because within the
framework of these rules our trade policies are pretty good. On the other hand
a number of European countries are reluctant in principle to give up controls
having in mind primarily other European countries and not the U.S., controb
which they too realise they will probably never have to exercise. So what we
have to do is to try to move people as far as we can away from this devotion to
principle and down to the practicalities ofspecific arrangement!; and see what
we can work out in the form ofa compromise. But this moving from principle
to practicalcompromise, that's where the will to have an arrangement toconti-
0
Due to show the solidarity of the West comes m and plays an important role.
Now to move a little bit to the Six and Seven problem, the U.S. deleganon f
has distributed a paper prepared by an American expert on this subject. It
may appear a little long but I would susseat that from the bottom of page: !)
on ia the most pertinent material. I would like however, to give a perhaps
somewhat different view as there ia still a CODDderable lack ofclarity about
what I see to be the U.S. oftic:ial position as distinct from U.S. public opuuoa
on the Six and Seven issue.
Theessential background to thecurreat U.S poation onthisspecific:• aod
Seven questioa is, I think. the coacemiD the U.S. about the U.S. ~ of
payment~, I believe thla to be a jartifiable feeJiDg as we caliDOt aondrlQC iA-
35
definitely to have a ddicit of 3 billion or more in our balance of payments
despite our large gold reserve. '''e have obligations in the world, th~t we would
be reluctant to cut back we don't want to cut back our rather hberal trade
policy a11d move further in this direction, we do not now foresee t~e.possibility
of cutting back the 3 billions a year that we spent on U.S. m1btary forces
abroad-that is not including military aid but just U.S. forces- we will be
reluctant to slow down the U.S. pace of investment which is running at over
3 billions a year. To finance this we require a surplus ofexports over .i~ports
and it is in this sense that our trade position and our export opportumues are
far more important to U.S. policy thanwould be suggested by the 1 %ofnational
income figure that a Swiss participant referred to. .
Consequently there is a concern in the U.S. about any arrangement m the
presentposition which represents a discrimination ag:Unst U.S. exports. As far
as the Six are concerned this worry has been outweighed, as a matter ofU.S.
government policy, by the great political advantages we see in the Six wi_th their
objecti"e of a political federation. We also believe as a second~ ~omt ~at
the deep integration in the economic field contemplate~ by ~e SIX ~cludU:g
free movement ofgoods capital, labor and close integratiOn will result m rap1d
economic growth and the best markets for U.S. exports have traditionally been
those in which there is a rapid rate ofindustrial growth. We would therefore
hope that the discrimination will be at least to some extent outweighed by the
increased opportunities this growth will provide. . . .
At the same time we are as interested as any one else w seewg that the SIX
external policy be liberal. . . . .
When we first heard about the idea ofacceleratton I think we made 1t qwte
clear in informal channels that acceleration without reduction, in other words,
without a proposal to reduce the level of tariffs, would in our view be an un-
desirable step. The acceleration proposal which has ~een made has been.ac-
companied with the prop~ to reduce the ext~rnal. tariffs. We have a ~arttc~­
lar commodity, tobacco, which has been heavily hit by ~e rate establis~ed w
the treaty ofRome for it and we have made our protest VIgorously,_publicly .as
well as privately, with respect to the impact of this! what we consxder unfarr,
duty on our tobacco expom and we hope others will feel free to do the same
when they are hurt. We are also concerned that the agricultural provisions
that may be adopted by the Six could be considered restrictive in U.S. te~,
and we will be watching the development of this policy, though no one IS
lily-white pure in this respect. .
W'lth tespect to other arrangements we will necessarily look at them m the
U(k of their ~ &om the ataudpoint of the U.S. position and the
_.d'a pod ~ 'WQ11ld·bc p:oteetiODilta in our Congrees, particularly
reflecting the attitude that they mayhave toward themas they affectU s
possibilities. With respect to the Seven and a larger arrangement ·0
· expb
0
~
· · h b h , ur as1c
pos1Uon as ~~.t _at we have ~o obje~~ons if they are broadly consistent with
the G.A.T.~. I h1s IS not a prec1sc pos1Uon because the provision., ofG.A.T.T.
are not preciSe but one cannotgo funher than that withoutseeing the details of
specific arrangements. But in fact we have gone further than that in the case
ofE.F.T.A.: we have about ten days ago said in the G.A.T.T., where a waiver
was necessa'!becauseoftheexclusion ofagriculture from the arrangements, that
we thought Itwas a good arrangement and justified a waiverfromG.A.T.T.,and
we proposed to vote for such a waiver and we hoped that other countries would
do so as well. E.F.T.A. does not have all the advantages that we think the Six
has, but it h_as ~ome of them and we were prepared to come to its support,
even though 1t did not meet all the requirements ofG.A.T.T. as we saw them.
What our position would be with respect to a wider arrangement is more
difficult to say in the abstract until one can see what it would be. Certainly ifit
were consistent with G.A.T.T. we would not block it and we would be in no
position to exercise a veto on it, ifit were not consistent with G.A.T.T.itwould
represent a wider area of discrimination and I think we would undoubtedly
--speaking in all frankness-have greater difficulty in supporting a waiver
under the G.A.T.T. than we found in the caseof E.F.T.A. This does not mean
tosayhoweverthatwewouldrefuse to do so. We would have to examine the
circumstances at the time, economic as well as political, in order to determine
what our position would be.
We do feel from what we have learned from both sides that the negotiation
of a wider arrangement which is clearly consistent with the G.A.T.T. is an un-
likely possibility in the foreseeable future and this is why we have suggested
that as a practical matter it might be more useful to concentrate energies on
reducing the areas of trade friction between the two groups as the immediate
measure which has the best prospects ofsuccess. Not only do we have the 20%
reduction, which we hope will be confirmed by a reasonable degree of reci-
procity, but we also have an offer from the Six to negotiate with respect to
particular items that are causing difficulty. One cannot tell how effective this
will be till one sees not only that they are willing to negotiate but what agree-
ments they are willing to reach, something you cannot tell in advance. But it
seems to us that it would be a mistakenot to take advantageofthis opportunity,
as we have tried to take advantage oftheir willingness to negotiate on the tobac-
co matter. A new duty on tobacco is now under discussion, as we understand
it, in the E.E.C. This is a matter ofviewpoint as to the most helpful tactics
at the present juncture, rather than any commitment in principle against
another arrangement ifit can be negotiated contrary to our expectatloDs.
