WW
1-0
I"---
(J)z
co
CJ
Ww
m
-r-
er.
en
"'
a:
w
CJ
CW
1.-
~z
0..
<C
u.
<(
w-
...J
z
<.O
otLI
:::!
0
(\J
....I
w
I
ca~
>O
v
(\J
z
n<
t:l:I
0
-
~
~
N
o~
0
'T.I
~
z~
tt1
0
I
~
N
""Ij
~
~
°'
t:l:I
I:)
~
tI1
>
tt1
c::
'"I
~o
~
0
....
-
tI1
'"
~
~
-
>
"°
zm
tt1
~
00
n
cn
tt1
-
.....J
~
0
tI1
~
-
z
z0
Cl.l
I
CONTENTS
FOREWORD ........................................................................................ 3
INTRODUCTION .................................................................................. 5
AGENDA ............................................................................................ 7
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS ................. .. ....... ........ .. ......... .. ... ....... .. ........ .. ... 9
I. STRATEGY TOWARD THE U.S.S.R.
Opening Remarks for the Panel, I ........................................................ 15
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II .................................................... 17
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III ......... .. .... ..... .. ... .......... ..... ..... .. .. ... 19
Discussion ..................................................................................... 21
II. POLICY TOWARD TRADE AND PROTECTIONISM
Working Paper ................................................................................ 26
Opening Remarks form Panel, I ........................................................... 31
Opening Remarks from Panel, II .......................................................... 32
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III ................................................... 33
Opening Remarks from the Panel, IV .................................................... 35
Discussion ..................................................................................... 36
III. THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Outline for Discussion .......................................................................- 40
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ..................................................... 41
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II .................................................... 43
Opening Remarks form the Panel, III ................................................... 44
Discussion .................................................................................... 46
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: CHINA
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ..................................................... 50
Opening Remarks from Panel, II ......................................................... 53
Discussion ..................................................................................... 54
V. THE ARMS CONTROL DEBATE
Working Paper ............................................................................... 58
Opening Remarks for the Panel, I ....................................................... 61
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II .................................................... 63
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III ................................................... 64
Discussion .................................................................................... 65
CLOSING REMARKS ............................................................................ 66
FOREWORD
This report is an account of the proceedings of the 1987 Bilderberg Meeting at Villa d'Este,
Cernobbio, Italy. Working papers and panelists' opening remarks are presented in their entirety,
with minor editing. Discussion sections, which incorporate panelists' closing remarks, are
organized according to subject matter. Thus, individual remarks and interventions are not
necessarily reported in the order in which they were made.
Grant F. Winthrop
Rapporteur
INTRODUCTION
The thirty-fifth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Grand Hotel Villa d'Este, in Cernobbio,
Italy on April 24, 25, and 26, 1987. There were 106 participants from 19 European countries,
the United States, and Canada. They represented government, diplomacy, politics, business,
law, labor, education, journalism, the military, and institutes specializing in national and
international studies. All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without committing in any
way the governments or organizations to which they belonged. As is usual at Bilderberg
Meetings, in order to permit frank and open discussion, no reporting of the conference
proceedings took place.
In opening the conference, Lord Roll of Ipsden, the Chairman of the Bilderberg Meetings,
welcomed the participants. He then reviewed the conference program and procedures. Finally,
he took note of the death of Jack Heinz, a founding member of Bilderberg and one of its most
loyal and effective supporters.
I. STRATEGY TOWARD THE U.S.S.R.
Moderator: Andrew Knight
Panelists: Egon Bahr
Henry A. Kissinger
Renato Ruggiero
II. POLICY TOWARD TRADE AND PROTECTIONISM
Moderator: Alfred Herrhausen
Working Paper Author: Helmut H. Haschek
Panelists: Etienne Davignon
Paul A. Volcker
John C. Whitehead
III. THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Moderator: David Rockefeller
Panelists: Edouard Balladur
Richard G. Darman
Romano Prodi
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: CHINA
Moderator: Lord Roll of Ipsden
Panelists: Winston Lord
Otto Wolff von Amerongen
V. THE ARMS CONTROL DEBATE
Moderator: Charles McC. Mathias, Jr.
Working Paper Author: John S. Foster, Jr.
Panelists: Christoph Bertram
Maynard W. Glitman
7
CHAIRMAN:
LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN*
Joint Chairman, S.G. Warburg & Co., Ltd.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE U.S.A.:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.
Executive Director, The Center for Asian Pacific Affairs,
The Asia Foundation
HONORARY TREASURER:
CONRAD J. OORT
Member of the Board, Algemene Bank Nederland N.V.;
Professor of Money and Banking, University of Limburg
ITA
TUR
USA
DEN
USA
AUS
UK
NOR
FRG
USA
FRA
POR
CAN
USA
FRG
TUR
CAN
GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
GUNDUZ AKTAN
PAUL A. ALLAIRE
TAGE ANDERSEN
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
HANNES ANDROSCH
MICHAEL R. ANGUS
NILS J. ASTRUP
EGON BAHR
GEORGE W. BALL**
EDOUARD BALLADUR
FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO*
THOMAS J. BATA, SR.
JACK F. BENNETT*
CHRISTOPH BERTRAM
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
CONRAD M. BLACK*
President, Fiat S.p.A.
Adviser to the Prime Minister,
Ministry for Foreign Affairs
President, Xerox Corporation
Managing Director and Chief Executive,
Den Danske Bank
Chairman, Archer-Daniels-Midland
Company, Inc.
Chairman of the Managing Board of
Directors, Creditanstalt-Bankverein;
Former Minister of Finance; Former
Vice Chancellor
Chairman, Unilever PLC
Chairman of the Board, Fearnley &
Eger A/S
Member of Parliament; General Secre-
tary of the SPD
Former Under-Secretary of State
Minister of State; Minister of
Economics, Finance and Privatization
Director, Jornal Expresso; Former
Prime Minister
Chairman, Bata Limited
Director and Senior Vice President,
Exxon Corporation; Former Under-Secre-
tary of the Treasury for Monetary
Affairs
Diplomatic Correspondent, "Die Zeit"
Director of Companies
Chairman, Argus Corporation Ltd.
9
-·---' -~"·'-' • oh--'·-~•-~" -----"-~···---~'~·---·-' --
USA RICHARD R. BURT Ambassador to the Federal Repub- USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer
lie of Germany & Feld (Attorneys-at-Law); Former
ITA LUIGI CALJGARIS Author and Defence Correspondent President, National Urban League
ITA GUIDO CARLI Senator; Former Governor, Banca USA HENRY A. KISSINGER* Professor, Center for Strategic and
d'Italia International Studies, Georgetown
ORE COSTA CARRAS* Director of Companies University; Former Secretary of State
INT LORD CARRINGTON Secretary General, NATO NETH COR J. VAN DER KLUGT President, N.V. Philips' Gloeilampen-
SPA JUAN LUIS CEBRIAN Director and Editor-in-Chief, fabrieken
"El Pais" UK ANDREW KNIGHT* Chief Executive, "The Daily Telegraph
ITA CARLO A. CIAMPI Governor, Banca d'Italia INT MAX KOHNSTAMM** Former President, European University
!TA FRANCESCO CINGANO Chairman, Banca Commerciale Italiana Institute
USA KENNETH W. DAM* Vice President, Law and External FRA MARC LADREIT DE LACHARRIBRE Vice President, L'Oreal
Relations, IBM Corporation; Former BEL LEON J. G. LAMBERT Chairman, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert S.A
Deputy Secretary of State INT EMILE VAN LENNEP Former Secretary General, OECD
USA RICHARD G. DARMAN Managing Director, Shearson Lehman LIE H.S.H. PRINCE
Brothers Inc.; Former Deputy Secretary, HANS-ADAM OF LIECHTENSTEIN
Department of the Treasury USA WINSTON LORD Ambassador to the People's Republic of
BEL ETIENNE DAVIGNON* Director, Societe Generale de Belgique; China
Former Member of the Commission of SWI FRANTZ J. LUTOLF* General Manager and Member of the
the European Communities Executive Board, Swiss Bank Corporation
INT ARTHUR DUNKEL Director General, General Agreement USA CHARLES Mee. MATHIAS, JR.* Former U.S. Senator
on Tariffs and Trade POR JOSE EDUARDO MONIZ Director of Information, RTP (Portu-
CAN FREDRIK S. EATON President and Chief Executive Officer, guese Television)
Eaton's of Canada Limited FRA THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of Inter-
DEN UFFE ELLEMANN-JENSEN Minister for Foreign Affairs national Relations; Professor of
USA MURRAY H. FINLEY* President, Amalgamated Clothing and Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
Textile Workers Union ITA MARIO MONTI* Professor of Economics and Director of
IRE GARRET FITZGERALD Former Prime Minister the Centre for Monetary and Financial
USA JOHN S. FOSTER, Jr. Vice President, TRW Inc. Economics, Bocconi University, Milan
ITA RAUL GARDINI Chairman, Perruzzi S.p.A. NETH H.M. THE QUEEN OF THE
UK PAUL GIROLAMI Chairman, Glaxo Holdings PLC NETHERLANDS
USA MAYNARD W. GUTMAN Negotiator on Intermediate Range NETH H.R.H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE
Nuclear Arms NETHERLANDS
CAN ANTHONY G. S. GRIFFIN** Director of Companies ICE DAVID 0DDSSON Mayor of Reykjavik
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON* Chairman of the Board, SAAB-SCANIA AB POR FERNANDO FARIA DE OLIVEIRA Executive Vice President, IPE
ICE GEIR HALLGRIMSSON* Governor, Central Bank of Iceland; GRE IOANNIS PAPANTONIOU Under-Secretary, Ministry of National
Former Prime Minister; Former Minister Economy
for Foreign Affairs FRA FRAN<;OIS PERIGOT Chairman of the National Council,
AUS HELMUT H. HASCHEK Chairman of the Board, Osterreichische . Patronat Fran~ais
Kontrollbank A.G. AUS HUGO PORTISCH Publicist
SW! HANS HECKMANN Executive Vice President and Member USA CHARLES H. PRICE II Ambassador to the United Kingdom
of the Executive Board, Union Bank of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
of Switzerland ITA ROMANO PROD! Chairman, IRI
FRO ALFRED HERRHAUSEN* Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A.G. ITA FRANCO REVIGLIO Chairman, ENI
FIN JAAKKO ILONIEMI Member of the Management Board, Union USA ROZANNE L. RIDGWAY Assistant Secretary of State for
Bank of Finland; Former Ambassador European and Canadian Affairs
to the United States of America USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER** Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank Inter-
SWI PAUL R. JOLLES Chairman of the Board, Nestle S.A.; national Advisory Committee
Former State Secretary for Foreign INT BERNARD W. ROGERS Supreme Allied Commander Europe,
Economic Affairs SHAPE
USA THOMAS V. JONES Chairman of the Board and Chief Execu- ITA CESARE ROMITI Chief Executive Officer, Fiat S.p.A.
tive Officer, Northrop Corporation !TA RENATO RUGGIERO General Secretary, Ministry for Foreign
Affairs
11
SPA
ITA
DEN
FRA
FRG
BEL
FRA
USA
NETH
AUS
NETH
UK
SWE
CAN
NOR
USA
USA
USA
NOR
USA
FRG
SPA
TUR
ITA
SWE
JULIAN SANTAMARIA
GAETANO SCARDOCCHIA
JQJRGEN SCHLEIMANN
E. ANTOINE SEILLIERE*
THEO SOMMER*
ANTOINETTE SPAAK
HUBERT VEDRJNE
PAUL A. VOLCKER
JORIS J. C. VOORHOEVE
FRANZ VRANITZKY
LO C. VAN WACHEM
WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE
PETER WALLENBERG
NORMAN E. WEBSTER
NIELS WERRING, JR.*
JOHN C. WHITEHEAD
BRAYTON WILBUR, JR.
LYNN R. WILLIAMS
KARE I. WILLOCH
JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN*
OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN**
JUAN A. YANEZ-BARNUEVO
ZEKERIYA YILDIRIM
PAOLO ZANNONI*
HANS L. ZETTERBERG
OBSERVER
AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMANN
RAPPORTEUR
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
12
""- ,...,-...1- ',"1,:r\,,,; .,,(~'''i'-'....::;.~"""--·'
Ambassador to the United States of America
Editor, "La Stampa"
Managing Director and Chief Executive,
TV2
Director-General, Compagnie Generate
d'Industrie et de Participations
Publisher, "Die Zeit"
Minister of State; Former Chairman,
FDF (Federation des Francophones)
Former Foreign Policy Adviser to
the President
Chairman, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Parliamentary Leader of the VVD
Federal Chancellor
President, Royal Dutch Petroleum
Company
Minister for the Environment, Country-
side and Planning
Vice Chairman, Skandinaviska Enskilda
Banken
Editor-in-Chief, "The Globe and Mail"
Chairman of the Board, Wilh. Wilhelm-
sen Limited A/S
Deputy Secretary of State
Executive Vice President, Wilbur
Ellis Company
International President, United Steel
Workers of America
Member of Parliament; Former Prime
Minister
President, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.
Chairman of the Supervisory Board,
Otto Wolff A.G.
Director, Department of International
Affairs of the Office of the Prime
Minister
Governor of the Central Bank
Vice President, Defence Systems,
Fiat USA, Inc.
Editor-in-Chief, "Svenska Dagbladet"
Managing Director, Creditanstalt-
Bankverein
Director, Wood, Struthers and Winthrop
Management Corporation
IN ATTENDANCE
ITA ALFREDO AMBROSETTI
NETH SASKIA TEN AsBROEK
USA CHARLES W. MULLER
ITA ALESSANDRO VANZETTO
*Member of the Steering Committee
**Member of the Advisory Committee
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AUS
BEL
CAN
DEN
FIN
FRA
FRG
GRE
ICE
INT
IRE
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Greece
Iceland
International
Ireland
President, Studio Ambrosetti;
Organizer 1987 Conference
~-'
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meet
ings
President, Murden and Company
External Relations, Fiat S.p.A.
ITA
LIE
NETH
NOR
POR
SPA
SWE
SWI
TUR
UK
USA
Italy
Liechtenstein
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States of America
Opening Remarks from th:! Panel
I.
In 1968, the Soviet Union put an end to the Prague Spring by invading Czechoslovakia. At that
time, we should have helped to bring about a Prague Spring in Moscow because the Czechs were
not likely to invade the Soviet Union.
For two years now, we have been witnessing exciting occurrences in the Soviet Union, with
unforeseeable consequences. Before devising a Western strategy, we must try to analyze the true
nature of what is happening there. We are witnessing an historic attempt to reform the Soviet
system. To be more precise, we are observing an attempt to adjust a country to the fantastic
acceleration of scientific and technological progress worldwide, so that it does not fall
hopelessly behind in global competition.
Gorbachev has said, of the current situation, that there can be no turning back, but the point
of no return has not yet been reached. The system's capacity for reform is to be tested, without
actually changing the system's basic structures. How far this is possible in theory is a question
that can be left unanswered at the moment. How far it is feasible in practice depends not least
on whether the Soviet leaders are supported by enough sufficiently capable functionaries.
This may be in doubt. Most probably, Gorbachev has already suffered his first disappoint-
ments and disillusionments. Yet, it is noticeable that his efforts have become more systematic
and his language sharper and more direct. He is pressing like someone who has little time.
In two to three years at the most, we shall see how far the limited reforms have succeeded.
If the desired results have not yet appeared, the leaders will have to decide whether reforms
within the system need to be supplemented by reforms of the system itself.
Moscow's domestic course is accentuating the differences among her European allies. These
governments are confronted with domestic difficulties generated by Moscow. The leading power
evidently accords higher priority to its own interests than to considerations of its allies. It is not
possible for the Soviets to force their allies to conform, because the process underway in the
Soviet Union is highly complex and its consequences still unforseeable.
The Soviet leader is the youngest in the East bloc. Compared with him, others seem like
Stalinist fossils, not least for reasons of age, likely to vacate their posts in the next five years.
Poland is an exception, once again. The new generation of leaders will probably possess
characteristics more managerial than ideological. This is the more likely the firmer Gorbachev
is in his aim of carrying out his plans by the Year 2000.
While Moscow's new domestic course is viewed by most of its European allies as more or less
narrowing their scope, Gorbachev's foreign policy initiatives, notably in the field of arms
control, are greeted enthusiastically, and are perceived by the allies as widening their own room
for manoeuver. They welcome any development that promises a lighter military burden, as well
as controlled, guaranteed stability. In this respect, the views of small and medium-sized
countries in Eastern and Western Europe do not differ much.
When he came to power, Gorbachev faced a situation that must Ii.ave been very gloomy. From
1975 to 1978, there had been economic stagnation, and from 1979 to 1984, a one percent decline
each year. It became possible to calculate when the Soviet Union would degenerate into a
second- or third-rate power. The gap between East and West in modernization and in the rate
of economic restructuring was becoming appreciably larger. The only field in which the Soviet
Union had achieved its claim to parity with the United States was that of military power. It had
attained the state of mutual assured destruction, but not one in which military superiority could
produce victory.
The new Soviet leadership could not fail to realize that a continuation of this system of
ossification and self-delusion would undermine the system's very historical validity. It has
become evident that the Soviet Union cannot escape the objective laws of rapidly evolving
science and technology. They are the same laws the West is subject to, but we are clearly better
able to cope with them.
Of course, Gorbachev believes in Communism. The reformer Martin Luther was also a
15
believer. In the long run, Gorbachev, too, can achieve more than a mere reform of his existing
church, whose pope he has become. Of course, Gorbachev does not carry out reforms to please
the West, but in order to become competitive again. Of course, democratization within his
system does not imply democracy along Western lines. And of course, openness and diversity
of opinion, even in Soviet publications, do not amount to pluralism of the kind that we enjoy and
cherish. But once the flame of this new way of thinking, of individual responsibility and
openness has been ignited, who can tell what hitherto dark corners it will light up?
The conclusions which Gorbachev has drawn from this essentially depressing situation for his
system are as simple as they are bold; power or security is still the central issue. Since power
can no longer be applied by means of weapons at the other's expense without risking one's own
destruction-in other words, since there can now only be joint security-any military superiority
has become meaningless. It is sufficient to retain a capacity for mutual assured destruction, or,
better still, to seek the lowest possible level of mutual security.
To obtain resources of economic relevance, the reduction of conventional weapons is more
important than that of nuclear arms. This explains the Soviet Union's readiness to reduce the
conventional superiority of the Warsaw Pact forces to obtain stability, which insures a mutual
capacity for defense, but not for a major conventional attack. This would also require a change
in Soviet strategy, which we in Western Europe consider to be offensive. The Soviet Union is
willing to make this change. Considering that neither East nor West has tabled negotiable
proposals for conventional stability in Europe, Western concepts would be all the more desirable
because only at the negotiating table can we ascertain the true scope of Moscow's theoretical
declarations of intent. Of course, this would also have consequences for the Western strategy of
flexible response.
What, as a result of this analysis, are the new approaches for Western political strategy? The
threat posed by the Soviet Union and its allies does not emanate from either its ideology or its
economic appeal. It is attributable solely, or at least predominantly, to Soviet military strength.
Neither the social models nor the living standards of the East bloc pose a threat to us, but Soviet
tanks and missiles do. Whoever elminates this military threat simultaneously does away with the
Soviet threat. This is especially important because of the possibility that the Soviets may be
tempted to engage in military adventures as a way out of the crisis its system may face in a few
years' time.
It is not in the Western interest to continue the competition with the East in the only field
where the latter is strong, if it is possible to shift the competition to the two fields where the
Eastern system is weak-its ideology and its economy. Such a shift in the competition does
indeed appear possible in view of the changes of course initiated by Gorbachev.
Holding Gorbachev to his word implies that the West should put forward proposals aimed at
achieving military stability. That means the elimination of superiority wherever it exists, the
preservation of a defense capacity based on mutual assured destruction, and, hence, the
downgrading of the military factor so that political and economic factors predominate.
All of the approaches discussed up to now for attaining balance and stability of strategic
weapons do not, incidentally, alter the fact that the West enjoys a geostrategic advantage. If this
advantage could be supplemented by conventional stability in Europe, which the Soviet Union
claims to be seeking, we could then have achieved a historic breakthrough-security against the
Soviet military threat.
We can take advantage of this opportunity in the coming years, regardless of how much
progress Gorbachev makes with his reforms. The West must not create the impression that it
opposes arms reductions. On the contrary, the West should assist the Soviet quest for reform by
depriving the Soviet Union of her trump card, military strength.
In the past, one might have doubted the position of Henry Kissinger, who was disappointed
that the treaties aimed at detente, which were concluded in Europe and functioned in Europe, did
not lead to Soviet restraint outside of Europe as well. For a Western strategy toward the Soviet
Union in the present-day situation, however, a global approach is imperative. In other words,
Western proposals should include a charter in which, at a minimum, the two superpowers agree
on certain rules governing their global conduct. The documents that Ford and Brezhnev signed
at Vladivostok can and should be developed further. The Soviet Union can only obtain relief
16
from competition in the arms race by appropriate conduct around the world.
By such a strategy, the West could regain the active role, and the full support of the
Europeans, and perhaps even the Eastern Europeans. It is thus not denuclearization of the world
that appears achievable by the year 2000, but the replacement of military confrontation by
peaceful competition between the two systems. All we want is security. Elimination of the
danger of military conflict necessary for purely peaceful competition of the systems and
ideologies can take place-as it must, from a historical point of view. There is ample reason to
be optimistic about the outcome of such a competition.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
II.
It is certainly not the first time that the Western World is facing a dynamic Soviet policy in
favor of disarmament, nor is• it the first time that we have a new Soviet leader promoting
economic reforms coupled with the so-called liberalization of the Communist society.
Each time the West has been faced with this situation, a debate has taken place, with hopes
and skepticism confronting each other. On one side were people asserting that we should take
almost for granted that a new era was dawning in the Soviet Union and that we should
immediately respond favorably in order to help positive movements in Soviet society to develop.
For example, in 1960, when Khrushchev was challenging the West in Berlin while at the same
time Sino-Soviet relations were deteriorating, some in the West argued that we should help
Khrushchev in his policy toward Berlin in order to improve relations between the two
Germanies, to avoid a compromise between the Soviets and the Chinese, and to prevent a
reversal of his economic reforms and a return to a more conservative, Stalinist syle of
leadership. These arguments were wrong.
There are also those in the West who believe there is no possibility of positive movement in
Soviet society or of improvement in East-West relations, simply because Soviet leaders are
Communists. This argument is wrong, too.
Now that we are facing a young, brilliant, and imaginative Soviet leader, the debate in the
West is even more intense than in the past. Certainly, Gorbachev is a different sort of leader
from his predecessors. For him, the Russian Revolution is no more than an historical event, as
the First World War is for many of us. His personal experience of the Stalinist era was limited.
He represents a new generation of Soviet citizen and of Soviet apparatchik. His main concern
is not to change the Communist regime, but to improve economic performance. He is aware of
his country's immense resources. But he is also aware that the Communist regime has failed to
modernize agriculture, that industrial development has been characterized by poor performance,
low productivity and a waste of resources. He understands that a modem Soviet Union has to
come to grips with the technological changes faced by every modem society. He needs more
than millions of poorly-skilled and unmotivated workers; he needs the engagement of the
intellectual class and of the technicians.
Will he succeed, or will he fail? Will he be in power for a long time, or is he a transitional
figure? These are open questions. But what is relevant for the West is how Gorbachev's
domestic policies affect his foreign policy, where perhaps his greatest strength is in his public
relations ability, in his capacity to use the most effective arguments to capture the attention of
Westem media and public opinion.
Gorbachev's dynamism is continuously changing, as he changes the linkages in the field of
disarmament. This sometimes goes beyond the Alliance's ability to adapt and respond
adequately. We have not yet defined a common strategy to deal with Gorbachev. This is, first,
because of the differing sentiments in the U.S. and Europe, which he fully exploits.
When Chancellor Schmidt campaigned for the deployment of the Euromissiles, his deep
motivation was to improve the coupling of Europe's defense with that of the U.S. in the new
situation of nuclear parity between the two superpowers. The deployment was justified on the
basis of the new threat posed to Western Europe by the the Soviet deployment of the SS-20. The
argument that won over our parliaments and our public opinion was the zero option, an
17
argument not based on security, but on the need to get approval for own deployment.
Now we face the zero option once again, still in a situation of nuclear parity between the U.S.
and the Soviet Union. We cannot go back. We are democratic governments, and the zero option
was our proposal. It would be very difficult to explain to our publics why we should retreat from
our own proposal, which will bring about the removal of 1300 Soviet and almost 200 U.S.
warheads.
But this is not the end of the story. When, after Reykjavik, the zero option for INF became
a real prospect, some in Western Europe began to point out the necessity to deal with the
imbalance in short-range INF. The Soviets have reacted promptly, proposing to extend the zero
option to SRINF with a range between 500 and 1,000 kilometers. Here, too, is an offer not easy
to refuse. It means the unilateral elmination of Soviet missiles, because the U.S. has no missiles
of this category deployed in Western Europe. We could propose to match Soviet SRINF,
perhaps at a lower level. But, then, we would have to explain to our parliaments and publics that,
while we are removing some missiles, we are deploying others, instead of accepting unilateral
elimination of Soviet missiles.
Why does Western Europe still feel uneasy and insecure at this stage? It is certainly not true
that the zero option for INF, including SRINF, will denuclearize Europe. There will still be
U.S. nuclear-capable aircraft, like the F-111, as well as short-range weapons, nuclear artillery,
and submarine-launched ballistic missiles dedicated to NATO.
But aircraft and submarines are much more mobile than land-based missiles. The strategy of
flexible response should be reviewed in the absence of INF, as the U.S. nuclear commitment to
defend Western Europe would appear to be weakened-at least its most visible and valuable
part. When we accept the zero option for INF, it perhaps will be more difficult to draw the line
where we stop the zero option for other weapons. And it is not at all certain that the line we draw
will not represent a new imbalance, not in our favor.
Decreasing nuclear weapons in Europe increases the value of conventional forces. And the
greater importance of conventional forces will increase the responsibility of Western European
governments in terms of financial efforts, common research and development and production,
and integration of armed forces. It will also be an important chance to make real progess toward
the creation of a European political authority. There is a strong awareness of the challenge we
face in. Western Europe and the need to move ahead.
The importance of the French and British nuclear deterrents will increase in the eyes of the
non-nuclear Western European states, but their modernization will face difficulties in a climate
which foresees fewer nuclear weapons in Western Europe. And it will not be easy to clarify what
more direct role these deterrents will have in the defense of Western Europe.
A European security effort in conventional forces requires a new understanding with the
United States. First, how do we improve the coupling of our defenses in this new situation?
Second, how do we decrease the skepticism of the U.S. toward every European effort in the field
of defense and security? There must be a change of mood in Washington about the strengthening
of the Western European Union. Americans cannot complain if European foreign ministers
discuss, in the framework ofE.C. political cooperation, questions related to European security,
including the question of INF. What is important is that we clearly define what a strengthening
of the European pillar of the Alliance will mean, and what will be the responsibilities of both
pillars. ,
Last but not least, Western Europe is confronted in its relations with the U.S. with a certain
globalization of our differences in non-military fields: trade agriculture, exchange rates, and
growth. From a Western European viewpoint, the credibility of the coupling with the U.S. also
involves improving our monetary, macro-economic, trade, and agricultural policies. An
American economy whose foreign debt will amount to $950 billion in 1991-17 percent of its
~DP-creates a situation of great concern in Western Europe. The deal, unspoken up to now,
is that Western Europe and Japan are financing the U.S. deficit and the U.S. is providing for our
defense. But we are now entering a situation where there are perhaps fewer possibilities for
Eur~pe.and_ Japan to finance the U.S. deficit, and perhaps, too, less credibility that the U.S. is
co?tmumg its defense commitment. There is also the question of the falling dollar, which could
brmg about worldwide recession without restoring the competitiveness of the American
economy. And the recurrent threats of reducing the American military presence, even in the
conventional field, in Western Europe to alleviate the U.S. fiscal deficit are certainly not the best
arguments to convince Europeans that we can rely on the same American commitment to defend
Western Europe that we had in the past.
18
There should not be two strategies to deal with Gorbachev-an American one and a European
one. That would be no strategy. A strategy implies more unity between Europe and the U.S.
This, in turn, implies an improvement in the coupling of our defense, in strengthening the
European pillar, and a common readiness to exploit all the possibilities of improving our
relations with Moscow, while keeping our unity and security.
The alternative will be a gradual disruption of the Alliance and of European unity, with an
increase in the appeal for European countries to try to get guarantees from Moscow. This will
certainly not guarantee our freedom and security as we have had them up to now.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
III.
The idea that the problem of East-West relations will be solved by conversion is not new; it
has been around since the 1940's. Harry Hopkins wrote from Yalta that "there was no doubt we
could get along with the Russians," as long as they were led by Stalin, who was "reasonable,
sensible, and understanding." In the words of a U.S. Senator from that era, the Soviet Union
had been "approaching for years the abandonment of Communism." Fortune magazine wrote
that Russia, after World War II, would "prefer the peace of Europe to expansionism" and
would ''focus on the development of her enormous domestic resources. '' And Averill Harriman
said that all Khrushchev wanted was domestic development, and his only obstacle was the
Western tendency to force him into an arms race.
Today, we still have this temptation to believe that one morning a Soviet leader will emerge
who is dedicated to peace. But then what? The content of peace appears self-evident, but, in the
whole literature of containment, there is very little about what happens on the magic day when
the situation of strength is conveyed to the Soviets, and they appear in the conference room and
say they are ready to negotiate.
What is the Western conception of peace? Does it have an objective reality, or is international
conflict a personal quarrel between leaders to be handled by essentially psychiatric methods?
President Eisenhower once remarked that "our many post-war conferences have been
characterized by too much attention to detail, by an effort to work on specific problems rather
than to establish the spirit and attitude in which we shall approach them, and I shall work to
remove distrust." President Reagan replicated this quotation before he went to Geneva. This is
one of our basic problems-the psychiatrization of foreign policy, the refusal to face either the
historic realities of Russian expansionism and of Russian concepts of security or the political
realities of the objective causes of tension, which must be removed if any benefit is to be
achieved.
Those who say there is an attempt going on in the Soviet Union to change the domestic system
are correct. Gorbachev has recognized that, if the Soviet Union pursues its domestic evolution,
it will return to the dilemma of Peter the Great, and be, after 400. years of suffering, an
underdeveloped country with a huge military machine. What should be considered, however, is
the question of what is the foreign policy consequence of that for the West, and in what way,
if at all, do we help Gorbachev. (VYe should not hurt him, but we do not know enough about the
internal dynamics of the Soviet system to make helping any Soviet leader an objective of
Western policy.) But, assuming this were our objective, Gorbachev's position can be analyzed
as follows.
It is doubtful that he can carry out his domestic reforms. It is striking that members of t.11e
Politburo, after describing their objectives, can not say how they are going to carry them out.
This is unheard of with Soviet leaders, who usually march from truth to truth. But whether
Gorbachev can succeed or not, he must be meeting substantial resistance in the plar..ning
mechanism from managers on the domestic side. He may have support from the military and the
KGB for the reason that, since they are in direct competition with the outside world, they
understand the relative position of the Soviet Union better than do the purely domestic
apparatchiks. If that is true, one cannot imagine Gorbachev, already in conflict with his domestic
apparatus, going to the military and the KGB and proposing concessions to the West that the
West hadn't asked for, in order to alleviate the spirit of and ease relationships with a group that
believes psychology is the result of objective conditions, and not the other way around.
19
Therefore, we may not even be doing Gorbachev a favor by permitting him to pick up those ·
Western proposals that he can justify to his appartus by saying, "The difference between
Gromyko and me is that, when (the West) made a silly proposal, Gromyko thought it was a
devious one and spent two years analyzing it. Dobrynin has convinced me that what you see in
America is what you get, or you get what you see. You can therefore afford to take proposals
that seem against (the Western) interest." Our curse is that we have no strategy. We have some
vague, general objectives-disarmament, reduction of nuclear weapons, trade-that you cannot
disagree with. But we have not figured out a balance of risks and incentives to get us from here
to there.
The INF situation is worrisome. It was put forward in the wake of the abandonment of the
neutron bomb for one reason-to deal with the problem that the U.S.-based American strategic
nuclear deterrent could no longer be credible for the indefinite future, and some political
coupling was needed. Since nobody dared to say this on eith_er side of the Atlantic, the INF
deployment was rationalized on the basis of countering the SS-20's. This was nonsense. The INF
missiles were never going to shoot at SS-20's. It was then put forth that, if there were no
SS-20's, there would be no need for the U.S. missiles in Europe, and so the zero option was
born, making a military equivalent out of a political necessity and comparing incomparable
issues.
The SS-20 is a Soviet military weapon, but the Soviet inhibitions to shoot at Europe with
nuclear weapons is no greater or less whether the weapon is launched from Poland or the Soviet
Union. The American inhibition io launch from across the ocean may be perceived to be greater,
and the principle advantage of the land-based deployment was the establishment of an automatic
trigger. That, in tum, created an opposition in the U.S. of the most diverse elements-those who
were against all nuclear weapons, those who wanted to get control of the nuclear trigger, and
those who didn't like the Europeans anyway.
Thus, a speech had to be made, in 1981, proposing the zero option-as a way to deploy, not
to abandon deployment. Then came the short-range weapons, advanced, again, not on the basis
of a rational analysis, but as a means of stopping the proposal that had been put forward, but that
nobody really wanted. So now we are trapped in a position where the Soviets have accepted our
proposals, and, in order to stop the acceptance of our proposals, we have made yet another
proposal, which they have also accepted.
From none of this can you deduce that Gorbachev wants peace. The worry is that, with
respect to Europe, those people in the U.S. who advocated no first use of nuclear weapons are
eloquent in their description of how we can cover any conceivable target from the U.S. and how
we have 4600 battlefield weapons left. But that doesn't deal with the political and psychological
problems. What they are saying is that they would rather Europe be defeated by conventional
weapons than use nuclear weapons. Leaving only battlefield weapons in Europe will have the
practical consequence that Germany will become the only nuclear battlefield, and that these
weapons will be in the hands of people least easy to control politically, simply because of their
dispersal. The combination of these factors must inevitably produce a general trend toward
denuclearization which cannot be eased by great statements of reassurance that cannot outlast the
18 months left in the administration, nor the domestic dynamics in which it has now become part
of political wisdom that the way you deal with your opponents is to steal their program.
On the Soviet side, Gorbachev is selling these programs to the military and the KGB not as
a means to end Soviet superiority, but as an offensive strategy. This, too, is worrisome. He may
not have started out that way, and he might want to discuss a serious relaxation of tensions. But,
like any political leader, he takes the line of least resistance, and, if we do not ask for things that
modify his conduct, why should he do more than accept what we offer? Why should he tell us
that we are starting a process in which the coupling of Europe to the U.S. will become
progressively more difficult, and where the people who have sustained NATO for 20 years are
becoming demoralized?
From what has been observed so far of Gorbachev, this appears to be a Soviet leadership that
has the intellectual capacity to understand serious proposals. It may even have the willingness
to examine them. It is certainly worth trying. The West should be faulted for not having come
up with serious proposals. The West has solved its short-term domestic problems by co-opting
its opposition groups wherever possible. One cannot find in what is now being negotiated any
ability to describe one benefit to the West other than that we are getting an agreement. One can
20
describe the potential advantages to the Soviet Union. We have given the Soviets a veto over our
nuclear deployments. (It had never occurred to anyone that the deployment of short-range
nuclear weapons needed to be discussed with the Soviets at all.)
We are starting unfortunate trends in Germany and in Europe. (This leaves aside the warheads
in Asia, whose practical consequence can only be the desire to get American acquiescence in a
threat to Japan, Korea, and China in return for an absurd deployment in the continental U.S.)
It is absolutely imperative for the Europeans to get serious. about developing a strategy, not in
opposition to the U.S., but in collaboration with it. America is a country that has gone now for
40 years of world leadership with no historic preparation for the relativities of balances of
power, and now it is, itself, in the process of changing the composition of its leadership from
the traditional European-oriented groups to those for whom Europe is a distant and emotionally
less comprehensible area. It is not possible to have two separate policies, but to have two
common policies, Europe must not be a lobbyist in our decision-making processes. Europe must
have a view, and it will have a responsible view only if it does more than just critique American
proposals.
Abolishing nuclear weapons i~ not an attainable, desirable, or worthy objective for serious
statesmen in this period. Nuclear weapons can be mitigated, and they should be balanced. But
we should stop talking nonsense that demoralizes our people by creating wrong impressions. We
also need to discuss our economic relationship with the Soviet Union. There may indeed by an
historic opportunity. We will not know this until we make proposals we can really believe in.
Gorbachev has asked why some oppose what happened in Reykjavik. The answer is because
he and Reagan were discussing numbers that were prepared by technicians and that none of the
leaders could have worked on themselves. They were not discussing the future-where we
wanted to go as societies-which is what national leaders are most qualified to do. We still can
do this, but it requires a totally different style of negotiation than is now being practiced, first
within the Alliance, and second between the Alliance and the Soviets.
To quote Metternich, "Policy is like a play in many acts, that unfolds inevitably once the
curtain is raised. To discuss the quality of the play is an absurdity. Once the curtain is raised,
the play will be completed, either by the actors or by the audience that mounts the stage." The
curtain has been raised, and our challenge now is whether the actors are going to complete the
play, or the audience that mounts the stage.
Discussion
An American opened the discussion by framing some of the questions that the West faced in
formulating a strategy toward the Soviet Union. What was the probable evolution of events in
the Soviet Union? How long would Gorbachev be in power? The examples of Khrushchev and
Kosygin indicated that failure was possible. Certainly Gorbachev had domestic opposition,
notably from the bureaucrats and some of the old guard. Even Gromyko, who had been
instrumental in putting Gorbachev in power, now seemed less enthusiastic about him, albeit
more on questions of timing than of substance. On his side, Gorbachev appeared to have the
KGB, the military, and the intellectuals, as well as support among the general public.
What did Gorbachev mean when he spoke of democratization? Presumably, he was not
talking about Western-style democracy? And when he talked about private initiatives, what did
he mean? As a dedicated Communist, it was unlikely he would significantly loosen up the central
planning of basic industries. What were his chances of economic success? And what would
happen if he failed to get the economy moving? Would it be because he had not gone far enough,
or because he had simply failed? In shaping its strategy toward the Soviet Union, the West
should determine whether there were opportunities for economic cooperation with the Soviet
Union that would be in both our interests.
A Norwegian speaker cautioned that the West should be careful in its analysis of the
implications of Gorbachev's reforms on the Soviet military threat. Did the reforms change the
nature of the threat? Was there a change in long-term Soviet strategy, or merely in the tactics
used to achieve the same goals of expansion and domination? Glasnost and the reforms, while
21
they might be the first steps in a process leading to a less expansive Soviet Union, had not yet
created a new and less dangerous situation.
In the meantime, if the West was too quick to conclude that the Soviet threat had diminished,
we risked providing the Russians with the temptation and opportunity for expansion, thereby
increasing the threat we thought was reduced. We could not be sure whether the Russians were
ready to abandon an offensive strategy. It was unlikely that the Soviet leadership really believed
military superiority had become meaningless or that it was ready to reduce its conventional
superiority. T.he Soviet reformers had not yet changed the character of the threat to the West
because they had not yet altered the monopoly of power held by the Communist Party, nor the
power of its leader to make decisions. Nor were there safeguards against a return to the methods
and policies of previous leaders. Thus, while we should pursue opportunities for breakthroughs
in arms control and for economic and cultural cooperation, we would be making a mistake to let
down our guard in terms of maintaining a military balance.
Other speakers favored a cautious approach to the Soviet Union. A French speaker worried
that the West might be making a mistake to assume that an economically stronger Soviet Union
would mean more security. The opposite could be true, he warned. A German agreed that the
danger to the West from a Soviet Union made stronger by Gorbachev's reforms could be greater
if Soviet political objectives did not change. The West should adopt a cautious strategy, taking
into account the causes for antagonism between East and West. These were not just military, but
had to do with different ideologies and different understandings of history. They would be with
us for along time.
Another German speaker was rather more heartened by the course of events in Russia.
Gorbachev was, in his opinion, serious about changing his country. This was particularly visible
in the media, where glasnost had created a new kind of openness and enjoyment of controversial
debate, through which Gorbachev was trying to foster public opinion in support of his efforts.
There appeared to be no organized resistance to Gorbachev, but rather an inchoate opposition,
mainly from those who benefited from privilege and sloth under the old system.
The West was faced, in its current dealings with the Soviet Union, with an historic
opportunity to break the mold of the postwar world. An important shift had already occurred in
Moscow. The current leaders now rejected the notion of the inevitability of war between the
imperialists and the Communists. They realized there was one capitalist economic world, and
they were ready to join it. In arms control, the Russians were offerring real cuts, and we had
to try to take them at their word, to probe their intentions. But we should not look at
developments in the Soviet Union in the narrow perspective of arms control, for a much larger
process was beginning. There seemed to be a kind of mellowing of the nature of Soviet power
going on, which, indeed, had long been an objective of Western policy. The Soviet Union
would, at the end of this process, still be a great power, with its own set of interests. But it would
be easier to deal with, and in that atmosphere, it would be easier for East and West Europeans
to get along.
Another participant from Germany was equally encouraged. He agreed that we were faced
with uncertainty about where the Soviet Union would be in three or four years' time; Gorbachev
himself didn't know. Western strategy should be to stand together, to maintain our defense and
our deterrent, and to probe. But the element of gloom which seemed to surround some Western
assessments of developments in Russia was not justified. The kinds of statements Gorbachev had
been making-about common security and about military power not being the determining
aspect of security-were what Western policy had been seeking for 40 years. What had
happened was a success story. We had stood together, looked after our defense, and now here
was a Russian leader saying the kinds of things we wanted to hear.
At the heart of the discussion about strategy toward the Soviet Union was the zero-option INF
agreement. The preponderance of opinion among speakers was that the West was committed to
this approach, however flawed it might be. Ifwe retreated from it, we would be courting disaster
in terms of public opinion. Should we fail to reach an agreement on INF, a German warned, our
governments would lose the credibility they needed to gain acceptance of arms programs in the
22
future. The effect on the Alliance would be devastating, added a Dutchman. A Belgian speake~
argued that achieving an agreement on INF would give the West greater room to manoeuver in
the future. Ifwe failed to reach an agreement now, nothing would happen for another two years
because of the American political calendar. The result would be a public perception that the
.Alliance had missed an historic opportunity, a resurgence of pacifism, and, quite possibly, a
paralysis of our ability to act.
Yet, a number of participants expressed grave reservations about the zero option. A Dane
argued that we had misled our publics when we said our deployment of cruise and Pershing
missiles was to counter the SS-20, when, in fact, the real motivation was to strengthen coupling.
To argue, now, that sea-based weapons could provide coupling overlooked the psychological
factor that land-based weapons were visible and sea-based ones were not. Added an American,
the denuclearization of Germany, toward which the zero option seemed to be the first step,
would create not just a military imbalance, but a psychological one. A French speaker argued
that the zero option would give Gorbachev more security and would split the alliance.
It was true, said an American, that we had gone too far to back away from the zero option,
but we should not delude ourselves into thinking we had accomplished a great success. The zero
option would not reduce the nuclear or the conventional threat to Europe. And the addition of
the short-range INF to the agreement created great psychological problems. All we got in return
was the acceptance of our own proposals. Why could we not find a greater justification for an
agreement than Soviet acceptance? A sensible strategy at this point would be to propose phased
withdrawals of the INF missiles over a period of up to five years and immediately begin
conventional negotiations, on whose successful completion the final phase of withdrawal would
be dependent. This would give us three and a half years to complete a conventional negotiation.
To say we wanted to take care of the conventional threat would not be a betrayal of our promise
on INF.
An Irish speaker supported the approach of linking completion of an INF agreement to
progress on the conventional front. To do so would restore our moral position. We would no
longer be on the defensive, and we would gain the support of public opinion. With the long- and
short-range INF removed from Europe, and perhaps battlefield nuclear weapons as well, the
West would be faced with a serious conventional imbalance. While there might be problems in
precisely defining a conventional balance, we should at least move in the direction of reducing
Soviet conventional strength in Europe.
There were, in the opinion of several speakers, positive aspects to the current arms control
situation. We had, in the view of an American, achieved an agreement by following through
with our deployment. We had decisively shown that we could limit Soviet military power by
demonstrating our own capacity to meet Soviet military challenges absent arms control. We had
proved the unilateralists in the U.S. and Europe wrong by showing that arms control could only
work in concert with a determined effort to maintain our capabilities. Gorbachev, said a
German, had performed a very important service to the Western Europeans, who had been
talking about doing without deterrence and about how arms control could solve all our problems..
Now, Europeans were talking about closer Western European security cooperation-a lesson
Gorbachev had unintentionally supplied. There had been a soberization taking place in Western
Europe, a realization that perhaps we had been going about arms control the wrong way. This
might help us develop a strategy. A Dutchman agreed, saying he found a mixture of fear and
hope in Europe. The door was more open than ever for a better defensive organization in
Europe. Whether any leaders were ready to walk through it was another question.
A Canadian speaker was encouraged by what he saw as a more sober European evaluation of
Gorbachev. The euphoria with which his coming to power had been greeted had been
considerably toned down. As to the incoherence between Europe and the U.S. on the arms
control situation, it was not as unhopeful as it might seem. We were caught between the
expectations of our public opinions and our strategic realities. Europe needed some time for its
public opinions to develop. An irony of the current discussion was, in the speaker's view, that
many of those most vocal in their concern about the possible use of nuclear weapons were least
appreciative of what the introduction of SDI as a non-nuclear defensive system had done to
enhance the possibilities of serious management of the nuclear balance. Finally, it was
23
premature to see a post-Yalta type of outcome to the present negotiations.
It was time to accept that the zero-option INF agreement was going to happen, said a Belgian
speaker. But rather than look at an agreement as our objective, we should be focusing on what
to do after an agreement was reached. In this, Europe faced particular responsibilities. If an
agreement was reached, the post-war basis of the Alliance would end, and a new strategy would
become essential.
In formulating such a strategy, Europe faced significant challenges. First, the European
Community-the nucleus for European cooperation-had to get back to basics in order to define
Europe's common political objectives. To do this, the E.C. would have to deal with more than
just economic questions, but political and security ones as well. And it would have to deal with
internal problems and differences that could stand in the way of defining the common objectives.
Second, what would be the U.S. reaction to an increase in European cooperation? The U.S.
seemed increasingly impatient with multilateral organizations that limited its room to ma-
noeuver. Could the West return to the type of organization where the U.S. was involved, taking
into account the genuine interests of both Europe and the U.S., but having one strategy?
Third, what would be the role of France and Britain in a European move toward greater
political and security cooperation? Without their taking a leading role, the credibility of that
move and of the development of a dialogue with the U.S. would be greatly affected.
Fourth, what would be the role of West Germany? Would it prefer to wait and see what
developed with the Soviet Union? And would an increase in European cooperation, with a strong
German commitment, appear as a danger or complication to the development of a relationship
in between the two Germanies and with the Eastern bloc?
Our objective should be to return to an understanding on a basic strategy. To do this required
initiative and leadership. Europe had to take the initiative and tell the U.S. that it was going to
take action. To delay would exact a high cost for European unity and overall joint security.
A number of Germans made remarks about their country's role in a new European strategy.
One said that all parties in Germany were prepared to participate in closer defense cooperation.
But another worried that there could be new strains between West Germany and the rest of the
Alliance. Some Germans might not want closer European cooperation in defense because they
preferred the status quo. Whatever strategy Europe followed, said a Dutch speaker, it must
avoid splitting Germany. There was a greater convergence of views there than there had been
in a long time. Our strategy had to be to try to keep the German government and opposition as
united as possible, and not to undermine that unity.
With respect to France, several speakers called for a greater role in and and some new
thinking about European defense. A French speaker agreed that his country had a major
responsibility, and that it was time to move. In fact, France had done a good deal, but perhaps
too secretly. Now it was time for France to lift what remained of the ambiguity of its position
in the event of war. This probably required a closer integration of its conventional forces. But
it should keep its independent nuclear weapons. It was because France had this force that it could
afford to be more cooperative with the Alliance in the conventional field. We should agree to
exchange a higher nuclear threshold for France for a lower one in the Alliance. But France
would take on this role only if it was clear that deterrence remained the focus of Western
defense.
In order for the Alliance to have to develop a new strategy toward the Soviet Union, said an
American, we had to understand three important changes that had taken place over the last
decade with respect to East-West security problems: (I) the growth in Western public opinion of
antinuclear feeling; (2) doubts expressed in Washington about the sustainability and desirability
of deterrence; (3) the shift in Soviet strategy under Gorbachev in which the Soviet Union had
substituted an earlier strategy of nuclear build-up for one of nuclear build-down through arms
control.
The problem we were now faced with was to address the continuation ofGorbachev's strategy
of attempting to maximize his conventional options in Europe by reducing or eliminating all
nuclear weapons and turning Europe into a de facto nuclear-free zone. In approaching this
problem, we had to be guided by three principles. First, we could no longer practice a policy
of co-opting the arguments of our opponents. We must make the case publicly for maintaining
24
some level and mix of nuclear weapons in Europe for the defense of the Alliance. We had to
draw the line between the zero option and some level of nuclear capabilities. Second, we must
avoid Soviet efforts to discriminate among different members of the Alliance. An arms control
agreement that left some Europeans less vulnerable to Soviet missiles and others more
. vulnerable was an approach to avoid. We also had to avoid being left with an unusable
deterrent-one based on battlefield systems. Third, any further nuclear arms control agreements
should be linked to progress in conventional arms control. And we should avoid adopting the
idea of conventional deterrence. We could not totally eliminate nuclear weapons.
With respect to this last point, another American felt that, in reaching a common
U.S.-European strategy, we had to keep in mind the disparity of assumptions prevailing within
the two pillars of the Alliance. Americans wanted to believe President Reagan when he spoke
of SDI rendering nuclear weapons ineffective and obsolete, because nuclear weapons, for them,
meant the possibility of the U.S. being fired on by a hostile power for the first time since the War
of 1812. Europeans, on the other hand, grew up with a war cycle, and nuclear weapons
symbolized the hope of breaking and ending that cycle. We had to strive for a solution that
preserved a minimum numbef of nuclear weapons to avoid a return to the war cycle in Europe.
A number of participants worried that we faced self-imposed obstacles in developing a
strategy toward the Soviet Union. A French speaker said he was not optimistic because he did
not see a strong leader anywhere in the West. All the Western governments were weak. And if
no leader was there to take the right initiative, nothing would happen. The only leader today who
had the initiative was Gorbachev.
An Irishman questioned the effectiveness of the deliberations of Western leaders. Political
leaders devoted inadequate preparation and insufficient time to their discussions. They failed to
think out issues with open minds, and to listen to each other rather than declaiming at each other.
An International participant felt that the failure to develop a common strategy was due to the
lack of cohesion and of proper consultation in the Alliance. This was not so important in the past,
with a more or less predictable Soviet Union, but, with Gorbachev, it was a different situation.
As an alliance, we looked in disarray, and this was bad for our publics' perceptions of our
leadership. This lack of cohesion and consultation went further than arms control, to our
dealings with the Soviet Union on many matters. Either we had the wrong institutions, or we
didn't use the ones we had properly. Certainly, NATO was not used properly by its member
states. They talked about arms control but not about the other political things which were just
as much the business of NATO as of other organizations. The consequences of our failing to get
our act together would be serious in the end.
It was an American's view that there might well be an historic opportunity for a breakthrough
in relations with the Soviet Union. But we were in danger of missing it because of the way we
were manoeuvering. We were not making proposals that were in the mutual interest of both
sides. We were not being honest with ourselves. The U.S., at the present time, did not have a
strategic view for a number of reasons. Nor did the Europeans really know what they wanted.
Both the U.S. and the Europeans had to analyze what they really wanted and needed, and, in
making proposals, recognize the mutual benefit. We didn't seem to know what our opportunity
was. It was up to us to define it.
25
II. POLICY TOWARD TRADE AND PROTECTIONISM
Working Paper
Hopes or Illusions?
on GATT Negotiations
I.
Some optimists believe that the new round of trade negotiations which began with Punta de!
Este marks the resumption of liberalization in trade in a world economy increaingly disrupted
by a multitude of trade barriers. Ifwe regard this from a wider historical perspectve we may feel
that at the present this is more or less wishful thinking. Of course it was important that an
agreement be reached to start a new round of trade negotiations. It was important that
multilateralism prevails over bilateralism. Nevertheless the appalling discrepancy will persist
between the development of imbalances in the flow of goods and services throughout the world
and the development of currency movements. Trade restrictions of various forms and their
containment (at least) will be discussed; but at the same time uncontrolled and increasingly
unpredictable exchange rate developments will continue to influence and distort the flow of
goods and services beyond all historical experiences. And these distortions will be many times
worse than the effect of any trade policies however bilateral or multilateral they may be in the
long run.
Even optimistic forecasts over the next five years show sluggish growth of the world's real
gross national product and of world trade, no evidence that the basic disequilibria will be
eliminated, in particular the current account deficits of the United States will continue to remain
above $100 billion thus exerting continued pressure on the real effective dollar exchange rate. 1
Whether progress will be achieved depends largely on which nation assumes leadership. The
issue at stake is not whether this leadership role is desired. It falls upon the strongest, and this
will continue to be the United States. However, if this is not assumed, and assumed in a credible
way, then the world market for goods and services, and eventually the financial markets too, will
be doomed to fragmentation. The price of fragmentation will be increased poverty worldwide,
and less equality among the community of nations. Frameworks such as a new round of trade
negotiations are a worthy environment, but they are not substitute for leadership.2
II.
Ifwe consider world economic data over a long perspective, then the developments during the
30 years after the Second World War present us with an extraordinary scenario. So
extraordinary in fact that, had futurology been in vogue at the time, anyone who had written a
"concise history of 1987" at the end of the Second World War would have been consigned to
the land of fantasy by even the most outrageous optimists if his vision of the state of development
had approximated to the reality of the mid-seventies. This still applies even a decade later,3
26
1 Wharton Economic Forecasting Associates, World Economic Outlook; December 1986, Vol. No. 4.
2 G. Klepper, The Next GATT Round; Bilateralism versus Multilateralism. Intereconomics, September/October
1986, p.236.
although expectations have become somewhat different-more of a feeling of the morning after
the night before.
Never before in history have so many enjoyed such lasting benefit so suddenly. It may be
debated whether they have been made happier, but a decision about that would presuppose that
anyone could agree on a definition of what it means to be happy. However, if we take a positive
attitude towards life, then there is at least one yardstick of success that is beyond dispute, and
that is the fact that we have succeeded in substantially extending the human lifespan. It may well
be, although not very unexpectedly, that international distribution of income has not become
more just, and that not all nations have partaken in equal measure of the general success. The
fact is that today some four billion can be fed less badly than 2.5 billion were in 1950. To
interpret this outstanding performance to be a failure, leading to disaster was the prerogative of
the 'seventies-exactly that change in expectations which we mentioned earlier.
III.
A unique paradox becomes evident against this background. One can hardly conceive of any
other area in economics where the conflict between economic insight and policy reality is more
apparent than in trade policy. Economists are almcst unanimous in supporting free trade as a
good thing, yet there is practically no country which actually practices it except for Hong Kong,
if the term country can actually be applied to the colony, and follows the economists' lead: nor
does empirical data impress. The call is for trade barriers to protect jobs; yet in the most heavily
protected areas in the industrial countries, jobs were not saved but lost.4
To take one telling example: During the period 1973-84, the United States lost 223 of the
jobs in the textile industry, 183 in the clothing industry, and 543 in the iron and steel sector;
the EC lost 463, 43 3 and 423; and Sweden 41 3, 563 and 25 3 respectively.s
However, R. A. Gephardt, the first Democrat to declare for the Presidency, is reported to
have taken a hard line on trade: "The next President, must be as tough in negotiating terms of
trade as this President has been in negotiating with the Russians." In an article "Real-world
Trade Policies are Making a Come-back", R. Kuttner proposes "an ingenious plan to auction
import quotas to the biggest bidders, thus allowing the Treasury (of the United States) to collect
some extra money for deficit reduction and to protect domestic producers-not mentioning, of
course, who is to pay the difference.6
Quite clearly, the continually growing exchange of goods and services on an international
level accounts for a very substantial share of this unique development, the characteristic feature
of which was a movement step by step towards a free trade system. And the main reason for the
system being able to develop in this direction at all can be very largely attributed to the world's
biggest national economy, the USA. As history in general shows, the development towards a
free trade system is largely determined by the fact that the system is forced by a "hegemonic
power". A comparison here might be the role of Prussia during the days of German Customs
3 It speaks for the viability of the "GATT-system" that the 1973 oil price shock initiating a turbulent decade of
changing relative world market prices together with a world-wide recession comparable only to the Great
Depression set off quite a different reaction than then-the "New Protectionism" in the form of sector agreements
and country specific NTBs notwithstanding-through this was largely achieved through the recycling efforts of the
private financial institutions condemned so vigorously a decade later.
4 The paradoxon is based on the unique assumption that if everyone in a group of individuals or firms had some
interest in common, then there would be a tendency for the group to seek to further this interest. It was supposed
that if workers, farmers, or consumers faced monopolies harmful to their interest, they would eventually attain
countervailing power. However, a larger number would at best succeed in advancing the cause to a small
(imperceptible) degree. They therefore will not act in their self-interest. The same is true for governments. If
governments produce only collective goods that go to everybody there is rio inducement to contribute to their
support. It is different when governments provide something else than collective goods. Then special interest groups
gain leverage and are able to act contrary to the common good (the most protected have continued to decline such
as agriculture, textiles and steel; with similar prospects for the US automobile and chip industry) despite enormous
cost to the consumer.
M. Olson, The Rise and Decline of Nations; Economic Growth, Stagflation and Social Rigidities; New Haven;
1982, p. 21 ff.
5 International Trade 85-86, GATT.
6 Business Week, March 16, 1987.
27
Union, or of Great Britain within the terms of the Cobden-Chevalier Treaty during the second
half of the nineteenth century.7
In the case of the USA this may appear to be something of a paradox, since measured against
the GNP, foreign trade played and still plays a relatively modest role in the United States.
Many explanations have been put forth to explain the divergence between theory and practice,
each of them adding to the understanding of the complexity of trade policy. However,
recognizing the obstacles on the way towards a liberal international trading system does not in
itselfsuggest ways ofremoving them. A look back at history shows that protectionism per se is
nothing new. The roads to liberization must be analyzed in a longterm perspective. The moves
towards and away from free trade demonstrate the interplay of economic, political, institutional
and other factors which determine the fate of international trading systems.
If there is to be an international flow of goods, then there must also be a working system of
payments. And here the USA took on the role of world banker. This system, however, could only
function as long as the USA was prepared to subordinate its own national monetary policy to the
requirements of world monetary policy, a position it compromised on with the advent of the
Great Society and its involvement in the Vietnam War and ceased to re-attain ever since.
IV.
More Freedom was introduced step by step into international goods exchange until the start
of the 'seventies. The agreement which formed the framework for this concerted action was the
GATT, an entity unique in international law inasmuch as it did not involve an international
institution of the same kind, for example, as the International Monetary Fund, but was rather an
agreement of a recommendatory nature, subject to the scrutiny of a secretariat with regard to its
implemention. A secretariat, moreover, which reported back to its members and which
occasionally carries out recommendations.
The tendency towards more freedom went cheek-by-jowl with a monetary system which was
based on the principle of a gold-dollar standard, and which regarded the free play of market
forces with great caution; something which was initially expressed in the system of fixed rates
of exchange.
This trade and money system bore very much the hallmark of Lord Keynes, whose worst fear
of all was a post-war recession and speculative short-term inter-state flow of funds, which would
cripple the continuous development of trade flows due to deformed rates of exchange. As we
know, he only succeeded in pushing his ideas through in part, but he was nevertheless not slow
to take a lesson from history.
How well the system operated depended very much on one single country, the USA. In the
perspective of world history, it will go down as one of America's great contributions that she
took on this responsibility. One might point out that America, as the only country to emerge
truly victorious from the holocaust, could afford to do this, a country whose economic and
therefore also political power was unmatched; one might point out that this role also worked to
America's own advantage, and that it was not nearly so selfless as has often been maintained.
But whatever the judgment, the fact remains that the United States maintains to this day the
economy with the highest gross domestic product per capita, as well as being the most
prosperous nation in the world. But as the world of today shows, this need not have been the
case. Reactions could have been different, and there were sufficient forces within America itself
to have presented an entirely different policy.
To sum up, then, we should emphasize that the world economic system has worked, even
though the non-monetary sector was organized differently from the monetary policy sector,
without relinquishing any rights of sovereignty. And the reason was that the powers that be in
the world lent both their policies and weight to ensuring that this random separation would not
be allowed to come into effect. ·
7 G. Klepper, op.cit., p.236 ff.
28
v.
But the world has changed a lot since that start of the 'seventies. Thirty years of increased
international intermeshing has made the globe truly more global. But the world monetary system
was abandoned, and no replacement was found. Theoreticians have talked about flexible rates
of exchange to do away with the inequalities and to build barriers against inflation, but instead
the inequalities have become greater. Now there is excessive freedom for capital flows, and
increasingly more pressure to restrict the free flow of goods and services between different
nations.
VI.
To date, little has changed in the potential leading role of the USA. Nevertheless, this position
is not so unassailable as it once was, both politically and economically. America's dominating
position has been challenged more and more successfully in the political and military sphere by
the USSR and the nations allied with her; in other words, by a semi-theocratic system which
confronts a union of pluralistic and democratically-organized societies.
Against the backdrop, the adherence to multilateralism and free trade acquires great
significance, even if the continued creation of regional zones of integration-the EC being at
present the most important, although by far from the only example-runs directly contrary to the
principle of creating an intergrated world market.8
We mentioned that the importance of agreements, which the parties cannot actually be forced
to follow, lies in the fact that they allow national economic policy to seek a cure from short-term
symptoms. This can be seen from the incessant round of electorial strife which are endemic in
the democracies of the most important partner nations in the world economy; offering, too,
opposition to laws of economic good sense, in the direction of more protectionism.
VII.
At Punta del Este, the 92 contracting parties to GATT succeeded in achieving a concensus on
the subject matter, aims and procedures for the negotiations to take place over the next four
years, adding yet another round, the Uruguay Round, to its seven predecessors. Given the
present atmosphere, it did not seem at all assured that such an agreement would be struck.
During the preparatory discussions, attention seemed to be frequently drawn away from the
global common aims of the contracting groups. These conflicts have not been settled, and will
have to be dealt with in the future.
Artur Dunkel, General Director of GATT, said in a lecture in Vienna on October 14, 1987
that" ... the meeting was sucessful beyond all expectations, and the content is very hopeful. " 9
8 Governments do not operate in a political vacuum. It is difficult to develop a responsible economic policy against
powerful special interest groups (see footnote 3). In order to develop greater understanding for adjustment needs
and growth requirements GATT can provide (and has provided) valuable support; not infrequently GATT
obligations help to withstand pressure in order not to lose face internationally. There are strong arguments to make
GATT obligations enforceable within the individual member countries. Juridical review by national courts could
provide for a more de-politicized means of protecting individual rights and non-discriminatory foreign trade
competition than diplomatic efforts.
R. Adlung; GAIT and the "Uruguay Round", Intereconomics, January/February 1987;
G. Lehmbruch; Interest groups, government and the policies of Protectionism; Aussenwinschaft, Heft, II!II/,
September 1986, P. Ill;
E.-H. Petersmann, Trade Policy as a Constitutional Problem. On the "Domestic Policy Functions" of
International Trade Rules. Aussenwinschaft, op. cit., p. 243.
9 A. Dunkel, Welthandel: eine Bestandsaufnahme nach der GATT Ministenagung in Punta del Este;
Vortrags-Manuskript.
29
I
What exactly were the challenges of Punta Del Este, and what is supposed to be achieved?
The tasks were considered to be those of freeing the world trade system from the anti-GATT
measures which had piled up over previous years, strengthening the world trade system,
preventing uncontrolled protectionism, and adapting the world trade to the changes in the world
economy.
And what was achieved? An extensive catalogue of declarations of intent was produced
regarding all the measures which did not conform with GATT, a standstill and a rollback were
declared, and agreement was reached on a monitoring system. This group of measures included
voluntary self-restraint agreements, market division accords, price agreements, and similar grey
area measures. This does not signify, indeed, an acknowledgement of multilaterality over
bilateral control of trade problems. In addition, it is intended that the trade system will be
strengthened, and that a later disintegration of the liberalization standard will be prevented.
Accordingly, the agenda included the examination of the GATT regulations, and the protective
clauses and reconciliation procedures which have been worked out at the Tokyo round. The
ministers settled on a further liberalization of customs formalities and on a number of non-tariff
impediments, and declared to negotiate proprietory rights and the regulation of direct foreign
investments. Finally, the sector of services was also included in the round of negotiations. 10
Indeed, an impressive array. In Dunkel's words: "A major effort to keep world markets
open.'' In more moderate terms the significance of Punta de! Este can be summarized in one
sentence: Its importance is the fact that it took place at all.
What are the chances, then, that the declared aims can actually be turned into reality? Trade
flows in a global world economy, in which there are not many markets but one single market,
require co-ordinated flows of payment as well. If the flows of payment become disconnected
from the flow of goods, then tensions and stresses arise which cannot be selectively relieved.
Changes in rates of exchange, which are the result of discretionary national finance policy, can
have far greater significance than all the tariff and non-tariff trade obstacles put together, as the
latest development clearly shows. And how is that essential growth in the world economy
supposed to come about, which is the absolute prerequisite for turning the catalogue of intent
into reality, ifthe yields from the finance markets substantially surpass those from investments
into the real economy?
Of course, the interconnections did not go unconsidered at Punta de! Este. They were,
however, expressed in a very restrained manner as part of a detailed declaration, boiled down
in effect into two sentences:
Negotiations shall aim to develop understandings and arrangements " ... to improve the
overall effectiveness and decision-making of the GATT as an institution, including, inter alia,
through involvement of Ministers; to increase the contribution of the GATT to achieving greater
coherence in global economic policy-making through strengthening its relationship with other
international organizations responsible for monetary and financial matters.'' 11
It would be no surprise if the actual content of this part of the declaration of aims holds the
key to solving the problems ofthe world economy, problems ofwhich the importance seems to
be proportionally inverse to the amount of attention which was paid to the non-monetary
economy aspects in the Ministerial Declaration on the Uruguay Round-for reasons which
should be entirely obvious. When the success of the "glorious thirty" (J. Fourastie) will remain
a unique epoch in modern world history-as some believe-whether we witness the trough of a
Kondratieff-cycle-as some others think-or tribute is paid to the historically unique phenom-
enon of a truly global world in every respect which offers unlimited growth potential will be
decided-though only in part and unfortunately so-during the four years to come, the envisaged
30
10 Though there are a number of "imperfections" which prompt R. Wartenweiler to entitle this observation "An
Adventure in Trade Policy with Uncertain Results." There is hybrid negotiation structure which is programmed
for discord. The services are negotiated outside of GATT. The Punta del Este Conference was called as a
conference of the Contracting Parties. Hence participation was restricted for obvious political reasons. Thus the
Soviet Union and the GDR-both seeking GATT participation-could be easily excluded at the sacrifice of the
universality of a liberal world trade order. (the Tokyo Round was launched in 1973 as an open ministerial
conference.)
R. Wartenweiler, EFTA Bulletin 4/86.
11 Ministerial Declaration on the Uruguay Round, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, September 20, 1986.
span of time in which negoti°ations of the Uruguay Round will take place. For optimists the latter
scenario is conclusively thinkable as described in "A Concise History of the Future 1974-2024"
by N. Macrae. 12
12 N. Macrae; A Concise History of the Future 1974-2024; London, 1984.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
/.
The forces of protectionism in the U.S. Congress continue to be very strong. Most members
have in their districts a plant or factory whose products are threatened by what they call "cheap
foreign imports.'' The political power of voters whose jobs are in jeopardy is a lot stronger than
the more rational but less focused arguments favoring free trade.
Nevertheless, for all the talk, it is worth noting that no protectionist legislation has actually
been enacted in the United States in the last six years. A trade bill is likely to be enacted this
year, but it appears that it will feature a number of positive measures, including provisions
permitting us to make our own exports more competitive and to more effectively open up foreign
markets, rather than too heavy a load of protectionist measures. It is premature to be overly
optimistic about U.S. trade legislation this year, but there is reason for more optimism than
existed a year ago.
U.S. trade policy decisions take place within a framework of global economic developments
and policies. In the past four years, we have had the good fortune of a favorable economy in the
United States. We have had continuous real growth for over 50 months. If growth continues, as
expected, through October 1987, the current recovery will be our longest peacetime recovery.
Within this healthy economic picture, we do have severe problems. Large trade and current
account deficits accompanied this vigorous economic activity. Our current account deficit rose
from $9 billion in 1982 to a record $145 billion in 1986.
This record level of U.S. trade deficits has created the concern that our businesses and
farmers can no longer compete in international markets. But even with a record deficit last year,
the U.S. exported over $370 billion worth of goods and services.
Yet there are ways to enhance the U.S. manufacturing and farming base. Experience all over
the world shows that the surest path to increased competitiveness and increased economic
prosperity is through greater reliance on free market forces. The Reagan Administration has
developed a competitiveness initiative designed to reduce government intervention in economic
activity and more fully unleash the power of market forces.
Our competitiveness initiative is a wide-ranging set of proposals aimed at increasing our
investment in human and intellectual capital, boosting our scientific and technological develop-
ment, refining our legal and regulatory systems, and creating a more favorable international
economic environment.
The centerpiece of the trade proposals in the Administration's competitiveness package is·
negotiating authority for the new multilateral trade round. As we have done since the end of
World War II, the United States strongly supports an open and liberalized trading system. An
open trading system is the cornerstone for promoting growth in the U.S. and around the world.
Trade creates productive new jobs and profitable investment opportunities. It stimulates
innovation and entrepreneurial activity.
Last September, we joined 73 other major trading nations in launching a new trade round-
the Uruguay Round-under the auspices ofGATT. The United States and many other countries
worked hard to ensure that the agenda for the new round would be more comprehensive and
ambitious than past rounds. We place importance on developing rules for many areas of
economic activity which are not now included, such as agriculture, services, investment, and
intellectual property.
Agriculture is a particularly important negotiating area of the Uruguay Round. Government
intervention in agriculture has run rampant, creating tremendous market distortions and huge
economic and political costs. Government support programs, in the U.S. and elsewhere, have
severed the link between free market signals and production decisions. As a result, we face
31
massive overproduction worldwide; gluts prevail in nearly all major agricultural commodities.
The financial burden of this extensive government intervention is becoming unsustainable; the
total cost of farm-support programs in the industrial countries has soared to over $140 billion a
year. International disputes ·over agriculture are rnutiplying and complicating relations among
friends and allies.
Agriculture is a global problem, which requires collective action to solve. We hope that
agriculture will be a focal point of the upcoming Venice economic summit and the Uruguay
Round talks. In particular, we believe that the E.C., U.S., and Japan must take the lead,
working together and in GATT, in molding the trade and domestic reforms that will make
agricultural production throughout the world more market-oriented.
One more important element of U.S. trade policy is our efforts to eliminate protectionist
practices by other countries which unfairly penalize foreign competitors. The Reagan _Admin-
istration has aggressively defended the right of U.S. companies to compete in markets abroad.
We believe that markets should be open and open equally, so we have sought to eliminate
discriminatory practices.
We will not, however, start a trade war in any sense of the word. Even in our
highly-publicized recent action regarding Japanese semiconductors, the practices affected only
$300 million of trade, less than .5 percent of all Japanese exports to the U.S.
The Administration recognizes that increasing market access and eliminating unfair trade
practices are not the only solutions to the U.S. trade deficit. Nonetheless, attacking foreign
barriers is an important and essential component of U.S. trade policy. Our efforts to dismantle
foreign practices are necessary to maintain and preserve the principle of equity and openness on
which the international trading system is built. Only if all countries are willing to be bound by
a commitment to fair trade, can we hope to maintain support for free markets and the real
economic growth which free trade generates.
In the past four years, the United States economy has been strong. Our dedication to
market-oriented policies has facilitated this economic activity. The major trading countries need
to work together, through GATT and otherwise, to provide for active, free trade around the
globe. By sticking with free-market principles, we are confident that we can continue to enhance
the economic prosperity of the United States and of the world.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
II.
Looking at the causes of the current wave of protectionist sentiment, it is evident, from the
U.S. perspective, that the intensity of these pressures reflects the size of our trade deficit. It
provides the focus for concern and for specific interests in protectionism. That the deficit is three
and a half to four percent of GNP does not suggest the magnitude of protectionist pressures. But
the deficit is equal to 15 to 20 percent of manufacturing output. Taking this into account,
someone is bound to feel the pain; and it intensifies structural weaknesses that were there
already.
It is also true that, from the American perspective as the largest and also the marginal supplier
of agricultural commodities to the world, when you have a worldwide glut developing, the
marginal supplier feels it particularly strongly, and is inclined to see the problem as arising from
the practices of others.
As far as the rest of the world is concerned, certainly the relatively slow growth and the
unemployment in Europe and Japan have inhibited constructive responses to the trade problem
and have prevented them from carrying the banner of liberal trade at a time when it is difficult
for the U.S. to do so.
Exchange rate volatility has also contributed to the current problems. Many businessmen feel
they are not in control of their competitive destinies when there are such large fluctuations in the
value of the dollar. That kind of volatility creates a climate in which businessmen look out for
anything that creates a bit more stability, presented as an assurance of competitive fairness.
There appears to be a growing gap between the doctrine and ideology of free trade and what
people actually want. We have more and more change in our economies because of technology
32
and their very openness. We apparently are hot talking simply about a struggle between
particular and general interests. Presented with a trade-off between growth and more stability,
most businessmen would opt for stability over growth, and would· be willing to take a little
protectionism. The semiconductor industry in the U.S. is an example. It's a new industry-not
much more than ten years old-and there is a feeling that it is unfair that it is being taken away.
As to the consequences of protectionist pressures, the world's economy is in a particularly
vulnerable position. Protectionism risks inflation and recession, and it complicates an already
sluggish situation in Japan and Europe. The U.S. House of Representatives bill is barely
tolerable in terms of the existing world trading order, and the danger is that it will go downhill
from there. A lot has already been added, and there are even greater dangers corning from the
Senate.
The Administration's strategy, in addition to straightforward opposition to protectionism, has
involved exchange rates and the need for depreciation to make industry more competitive. This
was politically necessary and economically justified, and part of any reasonable strategy. But it
is a strategy of natural limitations, and we have probably reached them in terms of any net
benefit to the world economy. ,
The next step should be a more consistent pattern of macroeconomic policies among the U.S.,
Europe, and Japan. It has been said that Europe and Japan should do more to provide a stimulus
to expand the world economy. There is frustration in the U.S. that Europe and Japan have not
done much to accelerate growth. In Europe and Japan, there is frustration that the U.S. has not
done much about its budget deficit and about making room in its economy for more exports. The
old problem in the international monetary and financial system is that there is not much leverage
to get the surplus countries to move toward equilibrium, nor, from the European point of view,
is there much leverage to get a reserve-currency country in deficit to do the same thing.
The question is how to bring about pressure on our governments without bringing down the
house of free trade. There are dangers in working too much on the exchange rate side. As for
protectionist legislation, most supporters in Congress say they are not really protectionist but are
merely using pressure and would remove the measures if there was an appropriate response. But
there are dangers in this approach.
It would be useful to inculcate in U.S. legislation the notion that, if we think retaliation in the
form of restraints is justified, we ought to be able to get some other countries to join us in taking
the same action. If other countries would join us, it might determine if the approach is justified.
There is obvious potential for such a multilateral approach directed at countries with structural
surpluses, like Japan and Taiwan.
In the longer term, it might be worthwhile to re-examine the merits of tariffs. All post-war
trade negotiations have concentrated on reducing or getting rid of tariffs. Recently, we have
gone in the reverse direction in terms of erecting non-tariff barriers. Is there a possibility of
rewriting the rules of the game so that, within defined areas, there would be room for at least
temporarily invoking tariffs, instead of taking other kinds of trade-restraining measures? The
time has perhaps come, given the degree we've retreated on the restrictionist front, to begin
thinking of approaches that enable us together to better drive the frustrations that give rise to
barriers in more constructive, identifiable, and temporary directions.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
Ill.
With respect to trade, there is a certain degree of disarray because no initiative is forthcoming
from anyone.
There is a very serious ambiguity over the strength of the anti-protectionist intentions of the
the major economic players. Everyone is against protectionism in principle, except in those
areas where one or the other is clearly a dominant player. The voices speaking up in organized
structures have less clarity than ever before. In Europe's case, there is the overriding concern
about unemployment which remains a basic constraint on any political decision making.
Anything that might appear to worsen it in the short term would be very difficult to carry out.
Two elements of instability have influenced the world trading system. First, Europeans sense
33
the fall of the dollar in their competitive posture more in relation to a number of newly
industrialized countries whose currencies are linked to the dollar, than to the U.S. itself. The
consequence is not to affect the U.S. trade deficit, but to increase the trade surpluses of others.
Second, a return of the mercantilist approach is now expressing itself in the overall cult of an
export surplus. A country with an export surplus shows how competitive it is, how well it is
doing, and how good its people and products are. In Japan, there is a degree of resentment about
being damned for being so successful. Perhaps the targets we have selected to adjust to the
situation are the wrong ones. Trying to open the Japanese market is a correct objective, but it
involves a long-term effort. We should have been talking about such things as the level of the
Yen much earlier in the game. There have been no real, fundamental consultations among the
U.S., Europe, and Japan on issues like this. The E.C. has tried to take action with the U.S. but
has always been turned down on the grounds that it would be unfair to Japan.
The world is now a much more complex place. The technological revolution has changed how
industry and manufacturing work. There are trade consequences and there are consequences
having to do with the autonomy of development. This plays a big role in the semiconductor
industry, for example. How can you keep control over your technology? If you don't have the
technology, how can you develop? Will technology that someone else has be available to others?
All of these questions increase the ambiguity about protectionism.
Europeans are enormously concerned about what happens in the U.S. The U.S. has been the
main player and the driving force behind the multilateral system. But this is not true today.
There is concern about what Congress might do, and a lingering doubt about what the
Administration really wants.
On the European side, over the last two or three years, concern has moved toward the
increasing competitiveness of Europe. Those advocating the large market by 1992 don't know
what it is really about. They tend to believe it is just getting rid of barriers and making exports
from one European country to another easier. But that is not what is at stake. The point is to have
one market in which differentiation does not exist and in which you can do something in
somebody else's country that you can do in your own. When that is realized, maybe there will
be less enthusiasm.
It would be a mistake to misjudge what is happening in agriculture in Europe today. For the
first time, there is an acceptance in the majority of political circles that agricultural policies must
be modified so as to take into account the balance between need, cost, and requirements. The
possibility of a negotiation on this exists. It will not be a short-term process, but will take five
to six years to make adjustments. The question is how to keep a consensus among the various
parties for that period of time.
Another area of concern in Europe is technology, which is the main issue with respect to
Europe's capacity to compete. Regarding Japan, the situation is difficult to assess. Are they still
apt to produce a small initiative just in time to avoid a big hit on the head? That would not
basically change the contribution that Japan should make.
There are also political dangers. The real bitterness in the transatlantic trade debate is
striking. It is not now just a part of the rhetoric of negotiation, but is genuine, and will be an
element of permanent bother in the next eighteen months. One example is the dispute arising
from Spain's joining the E.C. Some perceive this as a change in American policy, which
traditionally accepted that there would be some economic cost to Europe's corning together.
Another example is the Airbus-Boeing situation. The feeling in the U.S. that Boeing, with 80
percent of the market, can be threatened by Airbus is resentC<d by Europeans as an attempt to
exclude them from growing technology.
Bilateralism is another grave danger we face. It is all right for fine tuning or damage control
or to avoid a dispute, but now it has become a basic element of policy. Bilateralism invites the
me-too syndrome, in which other countries want the same treatment. It happened in the textile
area with woeful results.
As to the GATT, the satisfaction expressed after Punta del Este was not really justified,
because nothing happened that could influence short-term problems. This is the problem of
GATT; the institution is only as good as its members.
What can we do? The first thing is for Europe and Japan to stimulate growth. Otherwise there
will be a recession in the U.S. We need quantified contributions of the various parties to the
solution. How much can Japan contribute to infrastructure, to third-world country debt
restructuring? The U.S. must reduce its budget deficit. The E.C. must pursue and be supported
by the economic operators in the large market-opening activity to restore competitiveness,
34
regain confidence, and not be preoccupied with slowing down the reality.
Multilaterally, we can increase tariffs. Talking about that has been. viewed as protectionism
and therefore taboo. But there are a number of areas where tariff increases are economically
justified. If it is done multilaterally, it is less dangerous. We need the will of the participants to
commit themselves to a multilateral solution. Throughout the trading system, short cuts are
being taken. A multilateral body, not the individual countries, has to establish if a case really
exists on things like dumping. Then there has to be a mechanism for dispute settlement. We need
to give some teeth to GATT. If we can do these things, then we will be back on the multilateral
path, and we will have set objectives for ourselves.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
IV.
What are the causes of the rise of protectionism? In a wider historic perspective, one can see
that free trade eras have been carried by hegemonial powers based on political, technological,
and economic superiority. Whether these developments-free trade followed by protectionism
and crisis-are part of long waves, known as Kondratieff cycles, remains to be seen.
Free trade has never had great popular support. The individual benefits are extremely
marginal, yet, for the economies involved, they are of serious magnitude. The advocates of
protectionism are always comparatively few, the short-term benefits large, and the burden they
cause to the consumers are so broadly distributed that they are insensitive to the direct impact
of the measures introduced.
Protectionism has the potential to be popular because it is a way to blame others for one's own
shortcomings. This is also the real reason for the widespread use of non-tariff protectionism,
because at the heart of the matter are not relative prices, but the availability of goods and
services of high quality and reliability. This anxiety that consumers might be prepared to pay a
higher price as long as they get the goods they want is the reason for the proliferation of
non-tariff protectionism.
It seems there is a natural human tendency against change, in particular when one has lived
well under a certain constellation and has become affluent. We can expect resistance to change
and adaptation in the current atmosphere. We are in a period of ever-shortening product cycles,
in which the very essence of the success of the industrial revolution economies of scale and
modification ofthe human to a tool in the material process of production is questioned and is
substituted by a need for flexibility, a highly educated and dedicated work force, and a need for
reorganization of the command structure in industrial relations away from hierarchical systems
which were developed for mass armies. Protectionism, in the last analysis, seems nothing other
than the visible expression of such resistance.
When one looks at the various forecasts, the future looks, from revision date to revision date,
more dismal. It might well be that we are on the way into the fifth Kondratieff cycle, if there
is one-the imminent breakdown of the world economy. Such a development is not inevitable.
One way to escape this trend is to stop blaming others for one's own shortcomings. To repeat,
this is what protectionism is all about.
Progress can be achieved only in a growing world economy. Such growth cannot be achieved
when an important section of the world is stripped of its purchasing power to repay old debts.
Then, instead of being a net capital importer, it becomes a net capital exporter. The restoration
of this purchasing power cannot be left to the private sector. Reconstruction of Europe and Japan
after World War II was not left to the private sector. Compared with the cost of a major war,
the debt settlement that is needed is of small proportions indeed. It should be noted that the
problems involved, however, need more than the simple transfer of money (which made the task
after World War II comparatively easy).
Agriculture is an area in which progress can be made, despite the power of vested interests
and the political consequences, because the present arrangement is so wasteful that it will not be
sustainable for much longer. There is a chance of making progress, and Europe, in particular,
could make an important contribution in changing the climate toward cooperation.
Instead of calling for penalties on current-account surplus producers, we should pursue
35
transforming them into exports to be handled by multilateral financial institutions.
There is no doubt that protectionism is, in the end, an extremely dear way of avoiding
adaptation, with no chance of succeeding. It would seem logical to spend much less to speed the
unavoidable process of adaptation. All this needs is leadership. The question is where it will
come from.
Adaptation will come about, but protectionism will not be the means to bring it about. The
only question is whether it will be forced upon the world economy or be engineered by those
who will suffer the consequences if it is not.
Discussion
An International participant opened the discussion with a rather gloomy analysis of
developments in the world trading system. On the one hand, negotiations had begun in GATT,
and there was an agreement to move in the direction of a new trading system. But on the other
hand, the day-to-day practices of governments were not in keeping with free trade, there was
doubt about whether that was still an appropriate objective, and there was increasing bilateralism
and politicization of trade disputes. The trading system was moving rapidly in an entirely
different direction from what was envisaged-toward things like voluntary export restraints and,
more generally, carte!ization of trade. In this atmosphere, there was a growing chance of trade
wars.
The tendency toward bilateralism was particularly dangerous, both politically and econom-
ically. Its objectives were completely alien to the system of reciprocity. A case could be made
that we were faced with the same kind of dangers that existed in the 1930's, when protectionism,
as characerized by the Smoot-Hawley legislation, was a major factor in bringing on depression.
Though no measures that severe were currently on the horizon, we could not ignore the dangers
of continuing the practices going on today. The world economy was vulnerable and our financial
and monetary systems were fragile. Our financial markets tended to react violently to such
things as announcements of trade retaliation. Bilateral actions and retaliatory practices could
well lead to recession. Our countries were fa,ced with a need for major adjustment, continued the
speaker. The U.S. had a very large trade deficit, while Japan, West Germany, and other
countries had very large surpluses. It was primarily the OECD countries that would have to
absorb these adjustments, and if we wanted to facilitate this process, the last thing we should do
would be to make the trading system more inflexible and to cartelize trade. Rather, we should
make markets open and flexible in order that the huge changes in market shares and trade flows
could take place with minimum disruption. And we had to adjust our economic policies to this
process. Instead of the U.S., Europe, and Japan calling for each other to change their policies,
we all had to take action.
In the view of another International speaker, the major problem we faced was competition-
that was at the heart of our problems. What governments and the private sector were seeking was
competition, as undistorted as possible. In textiles, steel, autos, agriculture, and high
technology, this problem had not been tackled satisfactorily. We had to recognize that progress
was more related to insuring undistorted conditions of competition than to reducing tariffs and
attacking non-tariff barriers. Competition was increasing the pace of change, and there was,
among a number of industrialized countries, a resistance to the challenge of competition. If
competition was a source of adjustment, if adjustment meant change, and change meant growth,
then one of the major challenges facing the world economy was reconciling real growth with
resistance to change.
Industrialized countries were resisting change because of such factors as unemployment,
while, at the same time, the newcomers in the competition understood and accepted it. The
desire of China and the Soviet Union to join GATT exemplified this.
The general consensus of the part1c1pants in the discussion was that the resurgence of
protectionism was largely due to political considerations. A Swiss speaker pointed out that it was
the voters who decided whether or not we had more or less free trade, or more or less
protectionism. A countryman attributed protectionist sentiment to short-term thinking on the
36
part of government, industry, and labor, all of which were looking for rapid, tangible results.
Applying game theory to the rise in protectionism, an Italian argued that the losers in the
economic game were using political strategies to defend themselves and to become winners.
Individual players in the economic game could choose to adopt either an economic strategy-
stay in the system, adjust, and try to become a winner-or a political strategy-try to become
a winner by voting. The political strategy was becoming increasingly attractive because the
group of losers in the economic game was becoming less and less stable. One could be a loser,
no matter what industry one was in. Bilateral measures were attractive to losers because they
offered the means of retaliating quickly.
It was a British speaker's view that, if the voters were asked if they wanted to continue to
enjoy the benefits of free trade in the form of agricultural products and consumer goods, they
would answer overwhelmingly in the affirmative. But a fellow Briton wondered if that would be
the case if they were told they might lose their jobs at the same time. An American argued that
the reason that protectionist legislation was being considered in the U.S. was precisely because
people were saying the price of free trade was too high, in terms of loss of jobs, of industries,
and of opportunities. ,
In the 1950's and 1960's, continued the speaker, the world trading system was built around
the Marshall Plan, which provided a unifying consensus. We no longer had that consensus
today. We needed to find a new vision in terms of the current needs of the global community.
Another American agreed, saying that we had no consensus on what kind of system we really
wanted. There had been fundamental changes since the post-World War II trading system was
created-capital mobility, rapid technological development, the growth of mixed economies, the
emergence of China, etc. The assumptions of the post-war era were no longer valid. We had to
re-examine the true nature of the trading system. It was no longer politically acceptable for the
U.S. to be the great open market. We had to reach a new consensus, and that might mean
managed trade to some extent.
It was true, said a Swiss speaker, that the world economic order had changed considerably in
the past 50 years. We needed new rules, and new safeguards to avoid retaliatory measures. The
cost of protectionism, in the long run, was higher than any other alternative. We had to find a
way to make people more patient and to speed up the results of non-protectionist policy.
Reflecting the sentiments of numerous speakers, an Italian, while agreeing that the trading
system had changed, argued that there was still no alternative to trying to strengthen the open,
multilateral system. If we abandoned that system, warned an International speaker, we risked
making trade policy a part of bilateral deals that cut across all aspects of international relations.
One of GATT's strengths was that it allowed trade problems to be isolated from other aspects
of international relations.
Several speakers felt that GATT was the appropriate institution in which to take action, but,
as with other international bodies, we did not use it properly. We had the right institutions, said
an Austrian, but we had not given them the power to do the job. In a world of increasing
globalization and interdependence, he continued, we still relied on the framework of the
nation-state of the last century. We needed more international cooperation and action. A Belgian
agreed, expressing concern about the diminution of the influence of international elements on the
conduct of national policy.
There was, agreed a German, a general decline in international approaches. To re-establish
one, we needed more than little solutions here and there. We needed to undertake a bold
initiative, something that might create a framework for dealing with other issues. For example,
if we could join together to tackle a problem like the debt crisis, this would give a psychological
boost. An Austrian agreed that it made sense to try to pick out some targets-the debt problem
being a logical one-but it would be very difficult to find a global approach to solving all our
problems.
An International speaker agreed that trade policies alone were not the answer to our problems.
We had to address macroeconomic policies, fiscal policies, debt policies, currency relation-
ships, etc. A Swiss speaker called for parallel progress in these areas, but no formal linkage, as
a precondition, to progress in the trade area.
A concerted international effort to adjust macroeconomic policies was advocated by a number
of participants. A Greek felt that there was a lack of consistency in our macroeconomic policies,
and we had to make an effort to improve their coordination in order to stimulate the needed
growth in Europe and Japan and to make the necessary adjustment in demand levels. A Turk
pointed out that we were embarking on a trade round in slow growth conditions. We needed high
37
global growth for the round to be successful; otherwise trade liberalization would produce
unemployement. We needed to address the problem of structural adjustment and to create a new
macroeconomic policy geared to growth.
Exchange rates were an area of concern to several speakers. An International participant felt
that currency stability was the centerpiece of free trade, that we could not have free trade without
it. An Italian voiced concern that a further rapid and substantial decline of the dollar would bring
a worldwide recession. It was an Austrian's view that, in the present situation, financial flows
were increasingly decoupled from trade flows, and this was a situation that had to be addressed.
Volatility of exchange rates was one cause of protectionism, said an Italian. It was due largely
to the dominance of financial transactions over trade-related transactions. There had been a
recent trend toward liberalization of capital markets, while protectionism was on the rise in
trade. As a means of reducing exchange rate volatility, trade imbalances, and protectionist
pressures in the trade field, was protectionism in financial markets and capital movements a
possibility? Was there a trade-off between trade protectionism and financial protectionism? And
would such measures as taxation of capital transactions and dual exchange-rate systems be
preferable to outright restrictions on capital flows?
An American's view was that financial transactions in the U.S. were so large and complex as
to make them very hard to effectively control. We were past the point where an approach of that
sort was practical.
A German was strongly opposed •o any notion of currency regulation, which had been tried
without success. Erratic foreign currency movements were preferable to financial protection-
ism. Once introduced, currency controls were very hard to remove. Even the most erratic
currency movements were easier for the business community to overcome than protectionist
measures, because the free market would find a solution. We did not need a new Bretton Woods
agreement.
Other participants worried about the problem of budget deficits. A Canadian wondered if
anything could be done in societies where expectations had built up over a generation, and where
tampering with social programs or raising taxes had become unthinkable. Was healthy
multilateral trade possible if budget deficits could not be reduced?
An Italian speaker was particularly critical of the U.S. in this regard. The U.S., he said, had
to take a leadership role, adopt restrictive policies, and deal with its domestic imbalances,
especially its budget deficit. But, because of political considerations and the presidential
campaign, it would be impossible for the U.S. to raise taxes in the next two or three years.
An American response to this was that, yes, the U.S. should shoulder part of the blame for
the current situation and should take the lead in finding solutions. It was doing something about
its budget and trade deficits. Reduction of the budget deficit was legally mandated by the
Gramm-Rudman legislation. And the U.S. was taking steps to decrease the trade imbalance by
increasing competitiveness.
Another American agreed that the U.S. had to do something about its budget deficit, but
disagreed that nothing else could happen until it did. Europe, as well, had to make policy
adjustments. In particular, given the size of world imbalances, Europe would have to absorb
increased exports from Japan if the U.S. was to make the kind of adjustments it was supposed
to. And with respect to the debt crisis, if that was ever going to be solved, Europe would have
to absorb more from the developing world. The problem of adjustment caused by Europe's large
surplus would have to be worked out by Europe, and, with no growth, it would not be easy.
The problem of the debt and the need for growth in the developing world was an area of
concern to several speakers. An Austrian felt it was manageable, but not by the private banking
community alone. Governments had to address the problem. It was up to the surplus producers
to shoulder a larger burden and use their surpluses in helping to solve the debt crisis. It was very
important, added a Swiss speaker, that our markets be open to the exports of developing
countries.
The developing countries, said a Canadian, were becoming increasingly important. Many of
them were quickly gaining technological expertise and management skills. Their success was no
longer dependent merely on low wages. They would be a powerful influence in the GATT
negotiations and would press for liberalization of imports. If the debt problem could be solved
and new industries created, these countries could become what Europe and Japan were to the
U.S. in the post-war era.
But a Dutch speaker worried about how we were to deal with the problem of our own
industries, like the semiconductor industry, moving to other countries. The E.C. had to have a
38
policy of maintaining certain basic industries, if its members wanted to have the right to defme
their own destinies and not be dependent on others for high growth.
It was in the Western interest, said an American, that we let Chii:i.a and the Soviet Union join
GATT. They were large, underdeveloped countries with low debt, and they enjoyed good credit
in the West. By increasing their imports and exports, they would become more market oriented.
The entry of China into GATT was being negotiated, said an International speaker, while the
Soviet Union was still waiting in the wings. GATT already had several members with planned
economies. But it had never been able to solve adequately the relationship between a
centrally-planned economy and a market economy. There was little problem with the smaller
nations, but China and Russia would present problems, particularly with their pricing systems.
We had to be careful in our negotiations with China to define the respective rights and
obligations. Otherwise, the relationship would be poisoned by disputes. It was better not to rush,
but to settle the rules at the outset and have a peaceful relationship.
The problem of how to deal with Japan was a major concern of participants in the discussion.
Japan seemed to be in a state of policy paralysis, said an International speaker. It had no policies
to deal with the practical problems it was facing-a currency very much appreciated by a strong
trading relationship with the U.S., and excessively large savings. The Japanese did nothing, but
we had to be careful not to think we could push them to take action. We had to be cautious and
wait for the appropriate time for a thorough policy debate with Japan.
It was an American's view that we should be impatient, rather than patient, with Japan, both
in terms of their reluctance to share in the global economy as consumers and in the fact that
newly industrialized countries tended to follow the Japanese model of focusing on exports and
restricting imports.
A Dutch speaker expressed similar frustration with the Japanese, saying that we only got
concessions from them when they did not mean anything. Our discussions on concessions and
agreements with them should be on the basis of reciprocity. The Japanese practiced the popular
tendency to favor free trade when it was in somebody else's country. Every institution in Japan
was dedicated to making it number one. They had targetted areas of the world and would not let
anyone get in their way. The content of our talks with Japan so far meant nothing.
Speaking about Japan from the U.S. perspective, an American said that his country had a
difficult trading relationship with Japan, and had had a hard time getting Japan's attention. It had
now taken some strong measures and felt it had gotten Japan's attention. There was reasonable
hope that Japan would be forthcoming with some meaningful proposals. The U.S. could not
continue to have a deficit with Japan while devoting eight percent of its GNP to defense, while
Japan devoted only one percent. The Japanese had to pick up a greater share of responsibility
in the world, particularly with respect to developing countries.
Most speakers agreed that we would be in for trouble if we failed to solve our trade problems,
and our other economic problems. A protectionist trade bill in the U.S., warned an Italian,
would have dangerous implications for our political relationships. Protectionism would bring
economic nationalism, leading to a dangerous decoupling of the U.S., Europe, and Japan.
As long as there was no real debate among these countries about where we wanted our
economies to go, warned a Belgian, we would continue to have disputes, and short-term
considerations would always prevail over long-term ones. There were no quick fixes. The
fundamental question was whether democracies had the capacity to deal with long-term issues.
An American speaker said that the openness of U.S. markets had been one of the most
important factors in the economic success of the U.S., Europe, and Japan. If it was going to be
preserved, we had better find a solution jointly. The U.S. trade deficit had gotten worse during
a period of prosperity. If we had a downturn and unemployment, it would become impossible
to keep U.S. markets open. And if the bitterness that was creeping into our rhetoric continued
to escalate, it would overflow from trade issues into other economic, political, and military
issues, and would damage all of us.
39
ill. THE PUBLIC SECTOR AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Outline for Discussion
The Role of the Public Sector in Growth
Should the public sector be viewed as a prime engine of economic growth in modem
industrialized and developing societies? Is there danger that certain types of public sector
intervention can have an adverse impact on growth?
There are at least four ways in which governments have an impact on the economy:
1. As a regulator
2. In its impact on the environment
3. As a provider of social services
4. As a direct producer of goods and services.
Government's role as a regulator can have a powerful impact on growth either positively or
negatively depending on the nature and implementation of the regulations. Should regulatory
bodies consider the promotion of growth as a priority consideration in the preparation
application of regulations?
In prescribing laws relating to the physical environment, governments also have an
opportunity to promote or restrict growth. To whatextent should measures designed to protect
the long-term quality of the environment be modified or set aside in the interest of promoting
short- or medium-term growth?
The role of the state in providing social services in such fields as health, education, child care
and benefits for the aging is generally today viewed as a necessary and accepted activity. Many
governments have done a good job in this regard. In some countries, the growth rate of these
services is accelerating at what may prove to be an unaffordable pace.
Does public ownership of major industrialized sectors contribute to or diminish the prospects
for sustained economic growth? What should be the determining consideration in government's
decision to own and operate major industrial sectors? Should productive facilities in the hands
of government be turned over to the private sector if there is reason to believe that economic
growth would be promoted in so doing? What other contributions should be taken into account?
It seems likely that governments will continµe to be involved in all of the four areas which
have just been outlined. But in terms of the promotion of economic growth, in which of these
areas should government place primary emphasis? Should it, for example, diminish its role as
a producer of goods and services while strengthening its role in providing social services?
Should it reconsider its role as a regulator in providing social services? Should it reconsider its
role as a regulator, by example in terms of its impact on the environment, so as to give more
impetus to growth?
Are we now facing a new regulatory problem which results from the international impact of
scientific and technological innovation? In some instances, these innovations have beneficial
effects, as in the case of hybrid seeds and improved agricultural technology. In other cases, the
effects can be harmful, as in the case of acid rain and the chemical pollution of internationally
used bodies of water. But to cope with these developments will require a new level of
international understanding, cooperation and control. Are we presently equipped to deal
adequately with this multiplying type of problem?
40
Growth and Employment
To what extent do aggressive growth policies tend to have an adverse or positive impact on
full eqiployment?
If growth and full employment policies are not compatible which should be given the higher
priority?
ls Sustainable Growth Still Possible?
To what extent and how are protectionism and sustained growth linked or in conflict?
The Club of Rome advanced the theory that population growth and natural resource
limitations will make impossible world-wide sustained growth in the future. Does this
proposition have validity? Ifso, whatiis the outlook for the world economy? To what extent does
man's ability to emphasize renewable resources and find substitutes for those which are not
renewable diminish the validity of the Club of Rome's dire predictions?
Are growth prospects better or worse in Third Wodd countries than in the industrialized
nations? What are the primary reasons for a different outlook? What are the obligations of the
industrialized world toward the Third World? Are they primarily motivated by pragmatic self
interest or are they based on moral considerations?
Third World Debt Crisis and Growth
Growth both in developing and industrial nations, is said by many to be an essential ingredient
in solving the present crisis in Third World debt. Is this true? If so, what measures should be
taken to ensure sustained growth?
Can Third Wodd debt crisis continue to be dealt with on a case by case piecemeal basis or
does it require more radical solutions? If the latter, what should these be? Are there radical
solutions which will deal with the debt problem without closing out future access by debtor
nations to world credit markets?
Should a solution to the Third World debt problem seek to pay off or write off the debt or,
rather, should attention be focussed primarily on enabling the debtor nations to service their
debt? Which resolutions of the debt problem will encourage the revitalization of Third World
economies?
Opening Remarks from the Panel
/.
There are some paradoxes in a discussion of the role of the state. In France, the effort to
privatize has to be examined in the light of a series of phenomena. The first is that the size of
the public sector in France had reached a level which was out of proportion to what it was in
most countries with comparable economies-that is, free countries. Nationalized industry
represented approximately 40 percent of industry, and more than 90 percent of the institutions
granting credit were nationalized. The situation was, therefore, excessive.
In spite of eternal debates, the French never resolved anything about the comparative
efficiency of a nationalized as opposed to a privatized economy. Two factors in particular
justified a policy of privatization in France. Nationalization means a specific introduction of
politics into companies, made possible by the temporary nature of positions of responsibility. It
is not good for the state to have so much power. A state which controls, directly or indirectly,
more than 90 percent of the credit distribution and 40 percent of industry is too powerful. This
is, in part, what gave rise to the French experiment, which was launched a year ago.
41
What characterizes the French experiment in privatization is, first of all, its size. It involves
privatizing 65 firms, including practically all the commercial banks, over a period of five years,
with a value of between two and three hundred billion francs. France is, in other words, engaged
in a program which will represent between 40 and 60 billion francs per year. If all goes
according to plan, it means that the Paris stock exchan5e capitalization should rise by 30 percent
in five years. Two major companies, have already been privatized, St. Gobain and Paribas, and
two others, the General Electricity Company and Societe Generale will be privatized by this
summer or soon after. So, in less than a year, four major companies, not to mention many
smaller firms. will have been privatized, representing a figure in the region of 50 billion francs.
Apart from its size, the French program is characterized by its creation of a global juridical
framework. New rules are not needed every time a company is privatized. There is one law, one
definitive rule, in which are fixed a certain number of principles. On this basis, year after year-
or, more correctly-month after month-the minister in charge of privatization will decide who
and when to privatize. This gives us the advantage of speed, flexibility, and efficiency.
The firms to be privatized are placed on the market at a fixed price. There is no call for an
offer or bid. There is always great demand, and it is necessary to decide each time to what extent
this demand should be met. ·
So far, privatizations have met with great success. There are now 3.8 million new
shareholders of Paribas, and 1.5 million for St. Gobain. Uniquely French, also, is the fact that
ten percent of the shares are reserved for employees, wno agree to certain conditions in each
case. Because of this, privatization in France is perhaps the most important development in a
long time, not only in terms of reconstructing the market economy, but also of establishing a
more democratic economy.
With respect to the subject of the state, it, first of all, plays a role in privatization as a
shareholder. The directors of public firms sometimes find it hard to understand that they must
take into account the wishes of the public shareholders just as they do the wishes of the private
shareholders. This is one of the justifications of priivatization. The state is a shareholder and
therefore it is the state that decides when and if to privatize, and how. There are rules for the
protection of the national interest. The finance minister can decide that nobody, be they French
or foreign, can hold more than five percent of the capital. On the day of privatization, foreign
interests in a company cannot exceed 20 percent. But the next day, trading can go on freely. In
certain cases, the finance minister can create a "golden share" to protect an industry in a
strategic sector. Up to now, this option has rarely been exercised, but it has been for the Agence
Havas. This is because Agence Havas concerns, to a large extent the press, and therefore
freedom of communication. And it seems prudent, in a five-year plan, to take precautions.
Another role that the state plays in privatization is in distributing its holdings widely to the
population. Consider some figures. Less than a year ago, there were only 1.5 million direct
shareholders in France; now, there are four million. There is a commitment to having workers
as shareholders. This is one facet of privatization which hopefully will encourage a change in
the social climate of our country, and in certain industries.
If privatization achieves its objective, and becomes an integral part of our system, will the
state become powerless? No. First of all, there will still be an extremely important public sector.
And practically everything having to do with energy and with transport will be left untouched
by privatization. So will the nuclear industry-not the manufacturing of products for it, but the
industry itself. We are also keeping a certain number of national credit companies.
Perhaps the final justification of such an extensive program of privatization is that, in France,
the state had gone much too far-much farther than any other country-and to return to a market
economy means a much greater privatization effort than anywhere else. Not until the end of this
first phase, when these 65 companies will have been privatized, can it be said that France has
returned to the level of other Western countries. The French tradition is not that of a weak
government, and the French people are not ready to absolve the state of its responsibilities to
assure the solidarity of the economic structure. This is why, no matter how important and
far-reaching our privatization program, it should not be seen to compromise the traditional
foundations of the French economy and society.
42
Opening Remarks from the Panel
II.
In the last ten years, there has been a real revolution in the debate over role of the state in the
economy. There has been a crisis in our planning policies that has led to the setting of
quantitative parameters to our economic system. Now the state is less pervasive in economic
life, as seen in developments ranging from Proposition 13 to the new French policies.
But it is impossible for the modem state to diminish public expenditure under a certain level.
The experience of the last ten years has shown us that there is a limit to how far we can reduce
public expenditure. Our societies have come to accept the welfare state as a political reality, and
governments have generally not been successful in diminishing the cost of the welfare state. The
developments of the last ten years have been useful in pushing governments to spend public
money more efficiently, and to allocate public expenditure more efficiently, but a substantial
diminution of social spending has proved completely impossible, not only because of political
resistance, but because people feel'it's the state's most important role.
We should not oppose the presence of the state in the economy, but rather its excesses.
Among these are surely the dimension of the government as a direct producer of goods and
services. Here, we have had a real change in the Western world, namely, the privatization
process. It has been a major change not only in France, but in many European countries. The
departure point in the United States was completely different. The difference in the dimension
of public ownership in the U.S. and Europe was not only due to a different political philosophy,
but to a different size of the market. The reason we have so much privatization in Europe today
is because the size of the market has increased. It is now possible to privatize, where it was
completely impossible in the old days.
In Italy, the public sector never expanded because of a socialist ideology, as in France and the
U.K. Its growth was instigated by Mussolini, who wanted to do something for the ailing
companies. Throughout Europe, the size of the market could not sustain economic development
without direct state intervention. Competition, efficiency, and productivity are compatible in a
big market, but not in a small one. Now, with the E.C. we are in a new era.
It is important that Europe has behaved very rationally, even if we didn't like the policies. In
the beginning of the E.C., we had a merger policy inside each big European country. Each
country had flag companies. There were many more mergers of American companies in the
1950's and 1960's than there were in between European companies because European countries
were trying to become strong before entering into the European oligopoly.
Now we have a different policy. We have international mergers, new competition, and
privatization. In spite of all the criticism, the E.C. is really functioning, and the new European
competition is emerging more and more. Connections among European companies are
increasing as never before. We should not judge the E.C. from the point of view of what goes
on in Brussels or of the problems in agriculture, but rather, from the perspective of the new
competition, and the new oligopoly that is being built. This is an important new chapter, and a
precondition to denationalization. You cannot liberalize from a public monopoly to a private
one. The political system will not stand it.
Each European country has done a lot to change its infrastructure. There has been a great deal
of privatization in the U.K. since 1979, and many people moved from the public to the private
sector. In Italy, we had a smaller movement in the sense that we did not have a general policy
aimed at liberalization. But we have had an empirical process of liberalization, due to the fact
that a good portion of the so-called nationalized industries in Italy are owned publicly but behave
like private companies, and are quoted on the stock exchange. Selling minority shares in the
stock exchange makes for a smoother privatization process.
It is important to stress that this is a general movement in Europe. The result is that Europe
is becoming like the United States. This explains why European companies are active now in the
U.S., just as U.S. companies were active in Europe. Of course, the change in the rate of
exchange is a factor. But the reality is a new one. In the new Europe, we shall have many
companies behaving like American ones.
There is another trend. Companies are becoming privatized through international mergers. It
is becoming increasingly likely that there will be international mergers of public companies. If
you merged a French company with an Italian company, you would have a new entity that was
unideological, but could afford the new competition.
43
General Remarks from the Panel
III.
Rather than try to present a complete or coherent analysis of the topic under consideration in
ten minutes of introductory comments, I hope you will allow me to offer twenty-five rather
summary points-trusting that some one of them might be provocative. That will average about
20 seconds per would-be provocation.
(I) I take as given the general view that market-oriented policies stimulate greater innovation
and growth.
(2) As a general matter, the world seems to be inching in a more market-oriented direction.
(3) This observation is probably more valid for the rest of the world than it is for the United
States-but of course the U.S. is working from a more market-oriented base.
(4) Within the U.S., the most dramatic market-oriented economic change of the Reagan
Revolution has been in the structure of the federal tax system-involving a series of tax reforms
that started in 1981 and culminated in 1986 with the most comprehensive tax reform in the history
of the country.
(5) The net positive effects of American tax reform are greater incentives for work and
productive investment, and more market-orientation in the allocation of capital-all ultimately
increasing productivity and growth. The net negative effect has been the reduction of the
revenue base below the politically acceptable minimum spending level-that is to say, the
enlargement of our structural deficit (to around 3-4% of GNP) and the associated accumulation
of debt.
(6) I say "below the politically acceptable minimum spending level" because I believe the
Reagan Revolution has come close to testing the limits of spending reduction-and has failed to
undo the basic middle-class entitlement and social insurance programs that account for the main
upward deviation from historical shares of GNP within the federal budget.
(7) These middle-class entitlement and social insurance programs are unlikely to be reduced
significantly (as a percent of GNP) by any American administration. They have a wide base of
popular support among voters (much more so than do programs for the poor). And they seem
now to be a fixture in modern democratic societies-a protection against downside risk that is
probably a practical political necessity if risk-taking, market-oriented democracies are to remain
such. (Japan is the notable exception to this rule, with more of the risk underwritten on the
private side.)
(8) Although farm price-support programs are increasingly subject to well-deserved criticism
at home and abroad, I would include these among the middle-class (or near-middle-class)
entitlement programs-and express a note of skepticism as to whether domestic or foreign
political realities will soon allow the rationalization that most can identify as economically
desirable in this area.
(9) Even with a well-managed effort at budget compromise in the U.S., it is unlikely that
federal spending will be reduced below about 22% of GNP. With revenues at 19.5%, this would
still leave a structural deficit of roughly 2.5% of GNP.
(10) That gap may be closed further in the U.S. by privatization-but not by much. Unlike
some countries, the U.S. government has acquired assets principally as a result of pragmatic
historical accident (so to speak) rather than as a result of ideological commitment. As a
corollary, the ideological shift toward privatization is not, in fact, likely to produce much
divestiture in the U.S. The current shift may result in additional one-time revenue gains on the
order of $10 billion- that is, merely a marginal contribution to reduction of the structural deficit.
(11) It is virtually certain, therefore, that there will eventually have to be an upward
adjustment of the U.S. revenue base through some form of tax increase. What is uncertain is the
particular form and its timing.
44
(12) My own bet is that the form Will be first additional excise taxes and later, perhaps,
additional energy-related taxes. In addition to reducing the fiscal deficit, this should have the
favorable effect of reducing slightly the U.S. propensity toward current consumption. I do not
think the U.S. will reverse course on the tax rate structure in the foreseeable future.
(13) As to timing, I would suggest that it is highly desirable that the revenue adjustment be
part of a more comprehensive, negotiated settlement on both our budget and our budget
process-and that that settlement ought best be negotiated in the next few months. It is desirable
economically. And looking at this from the perspective of the next Presidency-with an interest
in having a strong, popular and effective successor to the Reagan Presidency (whether
Democratic or Republican)-it is desirable to get the fiscal policy correction out of the way now
(that is, in what is probably the last chance before the next Presidency). Notwithstanding what
seems to be the obvious merit of this view, I would put the chances of its prevailing at only 50%.
(14) Whether the further U.S. fiscal correction comes sooner or later, the ultimate resolution
will likely leave the total governmental share of GNP at slightly over one-third. Thus, the U.S.
would likely remain at about the same level as Japan-which is to say with a public sector that
is substantially smaller as a percent of GNP than that of virtually all other OECD countries.
(This assumes that for a variety of cultural and historical reasons, and notwithstanding favorable
trends toward privatization and increased incentives for economic efficiency, the European
economies will likely remain in the range of 45-50% governmental.)
(15) Given that likelihood, and assuming that the U.S. does not turn self-destructively
protectionist, and assuming also that the U.S. increases its investment in non-defense, applied
R&D and in human capital development-assumptions I think it not unreasonable to make-I
would expect the U.S. and Japanse economies to show somewhat more dynamic growth than the
European economies. Or putting the point more positively from the European perspective:
Europe will have what is arguably greater potential for additional, growth-oriented policy
change.
(16) Japan, of course, will have to move in the direction of the Maekawa report over the
medium term-a process likely to be advanced not only by pressures from without, but perhaps
more importantly, by the forces of generational change within. In the meanwhile-perhaps a
rather long meanwhile-Japan will continue to accumulate large surpluses, most of which will
have to be recycled. The direction of that recycling will be an increasingly important variable
in foreign policy-with significant potential implications for politico-economic evolution and the
balance of power. In general, the recycling should increase market-oriented growth; but what is
still unclear is who will in fact be the beneficiaries of the necessary recycling.
(17) In the past few years, clearly the U.S. has been a principal beneficiary. Indeed, as a
related matter, one might suggest that given its deficit, the U.S. could not have financed its
growth over the past five years had it not been for the perception of "Eurosclerosis" and the
reality of the third-world debt problems. (I recognize that this is a somewhat perverse line of
thought.)
(18) Continuing with this somewhat perverse habit of thinking, one might note that another
side-benefit of the third-world debt problem has been the opportunity it has created for the
negotiation of debtor country policy change involving external parties-negotiation of change in
directions that are both more market-oriented than before and more market-oriented than would
otherwise have been the case.
(19) As a corollary: While there is need and room for refinement of the debt strategy, one
should not wish to see modifications that would reduce the capacity to negotiate market-oriented
change.
(20) In this process of negotiation, there has been an obvious increase in the role of the
multi-lateral public sector-i.e. the World Bank and the IMF. But at least as currently oriented,
this increase in international public sector activity has been consistent with an increase in
market-orientation and growth.
(21) So too, has been the increase in the vitality of the Group of Five and the creation of the
Group of Seven. The somewhat more systematic approach to exchange rate issues now
45
associated with these groups-even though it may at times involve greater intervention-can be
valuable in sustaining market-oriented growth. And, more generally, these public sector groups,
however imperfect, have improved the capacity of their member countries to coordinate more
fundamental policies in the pursuit of market-oriented growth.
(22) At a more parochial bi-lateral level, I would note that amidst the protectionist fervor, the
U.S. and Canada are quietly negotiating the larger part of a North American Free Trade Area
that has great and largely unnoticed potential to expand and secure market-oriented growth on
one resource-rich continent.
(23) Notwithstanding all these generally favorable tendencies toward greater market-
orientation and growth, there is much risk in the evolving system. U.S. protectionism is rising.
U.S. unilateralism is rising. Debt and some key interest rates are rising. Political stability in the
world is not.
(24) But risk is inherent in the quest for progress.
(25) The key is to keep working incrementally to expand market-oriented policies-in ways
that are sensitive enough to political realities and political limitations as to allow market-oriented
policies to be politically sustainable. Unfortunately, that calls for a mixture of boldness and
balance that is all-too-rare-thus raising a final question as to whether it is really prudent for this
distinguished group to gather in a single room at the same time.
Thank you very much.
Discussion
In an International speaker's view, there had been a remarkable evolution in the thinking of
industrialized countries about the government's role in the economy. There was a general
recognition that, in terms of macroeconomic policy, the public sector, instead of being the
correcting element in an unstable economy, should be the stable, predictable element in order
to allow room for a flexible private sector.
While government had come to realize that, in terms of expansion into the social field, the
public sector had become too big, not enough thinking had been done, especially in Europe,
about how to reconcile economic and social objectives. Government intervention in market
economies had become a negative influence on growth, income, and unemployment-the very
opposite effect of what social policies had been trying to achieve. All the industrialized countries
were now trying to find a reconciliation between these apparently conflicting objectives. We had
pretty well found the upper limits of the public sector, and agreed there was a lower limit where
the state played the role of the protector of last resort. But every country was different, and it
was impossible to arrive at an optimum public sector size applicable to all countries. What was
more important than size was the quality of the government.
This view-that, with respect to growth, qualitative aspects of government policy were more
important than quantitative ones-was subscribed to by several participants in the discussion.
Said an Austrian, growth could be enhanced by such public sector measures as those that
stimulated private investment or supported exports, and such future-oriented measures as
expenditure for research and development and education. A Norwegian agreed that different
policies had different impacts on economic growth and public welfare. For example, an increase
in expenditure for retraining the unemployed would have different consequences from an
increase in pension payments.
Addressing the state's role as environmental regulator, speakers felt that it was important for
the state to continue to play a strong role. Environmental regulations, said a British participant,
were not always the enemy of growth. It was important to have a means of assigning the costs
of pollution properly, and to show populations that growth and maintenance of the environment
were not incompatible. Added a Norwegian, tough environmental regulations today were
needed to avoid future expenditures detrimental to growth.
46
The politicization of decision making was seen by many speakers as one of the chief faults of
state intervention in the economy. This was a particular problem with state ownership of
companies. In an Italian's view, the power of the state in the economic field had its strongest
expression in political control over corporate managements. Political influence on the running
of nationalized companies, said a Norwegian, made them harder to control democratically. The
old socialist theory that public ownership was a safeguard for democratic control was not true.
A Briton agreed that there was a great temptation to politicize decision making. In the British
nuclear program, for example, bad decisions had been made by bureaucrats in such things as
reactor choice, speed of growth of the program, and even the necessity of the program.
Privatization, continued the British speaker, was beneficial from the point of view of
enforcing environmental and land-use regulations because it assured an arms-length relationship
between regulators and industry. The worst coaltion, from a regulator's point of view, was that
among trade unions, managers, and bureaucrats united in favor of retaining present employment
and production patterns. The fundamental purpose of privatization, concluded the speaker, was
not simply growth, but also the creation of conditions where growth could occur more freely by
removing the alliance between industry and the bureaucracy.
Another drawback of state-owned companies pointed out by speakers was that they could not
adjust as quickly to changing conditions. To be able to achieve the benefits of international trade,
said an American, firms had to make rapid adjustments; state ownership was a barrier to such
adjustment. For example, ministries tended to oppose greater imports. So privatization was an
important tool in achieving free trade.
But making quick adjustments was not only a problem for nationalized countries, said an
American. Some large private firms were as slow as governmental organizations to adjust. And
with respect to decision-making, pointed out a Briton, large private companies, too, had made
mistakes in planning and in investment policy.
Several participants felt that it was not always clear that private ownership was more desirable
than state ownership. In the opinion of an Austrian speaker, there was no black or white answer.
Some objectives could be better achieved by letting market forces prevail, and others by state
intervention. No matter who were the owners, industrial companies and financial institutions
had to be managed competitively. A countryman agreed that it made little difference who the
owners of a company were; what mattered was how efficiently the job got done. Regardless of
ownership, our industries required entreprerieurization and, in some cases, restructuring.
Nor did it matter a great deal from the worker's point of view whether a company was
publicly or privately owned, said an American. If efficiency, productivity, competitiveness, and
economic growth were the objectives, then worker involvement was very important. And as far
as that was concerned, the quality of management and leadership transcended questions of
ownership.
It was generally agreed that privatization did not mean the state would no longer have a major
role to play in economic affairs. The public sector had to be part of any policy mix. The state,
said a French speaker, had a continuing important role as the regulator of economic life, writing
the rules and making sure they were obeyed. An Italian agreed that this was very important in
order to avoid countervailing forces to privatization. We had to develop regulatory bodies
governing such things as competition and anti-trust issues, or we would risk a return to
nationalization.
With private sector growth, added a Turk, the role of the state as regulator and as manager
of budget and monetary policies would increase in importance. A countryman stressed that
privatization did not automatically bring about growth, nor did it dispense with the need for
appropriate macroeconomic policies. Privatization made room for growth by speeding up
structural adjustment, but an appropriate competitive environment was still needed. Therefore
the state's role in such things as trade liberalization remained crucial.
A number of speakers rejected the notion that there was a correlation between the size of
public sectors and growth rates. A Swede pointed out that Switzerland and Finland had public
sectors in the size range of the U.S. and Japan, but had not achieved the same rates of growth.
A Briton agreed that statistics did not tell the whole story. With respect to Japan, it could not
be said it was really a free market economy or that the state was not heavily involved in it.
47
Two speakers from Scandinavian countries spoke about how difficult it was, with absolute
majorities of the electorate in their countries, Sweden and Denmark, dependent on the public
sector for their income, to achieve public sector reduction or privatization.
An American worried that the emphasis in the discussion upon economic growth meant little
unless it had some direct bearing on the people it was supposed to benefit, particularly those who
were severely disadvantaged. How did growth relate to people who were really hurting?
How to deal with those whom even growth could not help, who would still be unemployed,
was indeed a problem, agreed another American. But a remedial program, priced at today's
technology to deliver it, to feed, cloth and educate these people would require more surplus than
was there to reallocate and still have a rising standard of living. Instead, we had to have growth
extensive enough to provide a large enough surplus to deal with these people, in addition to a
technological breakthrough in providing services, which was more apt to come from the private
sector.
In another exchange between two Americans, one expressed concern that the U.S. was not
doing enough to increase its productivity, which, the speaker felt, had been hurt by the recent
tax legislation. There needed to be some measures to moderate the increased effective tax burden
on corporations and on investment created by this legislation.
A countryman's response was that, while it would not be profitable to reopen the debate on
U.S. tax reform, it was true that the legislation did not adequately address the American
propensity to consume rather than to invest. The next upward adjustment in taxation should
therefore be on the consumption side. Yet it had to be realized that the corporate income tax was
a relatively minor factor in the productivity and competitiveness of U.S. industry.
There was wide agreement among participants in the discussion that, in seeking to achieve
economic growth, it was essential that we deal with the problems of the developing world,
particularly with respect to debt. In an International speaker's view, there was a direct
relationship between the management of the debt crisis and growth in the industrialized world.
It was, in a sense, a vicious circle. Growth in the industrialized countries was not likely to be
as high as we would like. Corrections of trade balances had been done mainly on the import side.
Economic growth in debtor countries had been very low, and these countries were reluctant to
go on paying very high interest rates. Better policies were needed to stimulate growth in debtor
countries; creditor countries had to produce better incentives for debtor countries to adopt better
policies. What was needed, in short, was the development of some criteria for debt relief.
What should be our approach to the problems of the developing world? In the view of a Greek
speaker, in those countries where even the most basic human requirements were absent, our
approach should be based upon ethical considerations. Such countries would not achieve high
growth rates for many years. But there were other developing countries where populations were
no longer destitute and where sufficiently trained or trainable work forces existed so that
extremely rapid growth rates from applications of existing technology could be achieved. In the
case of such countries, our motivating concern should be enlightened self interest.
A renewed flow· of capital to the developing world, while it would not solve short-term
problems, was critical in the medium term, because, in the next recession, the U.S. would find
it difficult to provide the kind of fiscal and monetary stimulus it had given in the last recession.
We needed a common Western strategy toward developing countries to help them adopt
Western-style economies. We had to influence them to follow rational economic policies, and
we had to have as a priority the provision of a greater flow of funds, though not necessarily from
governments. In particular, we needed to persuade Japan to provide surplus capital to the
developing world.
Both public and private sectors had roles to play in this effort, agreed participants in the
discussion. The public sector, said a Portuguese speaker, could help promote investment as a
partner, or as an accelerator of privatization. A Swiss speaker argued that involvement of the
private sector, which was vital, depended on the public sector's helping to assure the right kind
of environment for committing funds. The domestic policy alignment had to inspire the private
sector's confidence that there would be relative freedom in the years ahead and that industries
would be able to sell to the industrialized countries.
48
In the last analysis, said a Belgian speaker, growth depended on a withering away of the
nation-state. We needed to take international action. An American agreed, saying there had been
a fusing of national and international interests. The international system was under stress, with
budget deficits, trade imbalances, and third world problems, and international solutions were
needed.
Our challenge, said a Frenchman, was to find the system that best assured growth in the
world, which was indispensible for the developing and developed countries alike.
49
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: CHINA
Opening Remarks from the Panel
I.
China is the most dramatic and historically important panorama in the world today. It is also
one of the most complex. China was the Middle Kingdom for thousands of years. In the 17th
century, it began to fall behind Europe. From the mid-19th to mid-20th century, it was
humiliated by outsiders. In the last 40 years, especially the last 10, China has reasserted itself,
and is now determined to become the Middle Kingdom again, whether in the next century, or
later.
To get there, China faces two fundamental challenges. The first is how to develop the
economy without losing political control. There is a traditional Confucian Chinese fear of chaos,
now overlaid with a modern Leninist Chinese imperative of maintaining party dominance. The
second challenge is how to obtain outside technology without forfeiting Chinese culture and
identity. In current parlance, this means pursuing economic reform but upholding the four
cardinal principles which boil down to Communist Party control and socialism. It means also
pursuing an opening to the outside world, but opposing bourgeois liberalization-Westerniza-
tion.
The challenges facing China today are unlike any in its history because (1) in the age of
technology and information, development requires much greater decentralization within the
country and linkage with the outside world, and (2) in the age of television and telecommuni-
cations, visitors, and returning students, the doors are open wider, permanently. China may
aspire to be the Middle Kingdom in the sense of being the predominant country in the world, but
it cannot again be the Middle Kingdom in the sense of being self-reliant and secluded.
Deng's modernization program has made considerable progress-in agricultural production,
income for peasants and for some urban dwellers, consumer goods, overall growth in living
standards, and political stability. In accomplishing these things, Deng has been facing a dilemma
that all reformers face. He has to go fast enough to maintain momentum, but slow enough to
maintain control. He has to overcome various entrenched interests but not allow them to
coalesce into an effective resistance. Thus since 1978, there have been pauses when Deng has
encountered problems-economic slowdowns, tightening up of the cultural and political scenes.
He has been skillful at consolidating when he has run into trouble- protecting his flanks,
building a new consensus, and then moving forward.
The current phase is by far the most serious Deng has faced. First, he faces economic
difficulties. Until 1984-85, he did the relatively easy part-agricultural reforms and adjustments
in the industrial sector. He is now entering the more difficult phase of meshing a market
economy and a socialistic one. The present economy is a hybrid that can't work for the long
term. Deng is facing the fundamental dilemma of centralization versus decentralization. The
economy is now overheated. It has done very well in producing consumer goods, but there are
bottlenecks in the infrastructure-energy, communications, and transportation. The result has
been inflation, which hits a historical raw nerve in China, and gives rise to fears of urban unrest
and of workers and students linking up in protest. There are budget deficits and a foreign
exchange squeeze. There is also the ongoing problem of too many people and too few of them
educated. The leadership is not biting bullets on key issues like price reform, enterprise reform,
bankruptcy law, labor mobility, etc. Nor is it facing up to key political reforms needed to go
along with economic reforms, notably the role of the party.
Deng is also running into political and social strains-of rising expectations and of disparate
income levels between sectors of the population and sections of the country, against the
egalitarianism of the last 30 years. There is resistance from mid-level, timid bureaucrats and
party cadres whose power is threatened. There is even resistance among some people who prefer
the security of the iron rice bowl to the insecurity of the need to work harder. And there are
increasing signs of outside influenc~s-corruption, white collar crime, prostitution, black
markets, and even stirrings of democratic ideas. All of this illustrates Deng's two big dilemmas:
50
how do you malce domestic progress without domestic disorder, and how do you gain foreign
assistance without foreign contamination?
This was the backdrop to the student unrest of last December and January, the fall of Hu
Yaobang, and the expulsion of selected intellectuals. The current Chinese line is that of
energetically reassuring the world that the reforms and the opening to the outside world will
continue and that there is political consensus. This is largely sincere, and there is much evidence
to back it up. On the economic side, there has been a slowdown, but not a reversal. Many core
economic reforms have been untouched, some are still going for\vard, others are postponed, and
the economy continues to do well in many areas.
On the political front, we are not seeing the kind of bloodletting or tremendous instability of
the Cultural Revolution, or anything since. The political campaign is relatively controlled, few
people are being picked out, and they are not being humiliated as much as in the past. The
Chinese people are going through the motions on the ideological lessons they are now getting,
rather than climbing on the bandwagon and attacking those who have been singled out.
There is much momentum in the reforms. Most people are better off. There is a thick web of
ties to the outside world, through economic investments, student exchanges, etc. It would be
hard to reverse the reforms or the opening on a broad scale. No one wants to go back to the
ideological frenzy, the economic disasters, and the xenophobia of the Cultural Revolution. Deng
and the other leaders can't be neatly categorized as either conservatives or reformers. He and
the others, he says, are reformers with respect to opening the inside with the economy and the
outside with foreign connections. At the same time, he and the others, he would claim, are
conservatives in upholding the four cardinal principles and in opposing bourgeois liberalization.
Even the conservatives want some market economy and some opening, and the reformers want
political and cultural control. Thus, the debates center to a large extent on pace and degree-how
much and how fast-rather than direction.
The debates now taking place are nevertheless intense and important. There is a struggle to
decide the top party and government positions, and a struggle over economic policies. Is the cure
to slow down and have more controls, or to speed up, institute more far-reaching reforms and
have fewer controls? The Chinese say they have had a continuous policy of following both tracks
since 1978-that is to say reforms and opening at the same time as adhering to the political
principles and opposing bourgeois liberalization. But until last December, they really were
following only the first track. Now there is equal emphasis on both, with conservative themes
dominating the media and propaganda and Zhao and other reformers paying careful homage to
these themes. The most profound effect of recent events has been the crushing of the literary and
artistic spirits.
Thus, if there is a consensus, it is formed at a more conservative point along the spectrum.
Furthermore, the removal of a party secretary in a communist country by extraordinary means
must add up to something. Deng was probably disillusioned with Hu to a certain extent. He
wondered if he had the steadfastness to lead. He had an impetuous style, and threatened order
because he was moving too fast on political and cultural reforms. Deng himself is a conservative
in these matters. And there was considerable opposition from the army and from conservatives.
His not putting the students down quickly enough was the trigger for his demise. But Deng
probably would have preferred to wait for the Party Congress in October and a more orderly
process. Stability and an assured political succession had been among his prized achievements.
Deng is still the number one person in China, but he needs a consensus more than ever. The
succession is up in the air, and the next prime minister and key seats on the politburo are up for
grabs. Zhao will become the party secretary in October. Economic reforms are stalled or will
be implemented cautiously when they do come about. Political reforms are postponed and will
be limited. Intellectuals, artists, and students are cowed and bitter. Self-censorship is deeper and
wider than ever before, precisely at a time when China needs new ideas to go ahead. Fewer
students may return from abroad.
The central question on the domestic side is whether we are witnessing the emergence of
fundamental contradictions which will lead toward stagnation and political tensions, or a
consolidation and regrouping which will lead to resumed momentum on reforms and opening.
The answer has clear implications for China's economic interactions with the West and its
strategic orientation toward the West.
51
Chinese foreign policy is totally geared to their domestic imperative of modernization. On a
strategic level, they seek to protect their security in the coming decades while concentrating their
energy and resources on modernization. On a specific level, they deal with a complete spectrum
of countries-from Iran to Israel to Nicaragua to South Korea-pragmatically, not ideologically,
for economic assistance, military cooperation, and political influence. In the early 1970's, China
opened to the West because of its geopolitical concern about Soviet encirclement. In the late
1970's, it tilted toward the West because it thought the Soviets were on the offensive and the
U.S. was on the defensive. In the 1980's, the Chinese have followed a more even-handed policy
toward the superpowers because they've seen the Soviet problems and they think the U.S. has
rebounded.
China's basic strategy is, first, to look to the U.S. to maintain the global and Asian balance.
They need a steady, responsible American role in the world. They want a strong U.S. presence
in Asia through deployments, for example, in Japan, South Korea, and the Philippines. They
work with the U.S. in areas of direct geographic security concern to them, like Afghanistan,
Indochina, and even Korea. Elsewhere in the world, they pursue an independent line for
ideological reasons, for influence, and sometimes out of genuine tactical disagreement with us.
Bilaterally, we have broadened the relationship well beyond the geopolitical through high-level
and working visits, and through a military relationship that has expanded enough to catch the
Soviets' attention but not enough as to be provocative to our Asian friends. In the economic,
cultural, and scientific areas, we have greatly expanded our contacts. Our main problems remain
Taiwan, which is being managed quite effectively, and some economic tensions which have
arisen. These are really a sign of progress in our relationship, as our two greatly contrasting
societies interact.
What are China's policies toward the West more generally, including Europe and Japan?
They seek to obtain Western capital, technology, and management. Recently, they have been
giving heavy and favorable emphasis to Europe in terms of high-level trips and increased trade.
They believe Europe does a better job of transferring technology than either the U.S. or Japan.
They are particularly ambivalent about Japan for a variety of reasons.
There has been a reduction in tensions between China and the Soviet Union. The Chinese
can't afford to take the Soviets on in the near future. The relationship was improving before
Gorbachev, and has picked up momentum since, in the form of visits and exchanges, and an
increase in trade. There is even improvement on the political front, although the Chinese deny
it in order to keep pressure on the Soviets and not jeopardize their Western connections. There
is some movement on the border question.
China is also pursuing better relations with Eastern Europe. Relations with Moscow will
continue to improve, but pose no threat to the West. There are built-in inhibitions to Sino-Soviet
relations of a geopolitical nature as well as other factors which will keep the situation from
becoming dangerous. They are two large empires rubbing up against each other, with disputed
borders, overlapping ethnic populations, and other racial and historical factors. The Chinese
know the long-term threat comes from the Soviet Union, not from the West, and they know that
over the long term, their economic destiny lies more with the West. Thus they hope to get help
for their domestic development and buy time in security terms, to get through the next decade
when they are vulnerable and to reach a point early in the next century when their economic
strength is translated into military strength and they are better positioned to maintain their
security.
What has been the impact of recent events on their foreign policy? There is a broad consensus
among conservatives and liberals alike on Chinese foreign policy. It has not"been an issue in the
domestic debate except at the margins with respect to the cultural contamination of outside
influences. There has been a marked increase in tensions with Japan recently, but they have
always been there. There has been no impact on foreign policy with respect to the U.S., the
Soviet Union, or Europe, or on approaches to the Third World. Nevertheless, it is difficult to
say that the domestic debate and turmoil might someday not lead to foreign policy changes. To
the extent that the Chinese lean more toward a centrally planned economy-an ideological
affinity with the Soviet Union-this could have an effect over the long run. There is much logic
to their current foreign policy. Their basic geopolitical and economic imperatives will maintain
the basic lines of their foreign policy through Deng and beyond.
Will China continue to go on a course toward reform and opening? The Chinese themselves
cannot be sure. The least risky forecast is yes, but more slowly, zig-zagging for the next few
years, with more wariness of foreign influence. The last few months have brought home to the
52
world and indeed to the Chinese the awesome magnitude of their challenge. The world's oldest
civilization and most populous country is venturing forth on totally uncharted terrain. One
wishes them well, for the sake of the Chinese people and for the sake of Asian and global
stability.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
II.
At the end of March this year, the Chinese Minister of Finance, Mr. Wang, presented the
accounts for 1986, and he surprised many foreign observers. The deficit of just under eight
billion Yuan amounted to only three percent of the budget of 230 billion Yuan. It was not, as
many had expected, the case that Chiqese revenues had fallen, but that they had instead risen 3.7
percent higher than estimated. The deficit was primarily due to increased expenditures by
provinces and towns, which, because of decentralization in the domestic and international
economic sectors, had recently been given financial decision-making power.
After an extremely strong expansion which had, from mid-1985, led to severe economic
imbalances on the home and foreign fronts, the People's Republic of China succeeded, in the
first years of the current five-year plan, in returning to the more moderate path the plan foresees.
With respect to the domestic economy, the eight percent economic growth announced for
1986 is a noteworthy success. While agriculture in China only expanded by three percent,
development mainly came from industry, which was responsible for a good 40 percent of the
national income produced. Strong expansion was above all seen in businesses with foreign
capital investments, where technical equipment and management experience is above the
Chinese average. In spite of the small role of these businesses in China's total production, they
play a leading part both in technical and economic modernization and in the willingness of
Chinese companies to innovate.
What is decisive for China's future development is the continuation of the reforms begun in
1978. A major element of the domestic transformation is decentralizing decision powers down
to the company level. Discussion last winter concentrated heavily on the transfer of all
production responsibility to works management, not the political cadres as in the past. This
management style is already being practiced in four percent of all industrial works, on a trial
basis. However, because of political developments in the face of the student unrest at the tum
of the year and because of the criticism of the former Party Chairman Hu Yaobang, the concept
of a nationwide introduction of this important reform of urban industries was not presented for
approval at the Fifth National People's Congress this March.
Price reform, the second prop of China's progress, was also delayed, insofar as stability in
consumer prices has been determined to be a principal objective for 1987. This can be seen as
a precaution against possible solidarity between China's workers and the demonstrating
students. The consequence of this price freeze is that industry cannot freely increase prices, and
thus impulses for rationalization, quality and satisfying market demand cannot be brought into
effect speedily.
There were structural successes in the way consumer goods developed. The planned growth
figure of 13 percent was achieved, which compares especially well with the six percent growth
in machine and plant construction. Rural reforms, which have already made greater progress in
the direction of better serving market demand, showed the first signs of success.
There is a long way to go before this transformation is felt in machine and plant construction,
in spite of technical modernization seen particularly in machines, energy production, and
transport. Disagreements over authority among the administrative bodies, the lack of parts and
supplies, shortages of raw materials, transport difficulties, and foreign currency shortages are
constant problems. Nevertheless, the main obstacle to the development of Chinese companies
and thus for the whole economy, is the lack of both management and technical know-how. The
Chinese government recognized this years ago, and has therefore declared the import of
know-how to be a goal of economic policy.
As regards the international economy, in 1985 imports into China led to a balance of trade
deficit of $15 billion. This was largely due to import levels rising above the planned level as a
53
result of the decentralizing of foreign trade pow.er. By contrast, last year's imports were severely
cut back, with only a I.6 percent increase and a reduction in the trade deficit to $12 billion. And
currency reserves, which had fallen about 30 percent from 1984 to 1985, dropped only $1.5
billion, to $10.5 billion, from 1985 to 1986. China's state planning commission has stated that,
for 1987, only high technology and key equipment should be imported. Purchases of
conventional machines, as well as of consumer goods, are to be foregone.
In order to balance the trade deficit, China has, in recent years, tried to improve the
production structure and quality of its export goods. This has been done by cooperating with
Western businesses in such things as licensing agreements and joint ventures. Thus, 1986 saw
agreements on projects amounting to $4.5 billion in energy, transport, machinery, electronics,
mineral oil, chemistry, metallurgy, and light industry. Despite considerably reduced proceeds
as the result of price decreases in agricultural products and crude oil, as well as devaluation
losses on the Yuan, China's finished product exports almost doubled last year. Western
industrial nations purchased 12 percent more finished goods from China last year.
The Chinese application for membership in GATT is aimed at helping China's exports
increase further. However, the acceptance of such a large economy, which operates on state
trading principles, must be viewed with extreme caution in order to protect the present GATT
member states. In this context, the Soviet Union's desire to join GATT must also be kept in
mind. Still, it is a step in the right direction.
The Chinese government's idea of financing part of the current-account deficit with long-term
borrowing has only been partly realized. Credits from Western banks, governments, and
international organizations have indeed increased rapidly. At the end of 1986, debt rose to a net
$7.6 billion.
In Chinese law, there is a basic dissent between foreign investors and their Chinese partners
which has developed in recent years into a major problem for joint ventures. Foreign firms want
to supply the Chinese market, while the Chinese primarily want to import technical know-how
and to earn foreign currency through exporting. The importance of joint ventures as import
bypasses has hardly been recognized in China thus far. At the same time, joint ventures are faced
with ·great problems, including the lack of foreign currency, expensive labor, and shortages of
raw materials.
Many attempts have been made to draw the Chinese government's attention to possible
solutions to this problem. Directives and agreements since the autumn of 1986 indicate that the
Chinese government is really attempting to improve investment conditions.
China's most important partners in industrial cooperation are Japan, Hong Kong, the U.S.,
and the Federal Republic of Germany. But it is worth noting that trade with the Soviet Union,
at $2.5 billion last year, reached the highest level in the last 25 years. In 1986 alone, projects
worth $3.5 billion were agreed upon. The Soviet Union has thus become China's fifth largest
trading partner. This is a welcome sign of a renewed Sino-Soviet dialogue.
Discussion
China's chances for success in its modernization program were viewed with a degree of
skepticism by several participants in the discussion. In an American speaker's view, it was very
difficult to introduce incentives into a centrally planned society without challenging so many
vested interests that insoluble political problems would result. How could China's leaders be
politically conservative and still bring about economic reforms when the main obstacle was the
Communist party. Were we not now seeing stalemate rather than a continuing process? A
response from the panel was that this was indeed a dilemma for China's leaders. Yet they would
say that political reform will come, not in the form of a much looser society or much greater
decentralization, but as a streamlining of the Communist Party, with more authority being given
to factory managers versus party representatives, for example.
A German, observing that both the Soviet Union and China were embarked on reform
programs at the same time, wondered which of them would reach its goal first, if at all? He was
not inclined to bet on China for three basic reasons: it was ungovernable, the question of its
future leadership was up in the air, and its population growth was out of control. Through 4,000
54
I
I
!
I
I'
i
'
years of history, China had swung between extremes of governability and ungovernability. The
Communist leaders had continued the ancient Chinese tradition of palace intrigues and regular
upheaval, as in the Cultural Revolution. It was hard to believe that this was going to change and
that there would not someday be another Cultural Revolution or similar upheaval. With respect
to leadership, Deng's sun was setting. Two potential successors had fallen from grace, and a
stri.iggle for sucession seemed to have begun. Would Deng be able to impose his will? Or would
his ideas die with him? And finally, China was faced with_ the problem of population growth.
The success or failure of its family-planning scheme would determine the success or failure of
its whole reform effort. There were now indications that China was losing this battle, and this
would have dire consequences for economic modernization.
Another potential problem for China was pointed out by a Briton. He recalled noticing, on a
1979 journey to China, that the economic fortunes of some agricultural and factory workers
whose incomes had increased due to the crude system of bonuses that was then in place, were
better than those of army officers and party functionaries, whose fixed incomes were being
eroded by inflation. If it was still the case that some sectors of society-especially the army and
the party-were benefiting less from economic reforms than others, was this not a potentially
explosive situation?
Speaking in response to these views of China's chances for successful reform, neither
member of the panel agreed that the Soviet Union had a better chance of successfully
modernizing than China. One panelist argued that China had distinct advantages. It had started
its reforms earlier. The Soviet Union had had centralized economic authority for 40 years longer
than China. Structural problems in the Soviet Union were greater, such as the distance of the
raw-material producing regions from the industrialized regions, and tremendous ethnic
problems resulting from the growth of the non-Russian population. It would be far harder to
solve the Soviet Union's structural problems and to reform its economy than China's. The other
panelist agreed, adding that the Soviet Union had a more entrenched bureaucracy than did
China. In addition, with 4,000 years of history behind them, the Chinese had far more
self-confidence than the Russians.
Both panelists agreed that the chances of a second Cultural Revolution were small. One felt
it was unlikely because so many Chinese already were experiencing the advantages of the new
economic course. Said the other panelist, the Cultural Revolution had been very traumatic. It
was even viewed by some in China as a blessing in disguise because it showed how bad things
could get. Rather than collapse into another such upheaval if the economic program did not work
out, China was more apt to slow its program down, and to adopt more of a Soviet model.
Regarding the leadership succession, a panelist pointed out that the leading conservatives
were as old as Deng for the most part, while those in their 30's and 40's were more
Western-oriented, and more "freewheeling." As to the population problem, growth had been
slowed down by a forceful family planning policy. It was true it had been somewhat relaxed, but
the situation still appeared to be under control.
As to the problem of different sectors of the population sharing unequally in the benefits of
economic modernization, a panelist agreed that the ingredients for a blow-up were there. But
still great progress had been made in the last 10 years, and the majority of people were better
off today. Also, the atmosphere was much freer. All of this gave much momentum to the reform
movement.
In the realm of foreign policy, an American wondered how the Chinese currently viewed the
role of the United States around the world. In the early years of the relationship between China
and the U.S., what the Chinese wanted more than mere contact was for the U.S. to maintain the
balance of power in Asia, particularly with respect to the Soviet Union. They wanted a
predictable American foreign policy that showed an understanding of the geopolitical balance of
power. What, the speaker asked, did the Chinese think of the current U.S. posture? Was there
a danger that if the U.S. seemed too anxious to improve relations with Russia then the Chinese
might start to make compensating moves in the same direction? Did the Chinese view American
policy as stable or as idiosyncratic?
A panelist responded that, in the Chinese view, the U.S. had rebounded economically,
militarily, and in terms of national self-confidence. They had tilted toward the U.S. in the 1970's
because they felt the Russians were on the offensive around the world, while the U.S. was weak
and disorganized in the aftermath of Vietnam and Watergate. They wished to right the balance.
55
Today, the Chinese applauded America's new strength and felt the current administration had
done well around the world. If the Chinese view of the U.S. as being stronger did result in an
easing of Sino-Soviet tensions, we should not be overly concerned, because there were limits to
how far such a thaw could go. What was most important from the point of view of China was
that the U.S. maintain a steady, responsible role in the world.
Several speakers wondered about China's foreign policy in the region, especially with respect
to Hong Kong, Taiwan, Vietnam, and Japan. A Canadian asked if China was likely to leave
Hong Kong's capitalistic system intact after taking over from the British. Would domestic
political pressures and ideology allow them to? An American who had recently been in the
colony reported that he found members of the financial community there to be optimistic about
Hong Kong's future under the Chinese. The prevailing feeling was that China would be unlikely
to tamper with Hong Kong because of the colony's great importance to China as a source of
capital and technology. In addition, how China treated Hong Kong would surely have a
significant bearing on what might happen with Taiwan. A panelist agreed that China had a major
incentive to make the system of one country/two systems work. The question was did they have
the subtlety to maintain investor confidence. One could take some encouragement from the fact
that Hong Kong had always been left alone by China, even during the Cultural Revolution.
With respect to Taiwan, a panelist said there were two big issues of concern to the Chinese
at the present time. One was American arms sales, which they did not like but tolerated as long
as such sal<!s were gradually diminishing. The other issue was the U.S. role in advocating a
reconciliation between Taiwan and the mainland. China was particularly concerned about the
growing opposition party on Taiwan advocating independence and felt the U.S. should take a
greater role in promoting reconciliation-a position the U.S. was rightly not willing to take. In
any event, what happened ultimately in Taiwan would be determinted to a large extent by
China's conduct toward Hong Kong and Macao.
A Briton was curious about China's relations with Vietnam, and wondered whether China saw
itself as the guardian of prosperity in Malaysia, Singapore, and elsewhere in the region. A
panelist reported that there was great hostility in China toward Vietnam. This was the greatest
obstacle to better Sino-Soviet relations. China held the Soviet Union accountable for getting
Vietnam out of Cambodia. The Chinese felt that time was on their side with respect to Vietnam.
Keeping troops on the border with Vietnam was costly, but it did give Chinese troops battlefield
practice. And China felt it was keeping Vietnam from pressuring Thailand.
An International participant felt there had been some curious exceptions to China's pragmatic
foreign policy. Why had China become involved in Africa, financing the construction of a
railroad in Zambia and supporting Mugabe in Zimbabwe? What advantage were they seeking?
Were they likely to become similarly involved again in Third World regions? The response from
the panel was that China's involvement in Africa took place in an earlier period when it was
more ideological and more in competition with the Soviet Union for influence. They had since
cut down their involvement in the Third World.
Finally, a panelist provided an interpretation of China's policies toward the developed world.
As to Japan, the two nations very much needed each other. But the scars of World War II were
still very fresh, and there were economic tensions arising from Japan's failure to transfer
technology to and invest in China. China's attitude toward Western Europe was somewhat
dichotomous. On the one hand China wanted a more multipolar world, with more powers than
just the U.S. and the Soviet Union. For this reason, they wanted Western Europe to be more
independent of the U.S. Yet they also wanted the U.S. and Europe to stick together. The
existence of NATO provided a strong flank to the Soviet Union's west, which eased Russian
pressure on the Chinese border.
Looking ahead 100 years, a German speaker saw three possible scenarios for China. First, it
might still be a huge developing country with little chance of modernizing. Second, it might
become a "kind ofyellow Brazil," modernized and industrialized on its seaboard, but backward
and impoverished in the interior. Finally, it might become like Japan, a success story of reform
and modernization-a possibility that would cause "frightening problems" for the West. In
view of this last scenario, in which China might attain the per capita export level of Japan and
swamp world markets with $800 billion worth of goods, we might well ask if we really wanted
China to succeed.
A panelist acknowledged that already we could see the beginning of a problem along these
56
lines. China was starting to present a challenge at the low end of the scale; in 1986, it was the
top volume textile supplier to the U.S. Nevertheless, we should wish for the Chinese to succeed.
Over the long pull, they would modernize, w.ith Western help or without it. The best course for
the U.S. and Europe was to work together in establishing links with China, and in using
leverage-such as the Chinese desire to join GATT-to get them to open up their economy.
Otherwise the considerable commercial, cultural, and scientific benefits of participating in
China's modernization would go to others.
57
•
V. THE ARMS CONTROL DEBATE
Working Paper
Arms Reductions, Ballistic Missile Defense, and Strategic
Stability: United States and Europe
During the past few years there seems to have evolved a very general sentiment that the
strategic nuclear arsenals of the U.S. and the Soviet Union must be reduced by very large cuts.
This represents a change from previous, less ambitious arms control efforts, including the
Nuclear Freeze (which was in fact aimed at stopping weapons technologies, not reducing
numbers). Thus far, reports from various negotiations with the Soviets, and statements by
various arms control experts both from the United States and in Europe, have expressed serious
interest in various levels of total reductions in strategic forces. These levels have ranged from
reductions of 50% over current deployments, to reductions of 90% and even to the complete
removal of all strategic nuclear warheads.
It is important to recognize that the probability of initiation of strategic nuclear conflict is not
in any direct way a function of the size of the nuclear arsenals of the superpowers. Any doubts
one might have had concerning this point have been largely dispelled by the past 35 years of
growth to huge strategic nuclear arsenals. Thus, the principal motivation for reducing the size
of nuclear arsenals is to reduce the total damage that could occur should deterrence fail.
Reductions can also strengthen deterrence if particularly destabilizing weapons are eliminated.
Now, however, if the context proposed is one of major reductions, one must examine
carefully the nuclear balance, its stability and the security of each side. That is to say, the
reduction from 10,000 nuclear warheads apiece to 5,000 apiece might not present a serious
problem for stability; but to reduce as far as 1,000 warheads per side, or a few hundred, must
be seen as a matter of serious concern for the preservation of strategic stability.
Such large reductions raise these concerns on three different accounts. First, one must ask
whether deterrence based on a balance of strategic offensive forces still exists. For instance,
even if a common measure of number of warheads is agreed upon, one must recognize that the
Soviet Union has a significant advantage over the U.S. in deliverable payloads for strategic
missiles. Thus it would be possible to exploit this payload advantage with heavier warheads of
higher yields. An acceptable scheme for disposition of strategic firepower on both sides must be
arrived at before one can have confidence that a stable strategic balance would continue to exist.
In a sense, these are accounting problems; but they are extremely important and difficult
accounting problems, and one cannot be guaranteed that solutions which are both equitable and
acceptable exist, or can be reached.
The second major source of concern is that, with strategic warheads in the few hundred range,
defenses based on currently existing technologies begin to matter a lot. Whatever one thinks
about the efficacy of defending against unlimited strategic strikes where the threat involved is
10,000 or more warheads, one cannot reasonably discount the military value of widespread
defenses against a few hundred such warheads, particularly when the number of interceptors
may well be in the thousands. Serious asymmetry currently exists relative to this concern. That
is, the Soviet Union has widely deployed air defenses-upwards of 10,000 individual
intercepters, and over a thousand radars-and is currently deploying a highly capable
anti-tactical missile system, also in large numbers. None of these missiles has the strong ballistic
missile defense capability of the ABM-X-3 system being upgraded around Moscow, but in
overwhelming numbers they cannot be judged negligible against small attacks. In addition, the
ABM-X-3 system itself has essentially open production lines. Although the Soviets are for the
present remaining within Treaty limits for their deployment, the U.S. could not deploy, much
less extensively deploy, such a system in the next several years.
The third source of concern arising from large strategic warhead reductions is the obvious fact
that at levels of a few hundred warheads, cheating begins to matter a lot. In the case of mobile
ICBM's, it is entirely possible that the Soviet Union could have in ready storage twice as many
58
serviceable ICBM systems as are permitted by a Treaty, without our having any positive
indication that they exist. Thus, cheating could essentially double the military power of reduced
ICBM forces, and when coupled with defenses this leverage can be, overall, much larger. Here,
too, the situation is asymmetric: the U.S., would not seek to cheat, and even if it did, it would
not likely succeed in concealing such cheating from the Soviet Union. The secrecy of their
society thus offers them an additional advantage that is not likely offset by on-site inspection
acceptable to the Soviets.
So when we consider reductions of or beyond 90%, ·we should be seriously worried about
whether we are ending up with too few strategic warheads, and we should be fully aware of the
Soviet advantage in offense (payload being the only quantity that really matters in projection of
total offensive power), defense (both deployed and deployable) and the possibility of cheating on
agreements.
Therefore, if we wish to negotiate such reductions and maintain deterrence and security, we
must recognize that there are only three logically possible alternatives to pursue in such a
negotiation. Either we must require Soviet offense to be less than that of the U.S. (significantly
less, with some accounting ruJe to discount the existence of their defense); or we must convince
the Soviets to get rid of their defenses, while arriving at some otherwise straightforward offense
accounting; or we must deploy some sort of defenses (or at least be fully prepared to deploy
them) ourselves.
We cannot expect a negotiation in which we propose to lower Soviet offenses in recognition
of their defenses to be practically successful. This is partly because of the evident difficulties of
trading off their defensive capabilities against our offensive capabilities: We would have to
arrive at a mutually agreed upon formula for both the cost and effectiveness of both kinds of
systems, an eventuality unlikely in the extreme. However, even if this were possible, negotiating
away Soviet air defenses to permit our strategic missiles to penetrate would be unacceptable to
them on the grounds that we are trying to eliminate only the marginal capability of a system
whose primary value (air defense) they still want and need.
This leads one to the conclusion that if large scale reductions are to be practical, and to give
us in the long-term more security than we have now, and to lower the probability of initiating
nuclear war, we must be prepared to deploy defenses at the same time we cut the forces. Put
another way, a treaty which required major reductions to equal offensive forces but prohibited
one side from deploying strategic defenses (SDI) would be very dangerous indeed.
This requirement for defenses is a common problem of the Western Alliance. NATO as a
whole is now paying to maintain an extremely vulnerable deterrent; the criticality of the
situation, in term of the stability of deterrence, can only increase in the event of deep cuts in
strategic nuclear weapons. In fact, the parallelism extends to the specific cases as well as to the
general case: both the U.S. and its European allies face an increasing force of Soviet SLBMs;
both face Soviet bombers and Soviet cruise missiles, both air launched and sea launched; and
both face a land based ballistic missile threat.
There is some difference in the particulars of this land based threat, ICBM's for the U.S. vs.
IRBM's and shorter-ranged missiles for Europe. However, the distinctions are more political
than military or technical. For instance, both offensive systems will require that defenses employ
early warning, acquisition and tracking systems, and modern (that is to say, improved
performance) interceptors. In terms of the many requirements placed upon a defensive system·
facing these ballistic missiles, the overall difficulty of the two technical problems is roughly the
same. Differences in warning times, altitude and shape of trajectories, radar cross section of
re-entry vehicles, ease of deploying decoys, terminal velocities, and other such factors roughly
(that is, to the extent that we are able to calculate such things accurately with current knowledge)
wash out in the overall analysis. Finally, the Soviet perception of this problem is relevant and
perhaps dominant: The Soviets themselves do not draw hard and fast lines between missiles to
be used against the United States and missiles to be used against NATO. Thus, ~urrently
depl~ed ICBM's that we now view primarily as a threat to the U.S. should also be viewed as
a direct threat to Western Europe.
All this says that we need an intensive R&D program in defensive weaponry, but it also says
that a significant portion of that program should be directed toward some deployable defen~e,
including a defense with some capability to defend Western Europe. This logic does not reqm~e
that such a defense system be absolutely perfect; in fact, an important part of the 10&1c
supporting such a defense is the existence of an imperfect but still militarily significant ~ov1et
defensive system. The clamping of offensive weapons at low levels relieves the quest10n of
59
marginal costs (an appropriate question when dealing with nationwide defenses against
unconstrained threats). Against a well constrained threat only the total cost (and, of course, the
effectiveness) of the system matters. Finally, in the presence of such reductions, the prospects
for an eventual R&D success in leading toward a nationwide defensive system are greater.
None of this is to argue either that we should begin to deploy some elements of a defense
designed to be nationwide now, nor that we should renounce the ABM Treaty now; these issues
must be decided on their own merits as parts of larger questions. The argument made here is that
if we are seriously to discuss large scale reductions in offensive forces, we must also seriously
discuss deploying the necessary defenses to make such a reduction strategically stable. Which,
of course, means that we must in that event be prepared to deploy some such defenses.
So the objective is to be fully prepared to deal with the defensive half of an arms control
agreement involving major offensive cuts, and to provide strategic stability both between the two
superpowers and Europe. The question then becomes: What technologies must one emphasize
now to achieve this joint objective? There are at least five major technology areas that must be
vigorously addressed:
• Improved satellite warning and tracking systems, especially against SLBM's.
• Design and operation of a new detection capability for short-range missiles.
• Operational airborne acquisition and tracking systems.
• High frequency, high power, high-capability battle-management radar.
• High-velocity interceptors with high-performance homing sensors and high lateral-divert
capabilities to close with the target.
In addition to these technologies, one must develop detailed architectures to meet the U.S. and
European defense goals, system designs strongly linked to the actual threats that must be dealt
with.
All of these items, except the second (which is for the European mission only), are currently
part of the Strategic Defense Initiative program. The design and extent of those projects is
beyond the scope of the present discussion.
In addition to the above individual technologies, of course, important questions of systems
integration, including battle-management software, must be examined. A functional prototype
for such a system must be built, tested and improved upon to gain the necessary confidence that
it can accomplish its military mission. That mission, initially, is to offset the capabilities of the
Soviet defenses, and to provide protective stability to our European deterrent.
To meet the extended capability which will be required of a nationwide defense of the United
States, several additional technologies are needed. Prominent among these are the capability to
intercept missiles in boost phase and discrimination of re-entry vehicles from decoys.
The European defense mission and the nationwide defense of the U.S. both require major new
technological capabilities. Fortunately, we are in the midst of a raging technological revolution
stimulated by the Strategic Defense Initiative as well as other military and commercial R&D. As
a consequence, there are some exciting and surprising developments and progress is being made
across the board. However, it is important that we focus our attention, at least for the present,
on these more pressing issues, which are near-term both in the technologies that can accomplish
them and in the political necessity of our facing up to their challenges.
Offensive reductions are in the air. Considered by themselves, such reductions can only be
safe and stable if they are not only made but held to. This criterion in itself presents a major
challenge to our negotiators and to verification and compliance capabilities, a challenge we
should not underestimate. Then, assuming that offensive forces remain firmly reduced, the
necessity for defenses adds a further challenge. If the defenses that we are in fact technically
capable of implementing do not keep pace with these arms control successes, the overall result
may be to lessen the security of everyone.
60
r
Opening Remarks from the Panel
I.
The INF issue used to be known as the "gray-area systems problem," referring to nuclear
weapons that were not covered by any arms control regime. The withdrawal from Europe of
American INF systems in the late 1960's resulted in a Soviet monopoly of weapons that had not
been captured in any of the earlier arms control negotiations.
The introduction of the SS-20 in 1976-77 represented more than a modernization of Soviet
INF systems. With considerably improved capabilities, it was essentially a decoupling weapon
of political intimidation, deployed during a period of growing Soviet strategic nuclear strength.
NATO's reaction was the 1979 decision to first deploy U.S. systems to counter the SS-20 and
also to fill a gap in the deterrent spectrum made all the more dangerous because of the state of
the strategic balance, and then to try to find an arms control outcome that would address this
problem.
Our first objective when we'began the current negotiations was simply to have negotiations.
We wanted to persuade the Russians to negotiate on the basis that U.S. deployments in Europe
within range of the Soviet Union, in support of U.S. and Allied security, were legitimate
responses to Soviet weapons which threatened directly only Allied territory, not the U.S., and
to negotiate on these systems independently of U.S. and Soviet strategic negotiations. In this we
succeeded. Secondly, we insisted on an outcome which encompassed equal rights and limits at
the lowest possible level. From 1979 on, at Europe's suggestion, the lowest possible level was
understood to be zero. Another point was that the talks had to be global, as did the conclusion.
We could not accept an outcome that dealt only with the systems in Europe, given the
capabilities of the Soviet systems and the need to recognize the security requirements of our
Asian allies.
We made clear that the agreement we were seeking dealt only with U.S. and Soviet systems.
No third-country systems could be included in any way. We insisted there be no adverse impact
on our conventional forces-meaning that we didn't want aircraft included at this stage. We had
to have concurrent global constraints on U.S. and Soviet short-range INF (SRINF) to prevent
the undermining of an agreement. And we needed effective verification.
The underlying thesis was that a negotiated outcome which met these agreed Alliance criteria
could enhance overall Alliance security, with the recognition that a reduction in this element of
the nuclear component of deterrence implied that, absent a fundamental change in Soviet
behavior, other nuclear forces be as modern and effective as possible and conventional forces
be strengthened. In other words, if a gap were left in the deterrent spectrum, it should and must
be as narrow as possible, taking into account that we would have greatly reduced the threat posed
to us by Soviet long-range INF (LRINF) missiles.
Where do the negotiations stand today? The U.S. has tabled a treaty incorporating all the
above objectives. The Soviets tell us they will be tabling a treaty in this round, and we expect
it soon. On long-range INF, we and the Soviets agree on the basic outcome. There would be
reductions to equal global levels of 100 warheads on U.S. and Soviet missiles. These 100
warheads would be restricted to U.S. and Soviet Asian territory only. We still have to resolve
the question of the location within those two areas of the remaining systems. At any rate, the
result would be zero in Europe. Despite the fact that we will agree to this approach, we have on
many occasions made clear to the Soviets our strong preference for an outcome that would be
a global zero. We will continue to urge the Soviets to stop hanging on to these remaining 33
SS-20's with their 100 warheads. We have pointed out to the Russians that there are good
reasons for this, in their as well as our interest. Verification will be eased, made more certain
and less costly. Several relatively minor elements which remain to be resolved will be resolved
if the Soviets remove these 100 warheads. And, as we told them, if they mean what they've said
about improving relations with Asian countries, they could demonstrate it by removing these
missiles.
On the question of verification, we have an agreement in principle on the basic elements,
including on-site inspection. However, we are awaiting the fine print from the Soviets to
determine if an agreement in principle will translate into an ageement in detail. They are talking
a good game, but it remains to be seen if it really is one.
As to short-range INF, we need to bear in mind a few facts. They have been part of the
negotiations from the very beginning. They are not, as the Soviets tend to say, something we've
61
just added, or a new obstacle. At one point, the Russians agreed with us that SRINF had to be
part of the negotiations, and even incorporated an article in their draft treaty in the previous
negotiations dealing with these systems and using language rather similar to ours to describe the
problems these systems created. In the SRINF area, there are two systems we are looking at, the
~S-23, with about 300-kilometers' range, and the Scaleboard, also known as the SS-22, with
925-kilometers' range. The Russians have 130 launchers of these two systems throughout the
Soviet Union, and several times as many missiles and warheads, as the launchers can be
reloaded. Roughly a third are located in Eastern Europe (East Germany and Czechoslovakia),
a third in the western Soviet Union, and a third in the eastern Soviet Union.
The U.S. has zero SRINF missiles today. We agree with the Russians on the need to constrain
these systems in the context of an INF agreement. The Soviets have said they will unilaterally
remove and destroy the systems in Eastern Europe upon the signing of an INF agreement. They
have further suggested they could agree on the global elimination of all SRINF. They have
talked vaguely about separate negotiations on SRINF while also saying SRINF could be covered
in an INF treaty. It is difficult to imagine a separate negotiation given the fact that the U.S. has
no SRINF missiles. The only possible subjects of such a negotiation could be the Soviet schedule
of reduction and the verification of t)le end result. In any case, the Russians tell us they will be
flexible on this issue and will work to find the most practical result.
The Alliance is now engaged in intensive consultation on how to respond to the latest Soviet
proposal on SRINF. There are a number of possible ways of going. We could agree on equalit;
for U.S. and Soviet systems at the current Soviet level-that was our position starting out, and
remains our basic position. We could agree to an equal ceiling at a finite number below the
current Soviet global level. We could agree to equality at a global level of zero. We could agree
that there should be no constraints on either side and everyone is free to do as they wish with
these systems. We could come up with alternative negotiating approaches. But we would need
to take into account the fact that the Soviets are saying they are ready to unilaterally reduce and
eliminate this group of systems. No single solution will be perfect. It is not going to be an easy
problem to deal with, but it is also one we need not despair over.
In sum, while the negotiations are far from over, our fundamental negotiating objectives have
been or are within range of being reached, assuming that the rhetoric on verification is matched
by the details. In purely trade-off terms, we will be eliminating some 300 deployed LRINF
missile systems in return for the Soviets eliminating well over 1400 such systems, plus the
possibility of further Soviet reductions, if not elimination, of several hundred SRINF missiles
and up to 130 launchers. Under this option, we would have to give up the option of deploying
SRINF of our own with ranges of above 500 kilometers.
Finally, even if all these points were agreed upon today, we would still face painstaking work
in producing a treaty. There are armies of commas and battalions of semi-colons waiting out
there to trap us, and many young Congressional staffers waiting to find one of those little errors
to prove that we made a horrible mistake. But we'll do our best to prevent that from happening.
Where are we outside of the negotiations? From the very outset, INF has been as much if not
more related to the long-term Soviet effort to break up the NATO Alliance and to the Allied
determination to prevent that from happening than to arms control per se. The SS-20's and their
ilk are powerful and dangerous weapons. But a major, if not the principal, target of those
weapons is NATO's political will and cohesion. To some extent the SS-20 has been used in this
political role already. The fear their deployment inspired helped lead segments of western public
opinion to conclude that NATO's own INF deployment would literally bring the skies down and
make a:n arms-control agreement impossible. But we did deploy, and the Russians did return to
the negotiating table.
But we cannot expect the Soviets to enter into an agreement that meets only our objectives.
They want these American missiles out of Europe, and they don't want to see new ones deployed
there. They are negotiating for their own military and political reasons, which in some ways are
the reverse image of our own. Nevertheless the long-term results of these negotiations are very
much in our hands.
The basic agreement taking shape now can strengthen Allied security by, among other results,
at last elirninatng effectively a class of Soviet nuclear weapons which pose a threat to Europe and
other U.S. allies. It will be a result achieved by demonstrated Allied cohesiveness and
determination. But in addition, we should take advantage of the opportunity provided by such
an agreement to take steps to insure that our Alliance deterrence remains strong in a post
INF-treaty security environment. This means not forgetting we are dealing here with only
62
I
l
I
'I
l
I
I
ground-launched missiles in a certain range band. Other nuclear weapons will remain available
as part of the deterrent. Secondly, we need to state firmly our. intention to maintain and
modernize our remaining nuclear forces and to do it. In this connection we should continue to
carry out the commitments made along these lines at Montebello, when we unilaterally took out
i400 additional U.S. nuclear weapons from Europe. We need to move a:head on programs to
strengthen NATO's conventional forces. We should reinforce our efforts to spend scarce
resources more effectively and face up to the need to spend more on conventional defense in a
situation where nuclear weapons play a less prominent role. We have to recognize that arms
control cannot be a panacea for all our security problems. Defense cannot be placed in second
place. For without a strong defense there can be neither a basis for deterrence nor for realistic
negotiations.
There is time before the negotiations are completed and years before the last U.S. INF
missiles leave Europe-time enough to map out and implement a plan to adjust our deterrence
to take account of the reduced reliance on nuclear weapons which will eneluctably follow an
agreement reducing or elminating INF missiles; and time enough to insure that flexible response
will remain the basis of our defense and deterrence doctrine. Rather than wringing our hands that
the Soviets appear to be accepting our position in the negotations, or for that matter applauding
ourselves prematurely, we should be rolling up our sleeves to insure that the Alliance gains the
full benefit of an INF agreement.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
II.
In judging military balances it is important not just to look at the offensive forces on both
sides, but also the defensive ones. When one is considering the reduction of offensive forces,
one must guard against the possibility of an assymetry that might exist with regard to defensive
forces. Both the U.S. and Europe face similar offensive missile threats-from submarine-
launched and ground-launched ballistic missiles. The Soviet Union has deployed ballistic missile
defenses against ICBM's and is now deploying ballistic missile defenses against tactical missiles.
The West has not deployed any ballistic missiles defenses.
The U.S. has initiated the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) as a research effort to find out
what is possible with current and foreseeable technology in defending against ballistic missiles.
Most ballistic missile defense technology, in terms of components and systems, is common to
the defense needs of the U.S. and Western Europe.
Is a ballistic missile defense possible? The answer must be qualified. Yes, it is possible if you
don't insist that it be perfect and if you are willing to provide modern technology, and deploy
systems in sufficient numbers to meet the threat. No, it is not possible if you require perfection,
or if you are only willing to field forces that are perhaps a tenth the size of the offense they are
supposed to counteract. So, an effective defense is a matter of degree, of quality and quantity,
and of tactics and will.
What about the technology for such a defense? We are in the midst of a raging technological
revolution, one that has been going on for a couple of decades and is likely to go on for a couple
more. This revolution is especially in the area of electronics, of sensors, of beam weapons, and
of concepts for using these technologies. For example, a number of things that are critical to a
ballistic missile defense have been demonstrated, even at this early stage. Overhead, there are
satellites that can detect, with high reliability, missile launches from the Soviet heartland and
from Soviet submarines. New satellites are under development that can not only provide
warning of launches, but can also provide detailed tracking information on missiles launched. In
addition, incredible precision has been demonstrated in pointing, tracking, and guidance. It has
also been demonstrated that land- or airplane-based lasers can shoot down missiles. New kinds
of radar have been developed that permit the examination of objects coming into the atmosphere
and the determination of which ones carry nuclear warheads. New kinds of ground-launched
interceptors have been demonstrated, which could be effective at both high and low altitudes,
and in outer space.
Congress has asked the SDI office to formulate an initial concept of a ballistic missile defense.
63
They have created blue teams, which put together a configuration of defensive systems,· and red
teams, which try to figure out where that configuration is vulnerable. That done, the blue team
must go back to the drawing board to come up with a better system. Over the next six months
or so, the SDI office ought to be able to come up with a considerably improved concept of at
least how to use available technology.
Any engineering development will require the carrying out of tests of the components and of
the system. This is permissible now for defenses against tactical ballistic missiles in the
European theater, but not for a strategic defense of the U.S.
As to costs, the Nitze criteria say, simply put, that, at the margin, the defense should cost less
than the offense. But the following points are true. We don't know the costs, or what the system
will be. We don't know the incremental costs to the Soviet Union of their offensive systems
better than a factor of two. And we do know that, given the way the U.S. procurement system
works we could cut our cost by a factor of two, or better. The challenge for us to learn how to
reduce the costs by a factor of two, given our bureaucracy, is more difficult than the challenge
to provide the technology to do the job.
Opening Remarks from the Panel
Ill.
There is a common theme in this conference. For arms control and for defense, for dealing
with protectionism and debt, for acquiring economic prosperity, you have to know where you
want to arrive, not just from where you have departed.
The train has left the station in INF. The station we have left has been that ambitious goal of
"real disarmament" and "deep cuts." The dilemma over the zero option in Europe is that we
are finding that zero is not necessarily the best arms control result, if arms control is to help
establish stability and trust.
In finding a way out of the zero-option dilemma, we must ask where we want to arrive. We
should want to arrive at a situation of stable deterrence in Western Europe, which is now
dependent on doubtful battlefield weapons or on far-away and escalating strategic systems. We
should have something militarily and politically sound. We should couple the removal of
doubtful systems in Europe with the introduction of more reliable ones, and rely in future on
sea-based cruise missiles already on American ships in European waters. They are intermediate,
less vulnerable, and reassuring without being provoking. They should be given to the NATO
military commander, have Europeans be involved with them, and they should be linked to
deterrence in Europe.
INF is only one issue, and perhaps an isolated one. Arms control is wider. Here, too, we have
to know where we want to arrive. The tasks are daunting. We are facing a transition to new
technologies that must be managed under conditions of stability. Let's not reopen the debate on
SDI. Clearly defensive technologies will come into arsenals. The question is how do we
integrate them without upsetting stability. New technologies make the survivability of command
and control much more questionable. How do we manage this? How do we manage the return
to more stable offensive strategic weapons that do not give a premium to first strike, or, through
their vulnerability, make it imperative to launch them before one knows whether the war has
really started? We must move away from multi-warhead mfasiles which are too valuable to lose
on the ground.
We need to manage the transition in the conventional field. We need to have arms control on
conventional forces, yet we discuss this issue as though the background were static. It is not.
Western conventional forces are under very considerable pressure and are bound to diminish,
regardless of arms control, over the next few years. In seven years time, West Germany, which
has the largest land force in Western Europe, will have available half the number of conscripts
it now takes. In the U.S., zero growth in the defense budget, coupled with long-term
commitments and costly procurement programs, make it likely that cuts will be made in forces
stationed in Europe. In the U.K., a costly nuclear modernization program is coupled with a
decline in real terms of defense expenditures. And some smaller countries, like Belgium and
Denmark, do not seem to be in a position even to renew conventional weapons in the foreseeable
64
future. Thus, we have a daunting task of reshaping the basis of conventional defense in Western
Europe, while at the same time negotiating with the Soviet Union, which, if all it wants is fewer
Western forces, needs only to sit back and wait.
How do we manage nuclear proliferation? The record so far is not bad. But .the relative
in~ouciance in the West about reports that Pakistan may have the bomb is worrisome. This
reflects a decline in political awareness and concern in the West.
Arms control is the management of competition, not an auction. The zero optioners and deep
cutters are using a chainsaw to tend their garden. We must get away from the primitive approach
of deep cuts. It is bad for the West because we have smaller arsenals and cannot win by cutting
indefinitely. And it is bad for arms control because it doesn't solve the problems but rather
exacerbates them, and it doesn't create stability and confidence.
Where do we want to arrive? We have, in the past, given hostages to fortune. Let us not get
tied up, however tempting it may be, in a bitter debate over the wisdom of the zero option. Let's
get through it fast, with minimum damage, and then afterwards, sit down in an enclave of
Western leaders to finally reach a consensus on where we want to go. There is a saying that
goes, "if you don't know where you want to go, every way will take you there." If that becomes
the Western motto, we'll have neither arms control nor security.
Discussion
An International participant began the discussion with his analysis of the current arms control
situation. NATO's military mission was to deter aggression and intimidation, the latter being the
Soviet objective with respect to Europe-namely to put the Alliance in a military posture such
that the Soviet Union could "intimidate, coerce, and blackmail us." The Alliance's strategy for
dealing with the threat was flexible response and forward defense. The three possible responses
to a Soviet attack were: (1) a direct offense to defeat an attack or to force the burden of escalation
onto the aggressor; (2) deliberate escalation on our part to include the potential first use of
nuclear weapons; and (3) a general nuclear response-the "ultimate guarantor of our
deterrence.'' From the military point of view, the vital factors in our strategy of deterrence were
(1) the option of first use of nuclear weapons, and (2) the capability to strike Soviet soil with
land-based systems based in Western Europe. While the Soviets might doubt we would escalate
to nuclear weapons, they could not be sure, and this uncertainty was a vital component of
credible deterrence.
Should deterrence fail, the most probable scenario was a Soviet conventional attack and,
because of NATO's deficient conventional capacity, a resulting early use of nuclear weapons by
the Alliance-most likely after a few days. We would not want to use nuclear weapons on our
own soil in the first instance, but rather on non-Soviet Warsaw Pact soil and selectively on
Russian soil in order to send a message that the Soviet Union was not immune to attack.
The rationale behind the 1979 two-track decision was to fill a gap in NATO's spectrum of
deterrence. At the time, the F-111 was the only weapons system capable of reaching Soviet soil.
Further, there was a need to tighten the coupling between Europe and the U.S. by placing
American missiles on European soil. The negotiating track was adopted in order to get the
political consensus for the deployment track.
In 1981, President Reagan announced the zero option, by which we would remove the
Pershing 2 and Cruise missiles if the Soviets removed the SS-20's. But the SS-20 was not the
reason for the two track decision. It was to fill a gap in our deterrence irrespective of the SS-20.
While it made political sense, the International participant continued, the zero option made no
sense from a military point of view. All the advantages went to the Soviet Union because we
would again be in a situation where we had, on the one hand, disadvantaged conventional forces,
and, on the other, our strategic nuclear forces, with only the F-111 and some shorter-range
missiles in between as escalatory options.
The approach to arms control of NATO's military leadership was to favor balanced,
verifiable accords and to reject agreements that impacted unfavorably upon Western security.
Any arms control proposal was examined in the light of a series of key questions: (1) Would the
proposal reduce the threat? (2) Would it enhance our response to the threat? (3) By accepting an
65
agreement for one category of nuclear forces, would we become more vulnerable to other
categories? (4) What was the level of risk and whose risk was it-the U.S. 's or Western
Europe's? (5) What was the impact on our continuum of escalation? (6) What did it do for
nuclear burden-sharing among the ·Allies? (7) What would be the effect on the size of the
remaining weapons stockpile that would be needed?
While the negotiating track in the INF decision was the more visible one, it was the
deployment track that brought the Russians back to the bargaining table. Western governments
had convinced their people that the zero option was the way to go, and now, it seemed political
credibility of governments was of greater importance than the credibility of our deterrent. This
was hard to accept, because, while administrations and parliamentary governments came and
went, the constants were the people whose futures were affected, irrespective of governments.
However, politically, we had no choice but to agree to the zero option. We had been hoist by
our own petard. We were back to the pre-1979 situation where only the F-111 gave us the
possibility of hitting Soviet soil, and its task was greatly complicated by having to fly through
both Eastern European and Soviet air defenses. The zero option did not provide greater stability.
It did reduce the threat, but it reduced the credibility of our deterrent. We would not be able to
hit time-urgent targets on Soviet soil with Pershing 2's, but would instead have to rely on
air-breathers.
The military position was that the zero option would be unacceptable unless the agreement
captured shorter-range Soviet weapons, the SS-22 and -23. In addition, there would have to be
some movement toward achieving a balance of conventional and chemical forces before the zero
option could be accepted. The Russians had now thrown in the SS-22 and -23 and had said they
were ready to negotiate conventionally.
There was a danger that, with the zero option, we were beginning to move toward the
denuclearization of Europe. Would the next step be to move toward capturing forward-based
systems of dual-capable aircraft, and would that be put in language we politically had to accept?
We were moving too fast in arms control, and no one was calling time out. We had to be certain
we knew what we were buying before taking any further steps.
Some were saying that, even with the Pershing 2 and cruise missiles removed, we would still
have some 4,600 nuclear warheads in Europe. But we could not necessarily strike Soviet soil
with these. With air-breathing systems instead of ballistic missiles, you had to take into account
pre-launch survivability, reliability, and the ability to penetrate defenses in determining whether
you could hit the targets. Would 4600 be enough, under these circumstances?
Substituting Poseidon and Polaris sea-launched missiles for theater weapons made no sense,
because Soviet detection systems could not distinguish whether or not they were from the
strategic arsenals:of the U.S. and U.K. In the case of sea-launched cruise missiles, their mother
ships had to be tethered to the coast in order for their guidance systems to work, and they would
do us no good if they weren't where we needed them.
Faced with these obstacles, what should we do? First, we needed to link the total elimination
of our INF weapons from Europe to a satisfactory agreement on conventional and chemical
systems. Ideally, each side should be allowed 100 INF weapons. As to SRINF, we should agree
to Gorbachev's proposal to scrap his 42 forward-based systems and seek an agreement allowing
us to match what he had left by converting deployed Pershing 2's to Pershing lB's. Ifwe went
to a zero level for SRINF, we should try to protect West Germany's 72 Pershing !A's, and
persuade the Germans to modernize them in order to balance the forward-deployed Soviet
SCUD systems. And if the Pershing !A's had to go, we should draw the range line at 300
kilometers in order to capture the SCUD's. But we had to protect our own weapons platforms
for air-to-surface missiles.
Concluding, the International speaker said we could not get rid of the nuclear deterrent
without expanding conventional forces. We needed to develop the means to suppress Eastern
European and Soviet air defenses and enhance our aircrafts' ability to penetrate to targets on
Soviet soil. This might mean forward deployment of B-52 or B-1 aircraft, with air-launched
cruise missiles, which would have to be counted as theater and not strategic systems. We had
to insure that the U.K. and France kept their independent nuclear forces. And we should move
forward with the modernization agreed to at Montebello. And we had to get sea-launched cruise
missiles under NATO military command when deployed in-theater, specifically in the
Mediterranean. Finally, we had to exploit our technological advantages and not become captives
of preemptive concessions where. we rejected a new system because we did not think it would
66
work or felt it would be too expensive, and so failed· even to evaluate its mission- or
cost-effectiveness.
Addressing himself to the concern that the zero option would leave a gap in NATO's spectrum
of deterrence, a German participant wondered why it was so important for the Alliance to be
able to strike Soviet soil with missiles based in Europe. Did this imply that American nuclear
weapons would be used in defense of Europe only if they were deployed in Europe, and that the
American strategic arsenal would be used only in the event of an attack on the U.S.? Assuming
this was not the case, even without INF weapons in Europe, the Russians would still face an
unacceptably high risk in attacking Europe because they could still not be sure of the American
response. Our strategy of deterrence could still be maintained by strategic and battlefield nuclear
weapons. We had had 30 years of security before we had INF weapons, so why were we so
worried about losing them now?
But several speakers cautioned against relying on battlefield weapons and strategic systems
for deterrence, especially as regards Europe. A Greek pointed out that the Soviet Union could
strike Europe with a tiny percentage of its strategic arsenal, and he warned that strategic
weapons had been targeted on Europe before and could be again. As for battlefield weapons,
they were fine for the Russians in an offensive situation, but they were useless and risky for the
Alliance in a defense. A speaker from Liechenstein wondered if battlefield nuclear weapons
were not heading toward obsolescence anyway. Western military technology was moving in the
direction of replacing nuclear warheads with more intelligent and effective conventional
systems. But, an American responded, while the accuracy of many weapons systems had
increased to the point that nuclear weapons were no longer necessary to strike certain targets,
other, more dispersed targets could only be effectively destroyed by nuclear warheads.
A Canadian cautioned against selling short the deterrent effect of battlefield nuclear weapons.
Surely the Russians viewed as a deterrent the prospect of their conventional forces being
incinerated. A German agreed that the Russians were not indifferent to the use of nuclear
weapons of whatever category in Europe.
A number of participants supported the strategy of using other weapons systems to fill the gap
left by the elimination of INF systems. What was important, in an American's view, was that
the Alliance make it clear to the Russians that their goal of a Europe in which the only nuclear
weapons were the Soviet strategic arsenal was not something we would let them have. If we
agreed to the zero option for INF, then we should draw a line-possibly at 500 kilometers-
beyond which we would not agree to any reductions. In that range category, we should be
developing new systems.
But several speakers expressed concern about how NATO's deploying new types of nuclear
weapons might be perceived by our publics. A Belgian felt that the credibility of our
governments was at stake here. Our publics viewed the zero option as the first step toward the
eventual elimination of all nuclear weapons. What would be their reaction when we announced
our intention to deploy different kinds of nuclear weapons after agreeing to get rid of the INF
missiles? Were we saying there were good and bad types of nuclear weapons?
That, in the view of some participants, was exactly the case. Said a German, we needed fewer
and better nuclear weapons. Europeans could not expect to influence Alliance strategy, he
continued, unless they recognized that NATO had to have a nuclear component that would
directly and visibly affect European soil. An American interjected that, if we were moving to a
situation where Europeans were unwilling or unable to deploy American nuclear weapons on
their territory, was it possible to maintain the credibility of flexible response? The consensus was
that there was no better strategy available, and, rather than abandoning it, we had to make it
work within the context of the zero option for INF.
A number of speakers worried about the decoupling effects the zero option might have. A
Greek argued that, to couple politically and militarily, one needed the power projection
furnished by nuclear weapons. If we got rid of all INF weapons, there would be countries in
regions of NATO that would be completely strategically decoupled from those in other regions.
From there it was a short step to political decoupling.
It was a Dane's view that the two pillars of the Alliance had stood together when they decided
to arm Europe in the two-track decision. But they had not when Europe was partially disarmed
67
by the zero option. Europeans had not been present at Reykjavik, nor were they present in
Geneva, and they had to rely on sympathetic Americans to put forward their views.
An American countered that there had been full and frequent consultation among the Allies
during the course of the negotiations, and, indeed, the zero option had originally been a
European proposal. As to coupling, it was wrong to look at one class of weapon as the be-all and
end-all of coupling. Coupling was more than a weapons system or class of systems. It was a
series of links that drew the U.S. and Europe together. The U.S. was not committed to the
defense of Europe for any other reason than its own self-interest, and, in dealing with the Soviet
Union, the self-interest of the U.S. and that of Europe were the same.
A French speaker agreed, saying that coupling was, first of all, a political phenomenon, based
on the conviction of the American president, whoever it might be, that the defense of Europe
was inevitable for the U.S. The practical conditions of coupling in terms of weapons had already
changed several times and could do so again. This should not concern us, provided arms control
agreements were carefully negotiated and did not compromise Western security.
If an agreement calling for the elimination of INF from Europe was a foregone conclusion,
as most speakers felt it was, then, in the opinion of many participants, we had better do
something to correct the considerable disparity between the conventional capacity of NATO and
the Warsaw Pact, and about the Soviet Union's chemical and biological warfare capacity. In the
opinion of an International speaker, if we were entering a period where there would be fewer
nuclear weapons, then the conventional and chemical aspects would become more important, not
just militarily, but in the public mind as well. We would have to justify our remaining nuclear
deterrent at least partly on the conventional imbalance. Therefore, we had better be seen to be
doing something about that imbalance, which, so far, we had not taken very seriously. It was
doubtful that we would be able to significantly increase our own conventional capacity, given the
paucity of resources our governments were prepared to allocate to defense. So the alternative
was to get talks going-a process fraught with obstacles, ifthe bogged-down MBFR negotiations
were any example. Yet it was urgent that we address this problem.
In view of NATO's conventional inferiority, the zero option agreement was a particularly bad
deal, in a Briton's opinion. We seemed hell-bent on rushing into an INF deal just because it was
on offer, and worrying about a conventional deal later on. We had done nothing to pressure the
Russians on conventional forces, and now we were giving up our only leverage-to insist on a
linkage between nuclear reductions and conventional reductions. The INF deal was one made in
isolation and in a hurry, and we would surely come to regret it.
An American responded that negotiations had been going on for five and a half years, so one
could hardly say we had rushed into the INF deal. Further, to link the elimination of INF
weapons to a reduction in Soviet conventional weapons would be to take an approach' different
from the one agreed to.
A German argued that we still had battlefield nuclear weapons as a bargaining chip for
conventional reductions. But a countryman was skeptical about how useful this would be. How
could the West negotiate the reduction of nuclear weapons in order to get Soviet conventional
reductions, while at the same time reserving the right to increase other types of nuclear
weapons? It seemed to be trying to link the unlinkable. In any event, the speaker continued, the
conventional imbalance was exaggerated. The West had made significant improvements in its
conventional capacity in the last few years, and the Russians viewed these developments with
apprehension.
A few comments were made on the subject of verification. An American said that verification
could not make a bad agreement good, but could only make a good agreement viable. The Soviet
offer of verification in the zero option agreement was not a good reason to enter into it. Another
American stressed the difficulty of verification. Even if those doing the verifying were
convinced, how could they convince the rest of the world? And even if verification was possible,
what about compliance? What was there in the current proposals about measures to be taken in
the case of violations?
In an American participant's opinion, our dialogue on arms control was characterized by
conceptual disarray. We needed to go back to the basics of what arms control was and what it
was supposed to accomplish. To think coherently about arms control, we first had to think
68
coherently about strategic doctrine, and to have a consensus on military strategy.
For 40 years, the West had had a consensus on deterrence. Our doctrine of deterrence had not
been static, but had been adjusted according to changes in Soviet military capability. We had
moved from massive retaliation to flexible response and forward defense, and we had adjusted
flexible response to afford greater strategic flexibility. Now we had to ask whether we wanted
to stick with or to abandon the doctrine of deterrence. If we adopted a strategy of cutting
strategic forces by more than 50 percent and deploying strategic defenses, we would be changing
to a strategy of defense instead of deterrence. This would be a fundamental change in Alliance
strategy and in the possible use of Amerian weapons in defense of Europe. The problem in
accomplishing such a change in strategy was to do it in a stable manner.
In addition to a coherent military strategy, we also needed to determine how to marry defense
policy with arms control policy. We seemed to be moving in contradictory directions. In the
U.S., we were trying to deploy mobile MX missiles while trying to ban them in an arms control
treaty. Or, as in the zero option agreement, we were becoming more dependent on battlefield
weapons while seeking in our military doctrine to become less dependent on them.
Another American argued th,at our domestic debates had consistently frustrated our attempts
to mesh our strategic planning with our policy of deterrence. Starting with the Nixon
Administration, the U.S. had tried to develop a plausible war-fighting scenario which was more
than just killing millions of people. Calculations as to the appropriate number of missiles and
warheads to counter the Soviet force were made. Yet these calculations were whittled down by
successive administrations so that no one today knew what the composition of the U.S. strategic
arsenal was supposed to accomplish. Because of this failure to think coherently about military
strategy, we were in danger of sliding into the same position with respect to SDI as we were in
with INF. We were making a whole series of propositions in order to sell the project-an
approach that, sooner or later, we would find would not work.
The Soviet Union had some 20,000 anti-aircraft missiles. Was it a perfect air defense? No.
Was it a huge obstacle to NATO? Certainly. No one had dared to suggest that perhaps the best
way to start the process of negotiation on SDI was to ask the Russians to eliminate their ,air
defense and give us a free run into their country. Thus, mutual assured destruction would be
guaranteed. We had no air defense. We could then cut our missile forces. It would be a simple,
cheap solution. But everybody would say it was a preposterous proposition.
With respect to SDI, we were being asked for perfection, survivability, cost-effectiveness, no
testing, and a ten-year moratorium before any deployment. It was argued that the moratorium
was only the amount of time it would take to develop SDI anyway. But we should not fool
ourselves. If that was as long as it took, we should take that time. We should not rush it. But
we should proceed.
SDI could perform the task of complicating Soviet calculations, of discouraging third-party
attacks, and of making limited blackmail more difficult, among other things. It was an
astonishing argument that a defense of the U.S. made Europe less secure, because the conclusion
would then be that Europe had been less secure when the U.S. had an atomic monopoly than it
was now that the U.S. was totally vulnerable. We were inflicting upon ourselves, with respect
to defense technology, a set of self-imposed limitations. The Europeans were driving the U.S.
into making a distinction between research and deployment, which guaranteed we would never
get to the point of deployment. No one ever challenged Soviet deployments.
Ifwe wanted to negotiate SDI, we should say we were committed to dep!Oyment,and research
was our own business. We were willing to negotiate the level of deployment of defenses in
relation to the level of deployment of offenses. If the Russians were willing to lower their
offenses, we would be willing to lower our defenses, and we were ready to discuss those
principles right away. Otherwise, we would find, in five years or so, that we had, because of
our internal debates, given SDI away in our own proposals, from which we could not withdraw.
We could not have a strategy we were unwilling to implement, or one that, if we implemented
it, would destroy us. We could not rest the defense of democratic publics on mass extermination
of civilian populations, and then, not only deprive ourselves of a defense, but of systems which
had a certain automaticity of response (which was the advantage of the INF weapons-the
Soviets could not be sure if the Western military commander would be authorized to release
them before they were overrun.) To give all of this up and not to build a coherent strategy, to
fail to understand that many of the zero-option supporters also supported no first use of nuclear
weapons, and to believe that deterrence could be covered by the U.S. strategic arsenal, was an
intellectual incoherence that would ruin us.
69
We had come too far on the zero option to turn back; we had to avoid doing the same thing
with SDI. We had to avoid putting ourselves in a position where the Russians had both an air
defense and a missile system, while the Allies insisted their protection was their own
vulnerability, which they intended. to guarantee. If we failed to develop a strategic doctrine we
really believed in we would continue to stumble from dilemma to dilemma. If we could not get
an improvement in the situation now, with new Soviet leadership, we were in deep trouble.
The new Soviet leadership, as exemplified by Gorbachev, was indeed something we should
be taking advantage of in our dealings with the Soviet Union, said an International speaker. We
seemed to forget that it was the Russians who had proposed the zero option at Reykjavik. Yet
we seemed determined not to believe Gorbachev when he said his objective was not to destroy
Western values. We had to remain on our guard in dealing with the Russians, but, if we refused
to see even a glimmer of hope that our relations with them could change for the better, then our
policies would surely fail.
A German agreed, saying that our policies should not be too much driven by military
imperatives. Statesmen should not listen too closely to their military advisors lest they denied
themselves a chance of giving a new political shape to the order of things. We should continually
be assessing the Soviet threat. What was the chance that it was lessening under Gorbachev? We
should avoid giving our publics the impression that we were more interested in preserving the
threat than in furthering the possibilities for change.
Sometimes, added an American, statesmen had to take risks that military men would not. The
Soviets, we should remember, were going to zero in INF, too. Yes, there would be a gap in our
deterrent spectrum, and, no, the outcome would not be free of risk. But the elimination of a class
of weapons would be worth the risks, which we ought to be able to handle, if only we were
prepared to do what had to be done in a world with fewer nuclear weapons. We had before us
the opportunity to create a new situation, and if we handled it correctly, we would find our
security enhanced rather than diminished.
Many of the factors in the arms control debate-deterrence, coupling, security, etc.-were in
part psychological, several speakers argued. An American said that if we did not feel
intimidated, we would not be, and he wondered how an alliance of such economically strong
partners could feel intimidated. In a Frenchman's view, the European partners in the alliance
tended to show fear and apprehension in too many situations. They were afraid when the U.S.
negotiated and when it did not; afraid when the U.S. deployed weapons and when it wanted to
withdraw them; afraid when the U.S. was strong, and afraid when it was weak. We needed to
show some confidence in an alliance that had served to keep the peace for 40 years, in spite of
all sorts of problems. We should avoid feeling psychologically weak.
An Italian speaker warned that the threat was more than military. It was also the Soviet
objective of taking advantage of European insecurity to exert political influence. This was the
main challenge and threat to which Europe had to respond. It implied not just defining a strategic
doctrine, but also a commitment on the part of Western European governments to undertake a
common effort to strengthen conventional forces.
A German saw encouraging signs that Europeans were beginning to face up to this
responsibility. There seemed to be a new recognition that deterrence, which had been viewed as
almost disrespectable in recent years, was essential to European security, that life would be
worse without deterrence. And Europeans were talking about closer defense and security
cooperation. We needed to move ahead quickly and with as little dissent as possible in
negotiating the zero-option agreement in order to give our governments the credibility they
needed to ask for the conventional initiatives needed in a world with fewer nuclear weapons.
70
CLOSING REMARKS
In closing the thirty-fifth Bilderberg Meeting, Lord Roll expressed his view that, in terms of
both the quality of the discussion and the physical surroundings, the conference had been
exceptional.
On behalf of the participants, Lord Roll thanked all· of those who had made the conference a
success. He noted, in particular, Giovanni Agnelli and the Italian hosts; conference organizer
Alfredo Ambrosetti and his staff; the Bilderberg Secretariat; the General Manager and staff of
the Villa d'Este; the security staff; and the interpreters. He also acknowledged the contribution
of the working paper authors, the panelists, and the session moderators.
71
