STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
BILDERBERG
CONFERENCE
1iay 29tb~31st, 1954
l
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
i
I
ll
l
1
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.
,
CHAIRMAN:
Hrs RoYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE BERNHARD, PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS.
VICE-CHAIRMEN:
CoLEMAN, JoHN S.
vAN ZEELAND, PAUL
SECRETARY-GENERAL:
RETINGER, J. H.
RAPPORTEURS:
BALL, GEORGE w.
DE LA VALLEE PoussiN, ETIENNE
BINGHAM, GEORGE BARRY
HIRSCHFELD, H. M.
GArrsKELL, THE RT. HoN. H. T. N.
RocKEFELLER, DAVID
*) DE GASPER!, ALCIDE
NrTzE, PAuL H.
**) MoLLET, GuY
ZELLERBACH, J.D.
*) Unable to attend owing to illness..
*
* *
U.S.A. European Unity
BELGIUM European Unity
U.S.A. Overseas Territories
NETHERLANDS Overseas Territories
U.K. Economic Problem.s
U.S.A. Economic Problems
ITALY Communism
U.S.A. Communism
FRANCE European Defence
Community
U.S.A. European Defence
Community
**) Unable to attend owing to an unforeseen and urgent meeting of his party regarding
the EDC ..
3
ANDRE, RoBERT
AssHETON, T:HE RT. HoN. RALPH
DE BEAUMONT' G.
BoNVOISIN, PIERRE
BooTHBY, SIR RoBERT
BRAUER, MAX
BROWN, IRVING
CAFIERO, RAFFAELE
CISLER, wALKER L.
CowLES, GARDNER
DAviES, THE RT. HoN. CLEMENT
DRAPIER, JEAN
DucHET, R.
FAURE, M.
FERGusoN, JoHN D.
FosTER, JOHN
FRANKs, THE RT. HoN. SIR OLIVER
GEYER, G. P. TH.
GuBBINS, SIR CouN
HEALEY, DENIS w.
HEINZ, H.J.
H0EGH, LEIF
HYDE, H. MoNTGOMERY
jACKSON, c. D.
jAY, NELSON DEAN
KANELLOPOULOS, p.
KoNINGSBERGER, V. J.
KRAFT, OLE BJ0RN
LEVERKUEHN, P.M. A.
MALAGODI, GIOVANNI F.
MoE, FINN
MoTz, RoGER
MuELLER, RuDOLF
McGHEE, GEoRGE C.
NEBOLSINE, GEORGE
OosTERHUIS, H.
PARKER, CoLA G.
PERKINS, GEORGE w.
PILKINGTON, SIR HARRY
4
FRANCE
U.K.
FRANCE
BELGIUM
U.K.
GERMANY
U.S.A.
ITALY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.K.
BELGIUM
FRANCE
FRANCE
U.S.A.
U.K.
U.K.
GERMANY
U.K.
U.K.
U.S.A.
NoRWAY
U.K.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
GREECE
NETHERLANDS
DENMARK
GERMANY
ITALY
NoRWAY
BELGIUM
GERMANY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
NETHERLANDS
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.K.
*) PINAY, ANTOINE
*) PIPINELIS, p.
PIRELLI, ALBERTO
*) QuARONI, P.
RosENBERG, LuDWIG
Rossi; PAoLo
DE RouGEMONT, DENIS
RYKENS, PAUL
ScHNEIDER, ERNST GEORG
ScHNITZLER, W. F.
SPANG, JosEPH P. jNR.
STEENBERGHE, M.P. L.
**) TEITGEN, P. H.
TERKELSEN, TERKEL M.
TINGSTEN, HERBERT L. G.
TROEGER, H.
VALETTA, VITTORIO
VoiSIN, ANDRE
w ALDENSTROM, M.
VAN WALSEM, H. F.
WILLEMS, jEAN
WILLIAMsoN, ToM
GRAAFF, F. A. DE
CANAL!, P.
FocKE, E. G.
LITTLEJOHN, E.
VLEKKE, B. H. M.
SECRETARIAT
VEENSTRA, w.
OvERWEG, G. E.
PoMIAN, J.
*) Unable to attend owing to illness.
FRANCE
GREECE
ITALY
ITALY
GERMANY
ITALY
SwiTZERLAND
NETHERLANDS
GERMANY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
NETHERLANDS
FRANCE
DENMARK
SwEDEN
GERMANY
ITALY
FRANCE
SWEDEN
NETHERLANDS
BELGIUM
U.K.
Secretary to H.R.H.
Prince Bernhard
Secretary to A. de Gasper£
Secretary-General of the Netherlands
Society of International Affairs
NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS
U.K.
**) Unable to attend owing to an unforeseen and urgent meeting of his party regarding
the EDC"
5
\
l
I
1
I
GENERAL REPORT,
Th~ Bilderberg Conference was prepared by a group of men of good-will
from twelve Western European countries and from the United States of
America. Its general purpose was to study the relationship between America
and Western Europe in order, by means of a free and frank exchange ofviews,
to lay the foundations for improving mutual understanding between Europeans
and Americans on problems of common concern.
The task of choosing the participants fell on this small group, who based
their choice on the following considerations: first, men of high integrity;
secondly, men internationally, or at least nationally well known; thirdly, men
who within their own field hold a position of authority and enjoy the confi-
dence of their fellow-men; fourthly, men having no obvious nationalistic
bias and being neither strongly for nor against any other country of the
Atlantic Community; fifthly, men well acquainted with the problems of the
relations between the United States and Western Europe.
Since the problems confronting the Conference were not only politica~,
but concerned the whole field of public activities, the number of politicians
invited was, with certain variations, not more than a third. As regards
the remainder, slightly under one-third were businessmen and Trade Unionists,
the others being intellectuals, professional men, and leaders of public opinion.
The Conference was convened by H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
In order to permit people to speak freely, the Conference was private, neither
the public nor the press being admitted, and the participants stayed together
at country hotels near Arnhem. The costs of the Conference were covered by
private subscriptions from Europe, principally from the Netherlands. Every
participant, whatever his position in public life - minister, leader of a party,
head of an association - attended in his personal capacity; his speeches,
declarations, etc., engaged only his personal responsibility.
Three members who had accepted invitations were prevented through
illness from attending the Conference, and the absence on this score of one
French member and of two Italians was much regretted. Certain others were
prevented from attending by important political activities in their own countries,
and this was the case so far as two of the French participants were concerned.
Unfortunately no politician was able to come from the United States because
7
of pressure of business there facing both the House of Representatives and
the Senate.
As was to be expected, the discussions were lively and on a very high level
throughout the Conference. As a result of the frankness which prevailed,
coupled with the knowledge that discretion was assured, arguments seldom
used in public were presented, and helped to clarify many points.
The oqject of the Conference being to discuss the relations between Western
Europe and the United States, it was decided to start with a general debate,
followed by a discussion of respective approaches to the main problems which
are the cause of divergencies and misunderstandings.
The five main problems were:-
1. The general attitude towards Communism and Soviet Russia.
2. Unification of Europe.
3. European Defence Community and European Defence.
4. Problems of Overseas Territories.
5. Economic problems.
During the discussions these were extended to cover the present situation
regarding East-West trade, the present events in South East Asia, and the
industrial use of nuclear energy.
To prepare the discussion, five Europeans, as well as five Americans, were
asked to present reports on the five subjects.
The intimate atmosphere of the Conference, the frequency of the meetings,
all of which were plenary, with no division into committees, created
an environment of mutual trust and friendship. Thus, when it came to
dealing with controversial suqjects, more was accomplished than had been
expected.
For a variety of reasons, and in particular in order to allow people to speak
with the utmost frankness a,nd with the certainty that their words would
reach their fellow-participants only, and nobody else, a plea for the utmost
discretion was made by the Chairman at the end of the Conference. That
is why, for instance, in the present note, while certain views and arguments
are repeated (in no case arc the actual words spoken quoted), the names of
the speakers are not given. The participants are therefore requested to exer-
cise the greatest care in the use of this document, which should be treated as
strictly confidential. On the other hand, this document is meant to serve as
a basis of enlightenment of various views which the participants to the Con-
ference agreed to disseminate and which we hope they will try to make under-
stood in their particular sphere of influence.
8
At th: end of th~ ~onference a Press Statement was released, in which were
summansed the pnnc1pal points of agreement reached on the · b"
d .d. · . vanous su ~ects
un er 1s~uss10n. In .th1s report the relevant paragraphs of that statement are
quoted, smce they giVe a balanced picture of the conclusions, but they have
been expanded through the addition of a number of v1
"ews and
r. arguments
put 10rward in the course of the meetings. '
9
!
I
I
I
I
l
I
I
I
PRESS STATEMENT
released on June 1st at Soestdijk Palace:
During the last three days a group ofseventy-five Europeans and .A~e~icans
have been meeting at the Hotel Bilderberg at Oosterbeek. The mdividuals
attending this meeting were invited by His Royal Highness Prince Bernhard
in order, by means of a free and frank exchange of views, to improve mutual
understanding between Europeans and Americans on problems of common
concern. There were present members of different political parties, represen-
tatives of business and labour and academic life. While some of the members
are in active political life, all members were present only in their. in~ividual
capacities and no member spoke for any government or orgamsatwn. It
was not the intention of the Conference to propose .governmental action, but
simply to determine the areas of agreement on these common problems, and
to reach a better understanding as to the underlying reasons for differences
in the attitudes prevailing amongst the European and American people.
The members of the Conference all came from countries sharing the same
basic democratic faith, and a firm devotion to liberty and to the rights and
dignity of individual citizens.
During the course of the three-day Conference the members discussed the
following subjects:
A. The attitude towards Communism and the Soviet Union.
B. The attitude towards dependent areas and peoples overseas.
C. The attitude towards economic policies and problems.
D. The attitude towards European integration and the European Defence
Community.
As a result of the discussion, it developed that the extent of agreement
among the members was far greater than had been foreseen, and even where
there was a divergence of attitude the reasons for differing views were fully
and frankly discussed, and are now better understood.
10
1
l)
l
1
During the co~rse of the disc~ssion the following points w~re among those
made on the subjects under consideration:
I. The attitude towards Communism and the Soviet Union
1. T?e peoples of the free nations of Western Rqrope and the United
States a:e m. :ull agreeme.nt that the combination of Communist ideology
and Sov;Iet military power IS the paramount threat to individual freedom and
free. instituti~ns. Faced with the threat of aggressive Communism, the Western
natiOns are m the same boat, although it is a boat with several decks · if the
boat sinks all will go down together. The differences which still exist b'etween
t~ese nations on the subject of how to meet this threat are almost entirely
differences of method rather than of purpose.
~· Criticism, which is an essential ingredient of a healthy democratic
society, must also be an ingredient of a healthy democratic alliance. The
democr~tic nature of the alliance of the West is both its strength and its weak-
ne.ss. Smce the .Western. nations cannot act through compulsion or regiment-
atiOn, progress IS sometimes delayed, yet the fact that the Western alliance
functions through the free consent of all members endows it with a moral
and spiritual unity. It was repeatedly emphasized that certain of the tensions
which have disturbed relations between the United States and the countries
~f Western Eur~pe have resulted from the lack of adequate consultation before
Important pubhc steps were taken. It was agreed that improved machinery
for consultation was highly desirable.
3. The basic purposes ofthe free world were described by different speakers
at the ~onf~rence as freed~m and security, freedom through security, and
peace. With hberty. The aim of the free nations is to deter aggression and
to ?e£en~ the free peo_r~e.s. _It is to protect the whole world against a war
which might destroy civilisatiOn. Its strength is designed for defence and not
for offensive purposes.
4. Goo~ relations between the free nations must rest on friendship and
understandmg between the peoples of those nations, not merely on agree-
me~ts betwee.n governm~nts. ~ublic misunderstandings could encourage
Soviet aggressiOn by creatmg a misleading impression of weakness within the
alliance.
5. The Communist t~reat presents itself in different ways in varying
countries. To most Amencans It appears as a foreigp conspiracy alien to all
11
national traditions and traitorous in nature. To many Europeans Communism,
while no less dangerous, appears as an ugly perversion of certain Left-wing
movements with long historical backgrounds. It was agreed that, in certain
nations of Europe, many people vote Communist without considering them-
selves disloyal to their country, but in protest against what they regard as
wrongs and injuries. In such countries the Communist movement is cultivated
by outside leadership, but it has roots in native soil.
6. Poverty and deprivation are contributions to Communism, but not
its sole cause. There is no precise correlation between the appeal of Commu-
nism and the existence of bad social conditions. In certain regions of Western
Europe it attracts well-paid workers and in some cases intellectuals. Never-
theless, the best way to counteract Communism is for the free countries to
demonstrate to the world that an adequate standard of living can be achieved
for all people under conditions of freedom.
7. Soviet Communism is .not a force of liberation, progress and social
justice, but a movement of reaction and retrogression. This fact must be
constantly emphasized.
8. It took Stalin to teach the free nations of the West how much they
depend upon one another. Military co-operation has been seen by all to bene-
cessary; it has been implemented through the North Atlantic Treaty. It was
agreed that similar co-operation in the economic and political fields would
greatly advance the prospects of world peace.
9. America sometimes charges its allies with slowness and undue deliber-
ation. in meeting the Communist threat. European nations sometimes feel
that the United States is unreasonably impatient. The main difference
between the European and American attitude towards the Communist threat
is a different sense of timing. Both the Europeans and Americans understand
that Communism is not like the weather, against which occasional local
precautions can be taken, but that it is an active enemy requiring positive,
energetic and steady opposition.
10. The opposition to Communism must be carried out through democratic
means. Hatred must be kept to a minimum, as hatred breeds more hatred
and becomes in itself a destructive force. Soviet Communism is a pseudo-
religious imperialism or a perverted secular religion. It must be countered
by a moral as well as a material force having superior power to command
men's minds and hearts. In this battle of course religion and spiritual values
play a most important part.
12
I
If,·.·
'
·,
i
i
;
'
'
.
j
II. Attitude towards dependent areas and peoples oversea.s
_1. The pro_blem of dependent areas was explored as a source of possible
misund~r~t.a~dmg between the United States and the European powers with
responsibilities for such areas.
2. It 'was agreed that the welfare of the dependent peoples themsel e
sho~ld be the primary point of concern. It was recalled that the Uni~~
Natwns Charter sets forth the proper role of nations holding responsibility
over less d~v~loped areas of the world. It is a role of trust, in the nature of
a sacred misswn, and has been so accepted by the nations signing· the U.N.
Charter.
3.. Certain of the member.s argued that no dependent area should beg·
full md d 'I . . IVen
epen ence unti It IS capable of maintaining its freedom, but that
every e~ort should ?e made to create the pre-conditions for secure indepen-
dence With all possible speed. A slightly different view was that the test
should not be w~ether the dependent area is potentially able to protect a
~ew-found ~o.vereignty, but _whether it has developed an adequate degree of
hteracy, pohtical understandmg and a viable economy. It was noted h .
th t th h' f h ' owever,
a e ac I?vement o t ese conditions would generally provide the best
assurance agamst a loss of independence.
4...Under-developed a_r~as are sometimes not well supplied with indigenous
admmistrators and te~hmcians capable of carrying on a democratic govern-
ment. ~orne are~s. which have recently won independence have had to accept
less efficient admmistrators and declining standards in various ways. Mention
was made of the long programmes of development by the colonial powers in
the fields of education, public health, nutrition, and economic production.
It was stated that perhaps no colonial area in the world now shows a n t
profit to the power in possession, as a result of expensive e
development. programmes of
5. On the other hand, a very strong wind of nationalism is blowing across
the world, and under these circumstances, it was argued, demands for indepen-
dence may r:ot confo~m to any degree with the extent of preparation for in-
d~p~ndence m any g1~en area. Dependent peoples, it was argued, show a
wlll.mgness to buy their freedom, even at a high price to themselves in pros-
pent_y and orderlygovernment; and they will not generally be willing to accept
readmess for self-government as the test of when self-government should begin.
6. The act o~ ~ndependence does not necessarily mark the emergence of
a competent additiOn to the society of free nations. When treaties are signed
13
and the ink is dry, it was stated, the process of creating a stable nation is
not at an end.
7. It was pointed out that dependent areas would lose all chance to gain
freedom if the free nations of the West should themselves lose their indepen-
dence.
8. There was general agreement on the objective that the dependent
peoples of the world must be assisted along the road that leads to self-govern-
ment. There was a lack of agreement only as to the tempo of this movement.
The American point of view tended to favour a more rapid tempo on the
theory that nationalist feeling, contained too long, may explode into violence
which can only benefit communism. There was a difference of view among
European spokesmen on the question of tempo, though full agreement on
acceptance of the ultimate objective of self~government.
9. It was generally agreed that military action alone cannot be effective
in such areas as Indo-China. It must be accompanied by political action as
well. It was pointed out that a military success for Western forces in Indo-
China, if not accompanied by a satisfactory political programme, might lose
hundreds of millions of people of Asia and Africa to the Western cause of
freedom.
10. The difference between America and Europe with respect to the problem
of overseas territories emerged from the discussion as minor by comparison
with the areas of agreement. The obvious objective to be sought is an agreed
policy of the West to work towards colonial self~government as rapidly and
safely as is possible. Such a solution serves the interests of the West and of the
dependent peoples. It thwarts the imperialistic interests of Communism.
III. l!:'conomic Policies and Problems
1. It was generally agreed that economic factors were no longer such a
serious cause of friction between the United States and Europe as they were
a few years ago. The chief reason for this was the improvement in the dollar
situation which on the surface was very substantial. The diminution in purely
economic aid which had accompanied it was psychologically valuable.
"' 2. In 1953 American imports and expenditure abroad exceeded exports
in total by some 2 billion dollars. This permitted an increase in the gold and
dollar reserves of the rest of the world - especially Europe. But within Europe
the increase has been very unevenly distributed. Moreover the flow of dollars
14
itself has been sustained only by abnormal American government expenditure
~ defence aid, offshore purchases, military expenditure and stockpiling - of
some 4Y2 billion dollars. Anxiety was therefore expressed lest, when this
abnormal expenditure was cut down the dollar gap would reopen. It was
recognised that rising levels of trade and investment remained essential
ingredients in that "partnership for growth" between America and Europe
which is essential.
3. Tlie Randall Commission Report is evidence ofthe'attitude ofthe present
America!l administration on trade policy; the support ofthe American business
community is evidence of new industrial thinking. All of President Eisen-
hower's trade programme will not be adopted by the American Congress this
year; nevertheless, European business men are aware that further tariff
reductions are by no means the only important method of facilitating trade.
Delays and uncertainty resulting from the intricacy of Customs regulations
are equally frustrating to the freer flow of goods.
4. The condition of the American economy has significance for every
European country, but the relatively minor reflections abroad of the decline
in American economic activity during the past several months is an encourag-
ing reminder that the European economies have grown in health and
stability. There are a number of factors operating in the United States
economy which will tend to prevent serious economic dislocations of long
duration.
5. For some years now the United States has been producing manufactured
goods at so fast a rate that it has become increasingly dependent on overseas
sources for raw materials. This process will continue, and American imports,
principally of raw materials, will rise gradually but substantially. The
consequence should be a large increase in the supply of dollars to the rest of
the world. The rise in American imports, however, will consist largely of
goods from areas outside Europe. If therefore Europe is to have a share in
the increased dollar earnings, it will have to export more to third countries
in a framework of multilateral trade. The problem of convertibility of cur-
rencies was recognised as an important problem for the free world. Reference
was also made to the need for facilitating migration as a means of relieving
poverty and overpopulation in certain areas.
6. During the last few years, differences between America and Europe
over East-West trade have been an important cause of friction. While trade
between Western Europe and the Communist bloc has in fact been regulated
in accordance with agreements reached between the governments of European
15
countries and the United States, public opinion in America has been very
much at odds with public opinion in Europe and vice versa on the subject.
7. It was recognised that this conflict sprang largely from the differences
in the emotional reactions to the Korean war in America and Europe -
differences which it was thought had recently diminished. It was hoped
that the negotiations at present taking place on the list of controlled exports
would do much to eliminate them.
It was the general opinion:
(1) That certain exports of a strategic character to the Communist
bloc would have to continue to be regulated in accordance with
agreements made between the free nations, so that there would be no
divisions among free nations.
(2) That it was undesirable for the democratic countries to become
too dependent on the Communist bloc for either supplies or markets.
(3) That su~ject to these guiding principles, there was no objection
to expanding trade with the Communist bloc where there were ad-
vantages to the free world.
(4) That this trade was unlikely to reach a high level because of un-
willingness on the Communist side to endanger their own self-suffi-
ciency.
(5) That agreement between the U.S.A. and Europe on these iines
would go far to destroy the considerable propaganda advantage enjoyed
by the Communists during the last few years from the dispute between
America and Europe over East-West trade.
IV. European Union and European Defence Community
1. European unity in some form has long been a Utopian dreaml but the
conference was agreed that it is now a necessity of our times. Only thus can
the free nations of Europe achieve a moral and material strength capable
of meeting any threat to their freedom.
2. The American members of the Conference expressed full support for
the idea of European unification. They made it entirely clear, however,
that American opinion is not doctrinaire as to the form unification should
take. This is quite clearly a European problem which Europeans will solve
in accordance with their own institutions and traditions.
16
-1
I
I
3. There was discussion of the form for an effective unity. EDC is a
form of co-operation in one field proposed by European nations and already
ratified by several of the potential members. One member proposed that
EDC and all of its members might become an integral part of NATO,
which already exists. This same proposal would contemplate the formation
within NATO of a central organ of decision, capable of action in the political
and econ&rnic as well as the military field. '
4. America's interest in European unification was presented as a result of
the great sense of urgency that infuses American opinion and is shared by
many Europeans. This desire for early and effective action does not reflect
any lack of appreciation of the many difficulties faced by the European nations
in seeking to find a successful formula. It was suggested that America's interest
in the matter would be better understood and respected by Europeans if it
were presented as to some extent an act of self-interest, involving America's
own welfare, since human nature inevitably seeks private motives for public
actions represented as purely unselfish.
5. It was stated that Europe does not wish to produce a "melting pot"
in the American sense. It was pointed out in response that federation of the
American states has not resulted in an insipid conformity of culture and
character. It was further noted that the federation of the Swiss cantons
provides a good example on a small scale, of uniting areas with differing
languages, religions and customs for a greater strength with no sacrifice of
individualism.
6. It was noted that Communist leadership has developed a fear of, and
respect for, the idea of unity in Western Europe. The Communist ideology
from Marx through Lenin and Stalin, has taught that the democratic nations
of the West must collapse through internal stresses and through quarrels
among themselves. If effective unity is achieved, this basic principle of Com-
munism will be destroyed.
7. It was observed that the present is a moment of historic European
opportunity. A momentum has developed which should not be permitted to
slacken. The result of slackening might be a recrudescence of national
rivalries which would gravely weaken the democratic forces and mioht lead
b
to Soviet domination and the destruction of freedom.
17
I. ATTITUDE TOWARDS COMMUNISM AND THE
SOVIET UNION.
THE ASSESSMENT OF THE COMMUNIST THREAT..
1. "The peoples of the free nations. of .western Europe. an.d the United Sta!es
are in full agreement that the combmat1?n .o~ Commumst tdeology .an~ S~v1et
military power is the paramount threat to md1v1dual freedom and fr.ee mst1tutwns.
The differences which still exist between these nations on the subject of how to
meet this threat are differences of method rather than of purpose.
2. "The Communist threat presents itself in different ways in varying countries..
To most Americans it appears as a foreign conspiracy a~ien to ~ll national traditions
and traitorous in nature. To many Europeans Commumsm, whtle no less dangerous,
appears as an ugly perversion of certain Left-wing movements with long historical
backgrounds. It was agreed that, in certain .nations of E~rope, many pe.ople vote
Communist without considerina themselves dtsloyal to theu country, but m protest
against what they regard as wr~ngs and in~uries. I.n such coun~ries th.e Con:munist
movement is directed by outside leadershtp, but 1t has roots m nattve sod.
3. "Poverty and deprivation are contributions to Communism, but no~ its sole
cause. There is no precise correlation between the appeal of Commumsm an.d
the existence of bad social conditions. In certain regions of Western Europe 1t
attracts well-paid workers and in some cases intellectuals. N~vertheless, one of
the best ways to counteract Communism is for the free countnes to demonstrate
to the world that an adequate standard of living can be achieved for all people
under conditions of freedom.
4. "Soviet Communism is not a force of liberation, progress and social justice,
but a movement of reaction and retrogression.. This fact must be constantly
emphasised.
5. "America sometimes charges its 'allies with slowness and undue deliberation
in meeting the Communist threat. European nations sometimes feel that the
United States is unreasonably impatient. The main difference between the European
and American attitude towards the Communist threat is a different sense of timing.
Both Europeans and Americans understand that Communism is not like ,th~
weather, against whi~h. occasi?~al local pr.ecautions can be t~~en, ,hut that 1t 1s
an active enemy requmng pos1t1ve, energet1c and steady oppos1t10n.
The participants in the Conference were in complete agreeme~t in their
assessment of the danger presented by Soviet imperialism. Summmg up the
18
discussions, one of the participants pointed out that on both sides of the At-
lantic it was agreed that the Communist ideology being totalitarian was
fundamentally opposed to the belief in liberty and individual responsibility
which characterised Western civilisation. In fact, it constituted danger
number one to Western civilisation. An enemy power or group of powers
had decided to use that ideology as an instrument of expansion. Whether
the expansion of Russia was simply the old imperialistic expansion or a
new type, made no difference to the nature of the danger. In the face
of the Communist threat, it was possible to say that the reactions were
fundamentally the same in Europe and America, i.e., the desire to build up
military, social, economic, and moral forces strong enough to make aggression
impossible, and thus to preserve peace.
As was pointed out at the beginning of the debates, however, this threat
was global, and not limited to a particular area. For the first time in its
history, the United States was insecure, and felt that the Soviet Union pre-
sented a real, massive, and immediate threat to its own civilisation. The
United States had for 150 years taken security for granted. With the simul-
taneous occurrence of two events, the emergence of Communist imperialism
and the discovery of nuclear weapons, the American people overnight found
themselves threatened for the first time by the possibility of the destruction
of their homes and of their families.
Later in the debates two speakers compared the Soviet danger with the
threat of the Arabs for whom their religion, Islam, demanded world domina-
tion. This was why some of the participants felt that the West was faced
with a new kind of problem, and that it was a mistake to judge the present
situation, as many people were inclined to do, in terms ofclassical power politics.
Although the assessment of the Communist threat was identical so far as
all members of the Conference were concerned, the importance of an agreed
view as to its urgency became apparent early in the debates. This point
was frequently repeated. As one of the speakers pointed out, the attitude
of the United States and of Europe could be illustrated by speeches which
had recently been made, one in the United States by Admiral Carney, who
had said that the United States was rapidly approaching the cross-roads,
which would probably be reached within two years, in its fight to the finish ·
with Soviet Russia, the other in London by Sir Winston Churchill, who had
again appealed for patience in dealing with the Soviet threat.
It was, however, remarked that these kinds of opinions tended to be ex-
pressed in very different ways in Europe and in America, giving the impression
of greater divergencies than really existed, which led to frequent misunder-
standings.
19
Another question in this connection, that of co-existence, was mentioned
by several speakers. One of the Americans quoted a high official of the Ad-
ministration as having recently said that we could only avoid war if we shared
the firm conviction that co-existence was impossible. Again, the American
Secretary of State had recently said that co-existence was impossible so long
as Russia continued her present aggressive policies. Views on this point were
divided in the United States, and the case of Turkey, which for the last fifty
years had peacefully co-existed by the side of her enemy of long standing,
the U.S.S.R., is often quoted.
The views on co-existence were closely related to the estimate of the short-
term danger facing the West. In the United States there was a greater sense
of urgency, while in Europe in most cases the long-term aspects took prece-
dence over the short-term. One of the Scandinavian speakers explained, given
a sufficiently long period of co-existence, the internal contradictions of the
Soviet world were bound to turn in favour of the West. Soviet Communism
was not able to tackle the new problems with which it was faced, and the
doctrine which it applied would either prove its undoing, or would have
to be radically changed. Among these problems was the fact that until
recently power in the Communist world had been rigidly centralised. Now
China was becoming a separate power centre, and this was to a minor extent
the case in other satellite countries. This problem would in time become
acute, and it was one of the chief sources of long-term hope for the West.
He therefore believed the object of the foreign policy of the West should be
the prevention of "Hell on Earth", rather than the creation of Heaven on
Earth.
This debate also showed that Europeans did not share American impatience
in the face of grave problems to which there seemed to be no immediate
acceptable peaceful solution.
Political conditions which facilitated the expansion of Communism in
Europe were mentioned on several occasions. Among these were the Leftist
and, in some cases, the extremist tt:adition, which had deep roots in certain
countries of Europe, in particular Italy and France. Thus, it was pointed
out that although the majority in France was anti-Communist it must not be
forgotten that sentimentally the Frenchman is inclined to be Left Wing, and
that the Russians exploit this tendency. The tradition whereby the watch-
word was "Pas d'ennemi agauche" ("No enemy to the Left") was very strong
and had not yet died down. The fellow-travellers and progressist elements
tried to make people believe that they were the advance guard of democracy,
and tried to create the impression that Communism was but another Left
Wing party, only more extreme. In this guise they could exploit whatever
20
incident in America might appear to Europeans as anti-liberal and anti-
democratic.
Another political element which, it was pointed out, often helped the
Communists, was the nationalistic sentiments in many European countries.
These were exploited in particular in order to sow suspicion and distrust
among aHies and stir up anti-American feeling in the 'name of a country's
independence, and were most frequently used in connection with German
integration in the European community and German rearmament.
Another factor mentioned was that of the sense of power which the Com-
munists gave to their followers. Communism, in the Greek speaker's opinion,
represented less of an economic and more of a political and psychological
problem than before the war. Communism was now inspired less by the
class teachings of Marx than by the Nietzschean power worship. He con-
sidered that many people who, during or since the war, had adopted Com-
munism, had done so because it satisfied their "superman complex".
Like Fascism and Nazism, Communism gave ordinary people the oppor-
tunity to distinguish themselves and achieve positions of prominence and
power which they could not achieve otherwise on the strength of their ca-
pacities.
The same point was emphasized by a French participant, who recalled how
members of the Communist underground organisation had emerged after the
war with the halo of "toughness" and courage which they exploited extensively
in the immediate post-war years.
He thought that one of the best remedies in this case was a strong and
vigorous democratic government, applying with energy well-defined policies.
The need for really good governments was of primary importance, and another
speaker added that there must be stable governments if we want to carry out
certain reforms. In this respect, France could follow the United Kingdom's
example. For instance, M. Pinay's government gave the French people the
impression of recovering its power of action and stability, enabling the govern-
ment to take decisions which were even accepted by the working classes
who felt that thanks to this stability the standard of living could be raised.
Finally, there was the fear of war, and, as one of the speakers pointed
out, this was of particular importance in France, whose people were instinct-
ively afraid of anything likely to start a war. The Conference was reminded,
however, that this applied equally to other countries; in Italy, for instance,
it expressed itself in the desire of people to reinsure themselves with the Com-
munist side, in order to be safe in the event of Russian occupation, which
did not seem unlikely to them in view of the many victories scored by Russia
in the Cold War. An Italian speaker, after stressing the attraction which an
21
authoritarian regime exerts in a country which itself is familiar with th"
. d · IS
expenence,. an IS prone to swing from one extreme to the other, went on
to speak of two other factors favouring the growth of Communism nam 1
th 1 d h · h · ' ey
. e an . u~ger I~ t e ~ountrysi~e and the fear of unemployment, par-
ticularly m mdustnal r:gwns, which would always persist so long as the
problem of over-populatiOn had not been solved.
Economic and social conditions were naturally put forward by man
speakers as being of primary importance in the development ofCommunis y
I . d m.
twas pomte out, however, -and this view is more fully discussed in M d
G ., . e
aspen s rep~rt - that Communist convictions or support at the polls for
the ?~mmumst Part~, and an unsatisfactory standard of living and social
conditio~s, were not mterchangeable terms, and that improvement did not
necessanly cause people to change their views.
This opinion, however, was contested, and one of the participants pointed
out that the fight against Communism was a material problem. In the case
of Italy, it presented itself in the form of over-population. Other "countries
such as the Netherlands, which were ruined after the war, but owing to thei;
recovery had established_ sound economic and social conditions, had managed
~o reduce the Commumst Party to an insignificant minority. The trouble
m It~ly had started with the suppression of emigration, and the problem
resultmg t_herefrom had led first to Fascism and later to the present
troubles With the Communist Party. This was a problem which Italy
could not solve alone, and she must get the help of other countries which
;vould ~dmit the surpl~s Italian population. This was an example of how
mternatwnal co-operatiOn could help to solve the internal Communist pro-
blems of a country.
The view that the growth of Communism was not automatically related
to economic conditions led many delegates to advocate the necessity for better
democratic education.
The efforts of the Trade Unions in Great Britain and of the International
Federation of Free Trade Unions, which sponsored a considerable educational
programme, we.r~ mentioned, but many people thought that something
could be done JOmtly by the Western European countries through official
channels. The case of the unsuccessful Italian appeal for action to NATO
was cited.
At var~ous stages of the discussion American spokesmen explained how
Commumst problems appear to Americans. Their explanation may be re-
sumed as follows:- ·
At a time when the United States people found themselves to be the most
powerful people in the world, they simultaneously witnessed the victory of
22
governments in Eastern Europe and China. The combination
new-felt insecurity and the difficulty of explaining why the most powerful
~ in the world was incapable of preventing major losses, led the American
natiOn . . . Th" .
· le to look for scapegoats Withm their own country. IS was gwen
peo~tus by the discovery of some instances of espionage. The resultant
;:Cccupa.tion with the c_onspiratorial aspects ~f Sovie.t'Communism led to a
widespread mistrust of liberal or nonconforr:ust. sentim~nts. .
The Gommunist Party has never had any sigmficance m the Umted States
as a political force. At the present time, the number of known Communist
Party members does not exceed 25,000, n~r. does t~e United Sta~es find itself
burdened with social or economic conditiOns which are hospitable to an
increase in Communist strength.
The United States possesses a labour movement which is not Marxist and
which has been effective in eliminating Communists from its own ranks.
Communism in the United States has no political or social tradition on
which to build. Because the industrial revolution in the United States occurred
much later than in European countries, American labour never experienced
the extreme hardships of European labour. Even during the early days of
industrialisation, workers always had a degree of mobility far superior to
that of European labour because of the existence of the frontier.
America having emerged recently as a principal power is new to the problems
of external danger, and is anxious to find quick solutions. With this focus
on Communist imperialism, it naturally thinks mainly in terms of military
defence. On the other hand, America definitely wants. above all to preserve
a peaceful world, and is averse to any idea of preventive war.
The United States does not think of Communists as anything other than
agents of Soviet imperialism, while Europeans distinguish between Communists
professedly interested in social progress and social change and those who are
active espionage agents.
6. "The basic purposes of the free world were described by different speakers
at the Conference as freedom and security, freedom through security, and peace
with liberty. The aim of the free nations is to deter aggression and to defend the
free peoples.. It is to protect the whole world against a war which might destroy
civilisation. Its strength is designed for defence and not for offensive purposes.
7. "The opposition to Communism must be carried out through democratic
means. Hatred must be kept to a minimum, as hatred breeds more hatred and
becomes in itself a destructive force. Soviet Communism is a pseudo-religious
imperialism or a perverted secular religion.. It must be countered by a moral as
well as a material force having superior power to command men's minds and hearts.
In this battle G>f course religion and spiritual values play a most important part.''
23
In the opening address a call was made to the people of the West to become
more conscious of their responsibility to the whole world, and not only to
those parts over which their respective influence extends. It was stated that
in the face of the Communist challenge we must prove to the world that our
answers to its problems are the right ones. If we want our ways to prevail
we must win the votes of the world. We still have a very long way to go before
we can win such contests everywhere. In many places in the world we see
free people turning away from the West and casting their eyes on the Com-
munist East. This implies that we should offer the world a conception of
international society, a civilisation and a way of life which provide a place
for everybody, including those who might oppose us to-day. If we want to
succeed in this great and noble task we must prove that individually as well
as nationally we can meet the challenge it puts to us.
A similar note was sounded by many speakers, one of whom pointed out
that all the hopes of the Western world would crumble were it to experience
a depression similar to that of 1929. It would prove a failure of democracy,
which had first of all to demonstrate that it was a constructive force and attract
support by showing itself capable of raising the standard of living of its people.
The same point was made by a Belgian participant when discussing the very
strong Communist influence on intellectual circles in France. The best way
of fighting Communism was to look beyond the conception of an outdated
conservatism and give a new significance to democracy. New solutions must
be found for the social problems. Much hope was ·attached to European
solutions, which alone seemed likely to meet the challenge confronting the
democratic system to-day. They provided the long-term formulas for social
and political stability which were so badly needed in France.
The importance of the moral and spiritual factors was raised and a number
of participants stressed the part which could be played by religion and the
churches in the fight against Communism. Religious feeling in Western
communities was strong, going to the root of the convictions held by Western
peoples, and providing a fundamental base in the struggle against Communism.
Finally, one of the speakers mentioned that Communists could not be
defeated by hatred and persecution, and that was why he was concerned
with certain aspects of the present situation. Tolerance and reason were the
proper defence. Given an atmosphere of tolerance, unless we could convince
and prove to the people that we are right and the Communists wrong, they
and not us will deserve to win.
8. "Good relations between the free nations must rest on friendship and
mutual understanding between the peoples of those nations, not merely on agree-
24
ments between governments.. Public misunderstandings could encourage Soviet
aggression by creating a misleading impression of weakness within the alliance.
9. "It took Stalin t~ ~each the free nations of the West how much they depend
upon one ~nother. Mihtary co-operation has been seen by all to be necessary; it
~as. been Imple~ent~d through the North Atlantic Treaty. It was agreed that
Similar _co-operatwn m the economic and political field~ would greatly advance
the pro-spects of world peace..
10.. '.'Criticism, _which. is an essential ingredient of a healthy democratic society,
must also be an mgredient of a healthy democratic alliance. The democratic
nature of the alliance of the West is both its strength and its weakness. Since the
':"esterri nations cannot act through compulsion or regimentation, progress is some-
times delayed, yet the fact that the Western alliance functions through the free
consent_of all members endows it with a moral and spiritual unity. It was repeatedly
emphasised that certain of the tensions which have disturbed relations between
the United States and the countries of Western Europe have resulted from the
lack of adequate consultation before important public steps were taken.. It was
agreed that improved machinery for consultation was highly desirable.."
Three points in the opening address were debated at length, viz:
Since the free countries of Europe, the United States and Canada must
act as one, they will need a certain unity of outlook and they must make
an effort to think in terms of Western partnership as a whole. That means
that we must promote a new way of thinking, transcending the Old World
mentality which often has a provincial look about it. This could help Western
people to realise their common interest. A common outlook is essential to
the Western world ifit is to maintain the unity of action which is so desperately
needed.
The point outlined above is, however, at best a long-·term process. In the
meantime, ways should be found to eliminate frictions and misunderstandings
among the partners of the Western world. Among these, here is one that
should be mentioned: the right to criticise each other. Provided this criticism
is given in the right spirit - positive and not negative - and is accepted in
the same friendly spirit.
The interdependence of the Western countries makes interest in one's
neighbours' affairs not only natural but necessary and vital.
In all Western democracies criticism is essential to good government. It
ought to play the same beneficial role in the international field, enabling the
country at which it is directed better to judge the effects of its actions on its
allies and partners. Alas! to-day such criticism is often strongly resented. It is
very difficult, however, to visualise the Western alliance working efficiently
if the right of friends to criticise each other is not accepted as something
25
natural and necessary, not contrary to good manners or offensive to national
pride.
Just as at this Conference we study the domestic developments in our
respective countries and their bearing on international relations, sheer neces-
sity will in future force people sooner or later to the critical examination of
other allied or friendly countries' domestic affairs, whenever they can have
international repercussions.
In the face of the present challenge the Western world must act as one.
·We must therefore find appropriate forms of action.
One of the best ways of doing this seems to be multilateral agreements,
such as, for instance, NATO. Without prejudice to the many excellent
existing bilateral agreements, these, although often more convenient and more
easily reached, are more vulnerable and liable to be exploited by our enemies.
Unco-ordinated action, unagreed moves, decisions affecting allies which
have been taken unilaterally, all these things carry grave dangers by provid-
ing the enemy with the immediate chance and the weapon to divide the
Western world.
Similar views were expressed several times during the debates, and the
problem of NATO attracted particular attention. Early in the course of
the discussion one of the participants pointed out that NATO represented a
successful attempt on the part of fourteen nations to work together. This
organisation still followed the principle of unanimity, and the fact that it
had achieved so much since its inception proved the degree of unity in the
West. NATO had proved a predominant factor in stabilising the situation
in Europe, and divergencies which existed at the present time sprang up in
those regions in which no such organisation existed, in particular in Asia.
Another participant pointed out that on some aspects of the Western effort,
i.e., as regards Article 2 of the Atlantic Treaty, outside certain well defined
areas of military and financial action much was apparently said but little done.
Again, no ,appropriate machinery for consultation had been set up. The
Atlantic Council, which met from time to time, was a cumbersome body,
and the exchange of speeches could hardly be called consultation. Failure
to achieve consultation had in turn created emotional reactions. Minor allies
felt that most questions were not really their concern, and developed the
unfortunate habit of looking up to the major allies or of being annoyed by
their actions if and when not properly consulted. On the other hand, the
bigger powers thought of the smaller countries as "them", and not as "us".
This need for consultation was further referred to at the end of the debate
on Communism by three other speakers, who stressed the need for more
frequent meetings between Americans and Europeans, not only between
26
!
.!-
\
officials but also between personalities from all professions and all walks of
life, which would help to produce a common point of view on the free world
of to-morrow.
Another speaker, who again was certainly not isolated in his opinion, pointed
to the need for a joint policy towards Communism and the Communist states.
At th~ beginning of the debate on Communism one qfthe United Kingdom
participants stressed that one of the chief difficulties during the past three or
four yqrs had been that massive emotional states had arisen in the United
States which had no counterpart in Great Britain or on the Continent. Real diffe-
rences ofpolicy or emphasis could in the long run be solved by hard negotiation,
but those emotional states rendered agreement more difficult and threatened to
make it impossible. The speaker referred to two particular states ofmind which
had come into being in the last three or four years, one over China and the
other over "McCarthyism". Many Americans felt strongly about Communism
in China, and passionately about Korea. Although in Britain such feelings
were understood, an opposing emotional attitude arose in response to the Ame-
rican attitude; many wondered whether America acted from passion rather
than from policy.
With regard to "McCarthyism", the speaker wondered whether the many
Americans who "hated his methods but valued what he was after" realised
how those methods (not under-estimated by the newspapers) acted on Europe··
an minds and memories. There was a difference of outlook between the two
countries. When an American gave priority to the Communist problem, he
was first of all concerned with whatever was to be done about it now. A
Briton would take it rather as a statement of fact, such as that summer came
after spring.
Difficulties between governments were therefore due, not to the intract-
ability of their views, but to the massive emotional states prevailing in the
different countries, and to the effects which in turn they produced in others.
That factor accounted for the difference between the two periods, 1947 to
June 1950, and from that date up to the present time. Those emotional
states had not existed during the first period, but in the second they bedevilled
the efforts of governments at all stages.
The emotions he had described, said the speaker, were the real cause of the
conflicts between the Western partners, of which the Far Eastern problem
was a classical illustration. The meeting should look there for the root of
the trouble.
An American speaker said that McCarthyism had not only rocked the world,
but had caused many misunderstandings between the United States and her
friends. There were two aspects of the phenomenon: chasing Communism
27
and combating Communism. On McCarthy as a chaser of Communists
American opinion was divided into three camps: those who strongly dis-
approved, those who approved of the aims of McCarthyism but who
disapproved of the methods used, and those who were in complete agreement
with it. The speaker believed that these three currents of opinion would
continue to exist as long as McCarthy was in the Senate. McCarthyism
had caused a split in religious circles, while among the general public tens
of millions of sincere Americans disagreed on the subject. McCarthyism,
moreover, had caused strife between the legislature and the executive. Com-
munism at the present time certainly made a greater impact than it had done
formerly, and McCarthyism might have fostered it to a certain extent. The
speaker believed, however, that in the long run the American political system
would peacefully and democratically absorb McCarthyism.
28
II. ATTITUDE TOWARDS DEPENDENT AREAS
AND PEOPLES OVERSEAS.
1. "The problem of dependent areas was explored as a source of possible mis-
understanding between the United States and the European powers with respons-
ibilities for such areas.
2. "It was agreed that the welfare of the dependent peoples themselves should
be the primary point of concern. It was recalled that the United Nations Charter
sets forth the proper role of nations holding responsibility over less developed areas
of the world. It is a role of trust, in the nature of a sacred mission, and has been
so accepted by the nations signing the U.N. Charter.
3. "Certain members of the Conference argued that no dependent area should
be given full independence until it is capable of maintaining its freedom, but that
every effort should be made to create the pre-conditions for secure independence
with all possible speed. A slightly different view was that the test should not be
whether the dependent area is potentially able to protect a new-found sovereignty,
but whether it has developed an adequate degree ofliteracy, political understanding
and a viable economy. It was noted, however, that the achievement of these
conditions would generally provide the best assurance against a loss ofindependence.
4. "Under-developed areas are sometimes not well supplied with indigenous
administrators and technicians capable of carrying on a democratic government.
Some areas which have recently won independence have had to accept less efficient
administrators and declining standards in various ways. Mention was made of
the long programme ofdevelopment by the colonial powers in the fields ofeducation,
public health, nutrition, and economic production. It was stated that perhaps no
colonial area in the world now shows a net profit to the power in possession, as a
result of expensive programmes of development."
The problem of development in the colonies attracted the attention of
n:J,any participants. Early in the debate one of the speakers recalled the appeal
made many years ago by Queen Wilhelmina for the education of the native
population of the Dutch East Indies, to prepare them for self-government.
This population, however, had increased in one century from 5 to 70 million,
which meant that every year 1 to 2million more children had to go to school. In
the present state of its civilisation, premature independence had laid the former
Dutch colonies open to the risk of power being seized by extremist elements,
29
and the only reason this had not happened was that no sufficiently ambitious
strong man had yet appeared to take the reins of dictatorship.
Another problem which seemed ofvital importance was the lack of admini-
strative ability, which was felt far more strongly in Africa than in Asia. One
of the speakers said that it was obvious that the system in Africa, which
consisted in giving a good education to a limited number of intellectuals, at
the same time leaving millions of individuals in ignorance, could not provide
the country with an adequate number of civil servants and could only lead
to Communism. It was therefore indispensable gradually to raise the workers'
standard of living by increasing their salaries and by developing the native
middle classes which would form a social nucleus more liable to understand
democracy.
Political progress in Africa must proceed side by side with a certain economic
progress ifwe want to attain a real democracy. Politicalpowermustbegranted
progressively; this should be given first of all to local authorities. It was
a general trend which must be followed in relations with Africa. Somebody
asked how quickly this could be done. "This", was the answer, "depends on
the development of the economic situation which could be accelerated by an
investment policy."
This economic problem caused one ofthe American speakers to point out that
he saw a fundamental difference of emphasis between the European and the
American outlook. Europeans tended to think that if the economic and social
level of colonial peoples were raised, political progress could follow more
slowly. Americans regarded social and economic progress as fundamental,
but they laid a greater stress on the speed of political development. However,
in the last years they had come across a good deal of evidence of the ill effects
of granting independence to people unable to administer themselves m the
surroundings of the twentieth century.
The speaker stressed the importance of educating those countries in the
technical sciences and crafts. There was a tendency among them to embrace
the liberal professions rather than the technical ones, and America felt very
strongly that technical education should be provided and encouraged. What
was the choice, the speaker concluded. Was it between the political indepen-
dence of a country and starvation, on the one hand, mismanagement and the
economic exploitation of its inhabitants on the other? Experience had shown
that some countries which had recently become independent were considerably
worse off than they had been before.
The economic problem was matched in importance by that of the establish-
ment of democracy, and one of the United Kingdom speakers pointed out
that colonialism as a policy was a thing of the past and that a democratic
30
approach to overseas territories had taken its place. He pointed out that
except in the case of ancient Greece, democracy was a new doctrine and the
effect of its impact, together with the impact of the new sciences, had not
yet been fully realised in the West. The effect of their impact in Asia and
Africa was bewildering.
He thought that the West should consider itself as th'e trustee of Asia and
Africa. It ought to be realised, however, that basic education was insufficient
to equip ·a people for self~government and it would be unfair to expect those
inexperienced peoples to look after themselves without some special training.
Such training of selected students from colonial territories under British ad-
ministration had been carried out in the United Kingdom.
Lectures had been given and courses had been run on local government.
It had been interesting to note that all the students had pointed out that,
although their countries had now their own legislatures, supervision was still
required to avoid any misuse of power.
1. "On the other hand, a very strong wind of nationalism is blowing across
the world, and under these circumstances, it was argued, demands for independence
~ay not. conform to any degree with th~ extent of preparation for independence
m ~ny gwen area. Dependent peoples, It was argued, show a willingness to buy
then freedom, even at a high price to themselves in prosperity and orderly govern-
ment; and they will not generally be willing to accept readiness for self~government
as the test of when self-government should begin.
2. "The act of independence does not necessarily mark the emergence of a
compet~nt ad~ition to the society of free nations. When treaties are signed and
the mk IS dry, It was stated, the process of creating a stable nation is not at an end.
. 3. "It was P?inted out that dependent areas would lose all chance to gain freedom
If the free natwns of the West should themselves lose their independence.
4. "There was genera! agreement on the objective that the dependent peoples
of the world ~ust be assisted along the road that leads to self~government. There
was a lack of agreement only as to the tempo of this movement. The American
poi~t of view .tended to favour a more rapid tempo on the theory that nationalist
feelmg, contamed too long, may explode into violence which can only benefit
Com~unism. There was a difference of view among European spokesman on the
questwn of tempo, though full agreement on acceptance of the ultimate objective
of self-government.
5. "It was generally agreed that military action alone cannot be effective in
such areas as Indo-China. It must be accompanied by political action as well.
It was emphasized that a military success for Western forces in Indo-China if not
accompanied by a satisfactory political programme, might lose hundreds of ~illions
of people of Asia and Afi:ica to the Western cause of freedom.
6. "The differences between America and Europe with respect to the problem
of overseas territories emerged from the discussion as minor by comparison with
31
the areas of agreement.. The obvio-qs objective to be sought is an agreed policy of
the West to work towards colonial self~government as rapidly and safely as possible.
Such a solution serves the interests of the West and of the dependent peoples. It
thwarts the imperialistic interests of Communism."
From the outset of the discussion it was pointed out that on the American
side there was a strong and traditional feeling that Colonial people should
be free. Emotionally, Americans still felt a little like colonials, but from a
rational point of view, as public opinion grew more sophisticated, they were
discovering that a too sudden liberation might work out badly for all concerned.
They had not, however, outgrown their feelings.
In Europe, that conflict was reversed. The pull of emotion, in which
national pride was involved, worked in the sense of keeping colonials
under European guidance. Reason, on the other hand, had shown the dangers
of keeping too tight a hold.
A speaker pointed out that America's role as mediator in Colonial
questions could be a very important one. He hoped he was not expressing
a naive view when he said that America could act as a bridge between colonial
peoples and the colonial powers of Europe. Such action would require a
great effort of intelligence and understanding on both sides. Here again,
it was a question of patience. Many Europeans felt that Americans were
too impatient on the issue of colonialism. Americans, on the other hand,
felt that Europeans were too patient. In the great nationalistic storm they
would all be swept out of Asia and Africa, with most unfortunate results.
However, it was not primarily a question of European or American interests.
The interests of the colonial peoples themselves should not be forgotten, but
these interests were closely bound up with those of the Western powers, as
was increasingly recognised in America. An American speaker quoted a
remark made by Henry Byroade, Assistant Secretary of State, who in a speech
delivered in 1953 said that the premature independence of these peoples
would not serve the interests of the United States nor the interests of the free
world as a whole. Least of all would it serve the interests of the dependent
peoples themselves.
If America was to play a useful part in working out the problems of colonial-
ism, it would have to acquire a fuller appreciation of Europe's attitude on the
subject and to understand the real benefits brought by Europe to these areas.
Europe should also learn to appreciate America's good intentions. The United
States might not always be right-headed, but they were right-hearted.
This point was taken up by a Dutch speaker, who asked why America, who
itself suffered from a conflict between emotion and reason, was better suited
to deal with the problem of colonialism. Was it not liable to make the same
32
mistakes ? He suggested it would be better that an international body like
the United Nations should be the mediator on those problems.
The American speaker replied that he did not consider America alone
to be able to act as a mediator in the colonial question, and that within the
United Nations his country would certainly play an important part owing
to its great interest in the su~ject. America could control and use its emotional
drive for that purpose.
Referring to this question, another speaker suggested that the role of the
United States should be that ofleadership, which implied heavy responsibilities.
The attitude of the United States has, however, evolved considerably, and
one of the Americans pointed out that the one reason why the United States
felt it should play a role in working out colonial problems was that America
thought they were no longer merely a question of emotions, but that they
involved the military security of the United States. Whatever the progress
in dependent countries, there was a trend towards freedom, and colonial
powers could either keep the lid on it, which was a bloody and unlasting
solution, or organise an evolutionary development ending in liberty for the
native populations and economic advantages for the ex-colonial powers. He
asked the members of the Conference how the participation of the United
States in that task was viewed in Europe- with alarm or with comfort? Look-
ing at the past, he would expect alarm, but America had evolved since Wilson-
ian self-determination, and had gone a long way since the time when every
black with a tommy-gun was looked upon as a potential George Washington.
Again, the European attitude towards the aspirations ofthe Colonial peoples
varied from country to country, and one of the speakers said that the benefits
the Colonial people had received from white governments meant nothing to
them compared with the urge to be free.
That was precisely what had happened in Indo-China. The weakness of
the Western position was not only due to military causes but to the lack of a
basic democratic outlook, and if India, Indo-China, and Burma had not
achieved their independence, the whole conflict would certainly have been
a very different one. The speaker concluded by saying that the only solution
lay in a speedy development towards self-government.
The question of timing in granting independence to colonial or dependent
territories was frequently stressed, and one of the speakers suggested that good
timing brought its own reward in co-operation, whereas bad timing might bring
resentment and confusion. In disengaging themselves from their colonies in
implementation of the United Nations Charter, the Western countries had
been caught by the Cold War. They could not take back power and respons-
ibilities which had already been handed over, and in order not to create a
33
situation favourable to Communism, had had to slow down the process of
granting complete independence. It was to the advantage of the colonial
powers to maintain their support of the colonial territories and to strive to
assist them in their evolution towards complete independence.
Another country's policy was that a nation should become independent
as quickly as possible, as far as was consistent with its power to rule itself.
The test was a more internal one: did that country have a sufficiently large
political class ? Was it economically able to stand on its feet ? The question
should be approached in that way and not from the point ofview of its position
in international politics. The result would be the same, because Communism
would only flourish in a country that was economically unsound, or that was
not fit to govern itself because it was illiterate. The recent example of British
Guiana was a case in point. On both sides, more information was wanted
about each other's point of view. It should be realised in the United States
that the object of the British Government was to bring independence to colo-
nial countries. The issue was not so much one of colonialism and anti-colo-
nialism, but of timing. A constitution was no more than a step in the path
of a country's independence. It did not in itself alter existing conditions.
Another speaker pointed out that the freedom and future of Europe was
as much at stake as that of the colonial territories. The world was divided
into two hostile camps between which a line of balance would have to be found.
He thought, therefore, that the Western countries should accept the situation
in which they found themselves and decide whether or not a country should
be surrendered to Communism, if by so doing the final security of the world
could be obtained. It was the right and duty of the Western countries to
safeguard their own future and by so doing the freedom of the colonial
territories would also be assured. It was the duty of the West to help these
territories to gain their freedom, but the truth that a defeat ofthe Western coun-
tries would bring a total loss offreedom everywhere should not be overlooked.
The subject of colonial and dependent territories led one of the participants
to refer to the general problem of relations between Western and Asian and
Middle Eastern countries. He pointed out that the real issue was whether
or not the Western countries could gain the confidence of the peoples of Asia
and Africa. It was ironical that the United States of America, which was in
the forefront of the struggle in favour of colonial territories, should itself have
worse relations at present with some of those countries than had Great Britain.
It should be realised that in many countries the United States was considered
as a major imperialistic power. He reminded the Americans of two facts:
first, "colonialism" was deemed to exist when a large power exerted its
authority in a country without consideration for the local inhabitants; and
34
secondly, that the newly independent Asian countries reacted just as the Ame-
ricans had done before World War II when, having escaped from Europe,
they tried to avoid being dragged into power politics. He felt that if the
American people understood that the Asian peoples were reacting just as they
themselves had done, they would more easily gain confidence in Asia.
Speakin,g on the same subject, a German participant'pointed to the danger
of allowing Communism to become the champion ofliberty in under-developed
areas. Communist propaganda was successful owing to the suspicion with
which the promises of the Western powers were regarded. Much would
depend on the fight in these countries against Communist infiltration. The
Federation of Free Trade Unions had tackled that question on an international
basis and had found it easier to solve in that way. A regional fund had been
created, fed by European and American Trade Unions, which included
among its activities the setting up of trade union schools in under-developed
countries. This work had succeeded at any rate in gaining more confidence
than was inspired by any action by individual countries, for Western nations
were still looked upon with a deep-seated mistrust.
C~ntinuing in this train of thought, another participant said that in his
opinion the responsibility of the Western nations towards newly liberated
countries did not cease when, after ensuring that such countries were strong
enough to withstand Communism, they were granted their independence. It
should be remembered that colonial territories were willing to pay a high
price for their liberty and would cheerfully accept a reduction in their standard
of living in return for such liberty. If the former colonial powers would not
continue to help them, an economic crisis might arise which would pave the
way for Communism. Responsibility lies equally with Europe and with the
United States.
Early in the debate one of the speakers, referring to Indo-China, recalled
that in 1950 two distinct events had occurred in connection with the Korean
problem. The first had been a decision enabling the United States to initiate
military action in Korea with the full approval of the United Nations, and the
second had been the overwhelming world opinion that aggression had taken
place in Korea. The present problem was an early instalment of a situation
comparable to that which had existed in Korea, an instalment which might
later involve an area of the world from Buddhist Burma through Ceylon and
Hindu India to the Moslem countries. He thought that it would be a mistake,
believing the problem to be a matter of urgency, to deal with only one aspect,
i.e., the military aspect. Although it might be possible to win battles in S.E.
Asia and Indo-China, the aftermath of such battles might mean the loss of
500,000,000 souls to Communism if social and political aspects of the problem
35
were ignored. Political judgment was vital to the successful conduct of
affairs in those countries and was complementary to the military aspect. The
problem was urgent in both aspects and unless they were handled together
as was done in the case of Korea, the world might be faced with a communist
State extending from the China Sea to the continent of Africa. It was for
this reason that he advocated dealing with the political aspect at the same
time as the military aspect.
36
. III. ECONOMIC POLICIES AND PROBLEMS.
1. "Itwas generally agreed that economic factors were no longer such a serious
cause offriction between the United States and Europe as they were a few years ago.
The chief reason for this was the improvement in the dollar situation which on the
surface was very substantiaL The diminution in purely economic aid which had
accompanied it was psychologically valuable.
2. "In 1953 American imports and expenditure abroad exceeded exports in
total by some 2 billion dollars. This permitted an increase in the gold and dollar
reserves of the rest of the world - especially Europe. But within Europe the in-
crease has been very unevenly distributed. Moreover, the flow of dollars itself has
been sustained only by abnormal American government expenditure - defence
aid, offshore purchases, military expenditure and stockpiling - of some 4Y2 billion
dollars.. Anxiety was therefore expressed lest, when this abnormal expenditure
was cut down, the dollar gap would reopen. It was recognised that rising levels of
trade and investment remained essential ingredients in that 'partnership for growth'
between America and Europe which is essential.
3. "The Randall Commission Report is evidence of the attitude of the present
American Administration on trade policy ; the support of the American business
community is evidence of new industrial thinking. All President Eisenhower's
trade programme will not be adopted by the American Congress this year ; never-
theless, European business men are aware that further tariff reductions are by no
means the only important method of facilitating trade. Delays and uncertainty
resulting from the intricacy of Customs regulations are equally frustrating to the
freer flow of goods.
4. "The condition of the American economy has significance for every European
country, but the relatively minor reflections abroad of the decline in American
economic activity during the past several months is an encouraging reminder
that the European economies have grown in health and stability. There are a
number offactors operating in the United States economy which will tend to prevent
serious economic dislocations of long duration.
5.. "For some years now the United States has been producing manufactured
goods at so fast a rate that it has become increasingly dependent on overseas sources
for raw materials.. This process will continue, and American imports, principally
of raw materials, will rise gradually but substantially.. The consequence should be
a large increase in the supply of dollars to the rest of the world. The rise in American
imports, however, will consist largely of goods from areas outside Europe.. If there-
fore Europe is to have a sharein the increased dollar earnings, it will have to export
37
more t? ~~ird countries _in a framework of multilateral trade. The problem of
convertrbrhty of currencres was recognised as an important problem for the free
worl~. ~eference was also made to the need for facilitating migration as a means
of rehevmg poverty and over-population in certain areas."
. Discuss.ion on t~e possible recession in the United States was obviously the
mtroductwn to this part of the debate. The optimistic views of the American
participants were generally accepted, and it was the long-term prospect rather
than the short that became the subject of debate.
The impact on Europe of the difficulties recently experienced in the States
prompted one of the participants to point out that an important difference
now was th~t whol~sale prices had not fallen and that therefore the impact
of the recesswn on Imports had been confined to reduction in volume. This
was partly d~e to the fact that the break in the boom came about two years ago.
A secon~ Important point was that obviously there must have been compen-
~ato~y buymg ~rom the rest of _the world. This seemed to him important as
It dispensed With the assumptiOn that the rest of the world was dependent
on what was happening in the United States. This time in the United States
im~orts an~ exports had declined, but all this had been compensated for by
an mcrease m non-dollar trade. Psychologically this was of some significance.
That would not have been possible without something else happening as
regar_ds ~he dollar gap. There were three reasons why gold flowed into Europe:
a maJor m~uence was an increase in American overseas spending, i.e., making
dollars available through their overseas military expenditure; secondly, the
benefit of certain dollar economies; and thirdly, the movement of capital
had been recently towards instead of away ..from Europe.
In connection with the long-term economic prospects, multilateral trade
attracted the attention of the meeting. At the beginning one ofthe participants
developed the following argument: -
For the past century the volume of production had been doubled every
twenty-five years and there was reason to believe that this would continue.
During the past ten years there had been a change in the character of U.S.
produc~ion. The rate of production had been speeded up, which had caused
the Umted States of America to be dependent on raw materials from abroad
especially minerals and petroleum. Imports would increase to a great extent:
Europe and Britain would have to depend on getting dollars from countries
outside the United States, which would mean a re-establishment of multilateral
trade. Although this had been unrealistic some years ago, he believed it was
now possible to achieve.
Another speaker, referring to the question of multilateral and bilateral
trade, recalled that it had been pointed out that it was Latin American and
38
not European countries that were likely to benefit from future increases in
purchases abroad by the United States. Personally, he did not take a pessimistic
view of these prospects. He thought that European countries had for so long
been accustomed to bilateral trade that they had forgotten the classical me-
chanism for multilateral world trade which had existed for decades before
1914, an,d which had used the clearing-house of London. London had been
perfectly adapted to perform these functions. Possibly New York was not
yet completely adapted to taking over this role, but if it could succeed in per-
fecting the necessary mechanism, the rest of the world could begin to solve
its problems. Bilateral trade protected by governments was comparatively
easy; but the liberal multilateral system of trading, based on efficient private
initiative, could be much more successful.
Another speaker was less optimistic. Multilateral trade already existed,
for instance, between Canada, the United States, and Great Britain, but the
question was not quite so simple. Europe would find the prices of what it
bought would rise, and that it would have to meet fierce competition in the
United States in seeking to earn enough to pay for its imports. It was a
question of terms of trade.
This led one ofthe participants to refer to the necessity for a common attitude
towards under-developed countries whose economy was based in most cases
on the export of raw materials. This raised many problems. If, however, it
were possible to find in the near future some way of stabilising the prices of
raw materials, instead of hoping that a future liberalisation of trade would
automatically provide stable prices, this would ensure a stable economy for
these countries, and as a result would inspire them with more confidence in
the West and greater willingness to look to the West for political guidance.
In the course of the discussion in connection with the dollar gap, the Randall
Report was often mentioned. One of the participants, in reply to statements
that had it not been for political reasons, the Randall Commission's proposals
would have gone a good deal farther, said that that was not the case. He
mentioned also that there had been undue emphasis on the foreign trade
aspects of that report, which were only one of its elements. Two men on the
Randall Commission, as well as one Englishman, had advocated a complete
convertibility of currencies. The dollar gap was due to prices and could be
referred back to the provisions of the International Monetary Fund which
had fixed exchange rates at an unrealistic level, and for which the United
States had been largely responsible. If true convertibility came about, the
dollar gap would be considerably narrowed. He added that it was not possible
to say how much politics had influenced the final report prepared by the
Randall Commission. Political considerations had to be met, the Battle Act
39
was the result of such considerations and had been widely condemned but
yet it had made possible a number of things that otherwise would not 'have
happened.
On the s~bject of imports into the United States, customs difficulties
were not entirely the fault of the government. They were often the result of
efforts ma~e by importers to obtain rates that did nbt apply to the particular
merchandise.
Commenting on points previously raised, such as the United States Battle
Ac.t and restrictive practices in tariffs and customs duties, another speaker
p_omted ?u~ th~t apar.t from their evil economic consequences they also gave
nse to fnctwn m relatwns between the United States and European countries.
As long as Europe was unable to rely on favourable conditions of trade with
the United States, relations with the United States must suffer in one way or
another. He believed that the United States Administration was anxious
t~ ~mooth the path for. ~urope in the economic field. But its position was
dlffer.e~t fr~m the positiOn of governments in European countries. The
Admmistratwn was faced with internal political difficulties which resulted
for example, in the comparatively unadventurous proposals of the Randaii
Commissionwhichhe thought some membersofthe Commission would have liked
t? see ~uch m?re far-reaching. For the same internal political reasons con-
sideratiOn ofthis report might now be postponed. It should be borne in mind
therefore, t.hat the United States Administration was handicapped in man;
ways, and It should be emphasized that it was important to find a way so to
educate public opinion in the United States that the Administration would
receive more su~po~t.for its new p~licies ofeconomic co-operation with Europe.
Problems of mdividual countnes were also mentioned in the discussion.
?ne of the Italian participants, referring to the question of over-population
m Italy, ~r:w the attention of the Conference to the following facts:-
Two mlll.wn workers were unemployed or underemployed, and there was
an annual mcrease of 180.000 in the working population. Since however
the birth-rate was falling more rapidly than the death-rate, it was ~nticipated
that the population would be stabilised round about 1970. Meanwhile
inte.rnal absorption of t~e labour force could be further developed if enough
capital were made available from abroad. Internal absorption was more
desirable ~han emigration, which represented a loss to the country of origin
of the emigrant. A worker was a machine whose value had in fact been
calc~late~ as .at least $ I0.000, which was a gift by the country of origin to
the ImmigratiOn country. Workers were now leaving Italy at the average
rate of 160.000 a year; on the basis of these figures it could be aroued that
Italy was making relatively the largest contribution of any country t~ overseas
40
investment. He emphasized these points particularly in order to 'show that
the Italian Government was not in favour of emigration purely for its own
sake. Emigration would, however, be necessary for the next five to ten years
as a complement to internal absorption of the labour force. Of the total
number of workers leaving Italy each year one-third went to other European
countries and roughly two-thirds to Canada, Australi~, and Latin America.
The It~lian immigration quota to the United States was less than 6.000 a
year. The United States had passed a special law in 1953 authorising an
extraordinary quota of 60.000 immigrants over two years, but of these 45.000
had to be refugees and 15.000 relatives. In the opinion of his Government
the authorisation by the United States of an annual quota of 50..000 to 70.000
Italian immigrants would be of immense political benefit to the West. It
would set an example to other countries. In addition, the moving of Europeans
to certain countries of the free world, for example Australia, would constitute
an improvement in the defence of the West by re-enforcing its outlying citadels.
Another participant pointed out that in his view there was already a gre~t
measure of agreement between the United States and Eu~ope on ce~tam
basic economic principles which tended towards the freemg of natwnal
economic systems. These were: -
(1) the need for an expanding economy, and
(2) the recognition that expansion should not be carried out by inflationary
measures.
The primary target was to raise the standard of livi~g ~f the masses by
increasing productivity, which could only be done by bnngmg about a freer
movement of goods, labour and money.
It was obvious that an attempt to free trade would raise many problems
in many fields. He would point out, however, that in ?ermany an occup~t~on
law had been passed modelled on the Sherman Act "':h1ch, although prov1~~ng
for a great degree of decartelisation in many fields, did not ye.t make p~ovlSlon
for the legal dissolution of cartels. A bill was at present bemg examme? .by
the Federal Parliament for freer trade. He was glad to say that the oppositiOn
was in favour of this bill and that there was more public support for it than
was oenerally thought. This was a considerable achievement since it repre-
sented the beginning of a reversal of the classical German attitude. He be-
lieved that the new economic philosophy of free enterprise would be successful
in Germany and he emphasized again that on it depended Germany's integra-
tion in Eur~pe. In 1945 Western Germany had found herse~f starting from
scratch reorganising her economy. Germany was now neanng the end of
41
j
~ "
L.',.
~i I
li
I
1\
II'
'
[
L --·
..
.
.
llll. ::r ·-·····
l \\1',
i lit
l
·~t
''j'.
I' Jt
::11r·
T..
il
this period, and there was much talk of restoring former economic principles.
He thought that the fact that the pros and cons of these fundamental principles
were being discussed was a hopeful sign, since it was necessary for Germany
to reconsider her economic concepts carefully if she was to participate in
European integration.
The Conference had its attention drawn to the problem of shipping by a
member of the Maritime Transport Committee of the OEEC, who said that
although Western Europe could make shipping services 50% cheaper than
the Americans, it had been agreed that the United States should have a share,
under the Atlantic Pact, in a pool of all vessels at the service of the military.
The Conference was no doubt aware of the implications of the 50/50 clause,
attached to American aid. Europeans had lately feared that this clause might
become permanently attached to American financing, guarantees, etc. That
was why he was particularly interested in the Randall Commission Report
and President Eisenhower's statement thereon.
However, he feared that it was doubtful (for political reasons) whether the
Randall Report could be carried into effect.
He had seen the Butler Bill on regulations concerning the percentage of
American tonnage to be used and on freight rates, and he feared it might
impede world trade. There would no longer be free shipping in the world.
He added that his opinion was shared by the other members of the Maritime
Transport Committee.
Finally, at the end of the debate, one of the participants expressed the
opinion that the discussion had been extremely encouraging, and said that
he had arrived at a point where he no longer knew whether such and such
a problem had been raised by a European or an American, the points of view
being so close. The speaker expressed his appreciation of the high quality
of the reports which had been made. No-one would have failed to notice
that there were very many points of contact between the reports from the
two sides. The study of these reports made a very satisfactory impression,
It was clear that the United States' economy was sound, and this should provide
a lesson in dynamism for the Old World. As regards the question of invest-
ments, we could not expect to attain an international equilibrium without
an increase in private and official investments in all their different forms.
The speaker was completely in agreement with the importance the Randall
Report attaches to the convertibility of currencies. Also, on the suqject of
East-West trade, the basic reactions ofAmericans and Europeans have become
considerably closer. .
As regards reducing the obstacles which hinder the circulation of goods
between America and Europe, we must be realistic, but it is certain that
42
changes in procedure could be made, and he~e again the Ameri.can and
European conceptions are much closer. AttentiOn must also be pmd to the
desire to return to multilateral trade between Europe and Amenca.
It was recognised that this dilemma sprang largely from the differences in
the emotional reactions to the Korean war in America and Europe - differ-
ences whfch it was thought had recently diminished. It was hoped that the
negotiations at present taking place on the list of controlled exports would
do much' to eliminate them.
At the beginning of the debate one of the participants said that th~ is~ue of
East-West trade was one with an emotional background, and th1s forced
different policies on governments. It seemed to him that all th.is spra~g from
the Korean war. In America people felt themselves at war with Chma, but
this was far from being the case in the United Kingdom. It was true that the
United States had had to carry a tremendous burden in that war, which
explained why there had been a ban on trade with ~hi~a. ~e al.so wished
to stress that the Battle Act had created the greatest mdignatwn; 1t was felt
that the United States was using economic power to withhold aid in order to
impose a particular foreign policy. He felt this was entirely wrong and that
trade restrictions already provided ample fuel for communist propaganda. It
was important not to confuse political and economic ide~logy. . .
Another American participant thought that economic warfare with the
East had not been handled skilfully. The West had tended to view it in the
restrictive and negative sense only; but it was possible to wage it with much
more skill and success by adopting a more positive view. His country was
gradually moving away from a restrictive attitude towards a more ~exible one.
Certain laws made this difficult, for example the Battle Act wh1ch he had
known to react in certain cases against the United States itself.
It was now being appreciated in the United States that time was beginning
to run out, if it had not already run out, for the solving of economic
problems with certain countries, such. as _Japan. In t~e case of Japan ~he
United States had the choice of contmmng to paupense her or of findmg
some device for allowing her to trade with other countries. If Japan did
not have an outlet for her trade she would be driven into the Communist
orbit. Japan was not the only case, and the United States Go~ernment -:as
giving this problem serious consideration; but it needed partners m .develop1~g
the economic growth of the free world, and the European countnes were Its
natural partners.
East-West trade could be used, in the opinion ofa United Kingdom speaker,
as a means of penetrating the Iron Curtain and of spreading Western ideas
on the other side. He said it might be considered from three aspects: -
43
(a) Its scope, or the type of trade to be carried on.. In this connection he thought
that no-one in the United Kingdom would want to deviate from a policy which
had been commonly agreed on both sides of the Atlantic.
(b) Its volume. Here he thought that trade with the East should be developed
as far as possible, without the Soviets being given the possibility, however, ofusing
it as a reprisal weapon against a given industry in a given country.
(c) The methods to be used.
On the question of the methods, he considered that the West had already
lost an opportunity. By indicating that it considered trade with the East
as "unclean", it had given encouragement to undesirable channels of trade.
For example, in his own country a body had been set up calling itself the
British Council for the Promotion of International Trade, which was commu-
nist controlled. So long as this was the only kind of channel which was
possible for East-West trade, it would be exploited by the East in order to
divide the West. To combat this he thought it was essential that the West
should have the widest possible contacts with each country so as to be able
to encourage normal channels of trade. It was for the West to take the initia-
tive here, to recognise that economic and strategic arguments were overwhelm-
ingly in favour of East-West trade, and to try to overcome hostility to such
a policy which might be due to emotional states.
On the question of the dangers inherent in East-West trade referred to by
previous speakers, another Dutch speaker thought that a word should be said
here about the gold position. The Western system of paying for purchases
abroad in gold was a system which must be operated according to certain rules.
For example, countries must be prepared both to pay gold and to accept it in
payment. He thought it was possible that should a large volume of East-
West trade develop, Russia might be willing to pay European countries in
gold but not to accept gold. The transfer of large quantities of gold from
Russia to the West, while it might suit one particular country, might not
necessarily be in the interests of the West as a w4ole.
An American participant closely concerned with the utilisation of atomic
energy in the commercial and industrial fields described the work which is
being done on these lines by him and his associates. He described atomic
energy as a source of heat infinitely more important than the energy obtained
from the use of fuels. In Europe 60% of all power came from the use of
fuels; in the United States three-quarters. But there was a limitation to the
usc of conventional fuels. The work achieved by the United States in this
field could be made available to the nations of Europe. The speaker was
listened to with the utmost interest, and although the subject does not fall
44
within the scope of the Conferem::e, the participants expressed themselves as
in favour of the ideas put forward.
It was the general opinion: -
(a) That certain exports of a strat~gic character t? the Communist bloc would
have to continue to be regulated m accordance with agreements made bet-:een
the free nations, so that there would be no disagreement among free natiOns.
(b) That it was undesirable for the dem~cratic countries to become too dependent
on the Communist bloc for either supphes or markets..
(c) That subject to these guiding principles, there was no objection to expanding
trade with the Communist bloc where there were advantages to the free world.
(d) That this trade was unlikely to reac.h a high level b.ecause of unwillingness
on the Communist side to endanger their own self-sufficiency.
(e) That agreement between the U.S.A. and Europe ?n these lines would .go
far to destroy the considerable propaganda advantage en}oyed by the Commumsts
during the last few years from the dispute between Amenca and Europe over East-
West trade.
45
I
I
I
II
II
':I
II
I
IV. EUROPEAN UNION AND EUROPEAN
DEFENCE COMMUNITY.
1. "European unity in some form has Ion b .
conference was agreed that it is no .g efen a Utopian dream, but the
fi . w a necessity o our times 0 1 h ·
ree natwns of Europe achieve a moral and .
1
·· n Y t us can the
any threat to their freedom. matena strength capable of meeting
2. "The American members of the C n£ .
of European unification. They made\ ere~cel expressed full support for the idea
opinion is not doctrinaire as to the [. 1 ent~~e y .clear' however' that American
clearly a European problem wh' h E orm um c~twn should take.. This is quite
· . . Ic uropeans will solve in d · h
own mst1tutwns and traditions. accor ance Wit their
3. "T~ere was discussion of the form for an ffi . . .
co-operatwn in one field ro osed b e ec:Ive umty. EDC IS a form of
several of the potential m~mbers J Europ~an nations and already ratified by
its members might become an int~ rare a~~e:. er propose~ that EDC and all of
same proposal would contemplate ~he f~r / NA'!'~' which already exists. This
of decision, capable ofaction in the pol't' ra ~on Wlthl? NATO of a central organ
1 Ica an economic as well as the military field.
4 "A · ' ·
. menca s mterest in European unificat'
great sense of urgency that infuses Am . ~o? was p:esented as a result of the
Th. · encan opmwn and 1s shared b E
ans. Is desire for early and effect' . d y many . urope-
ciation of the many difficulties facedlv~ a~~wn oes not re~ect ~ny lack of appre-
a successful formula. It was suggested that ~ Eur_op;a? natw~s m seeking to find
be better understood and res ected b Eu. menc~ s. mterest m the matter would
extent an act of self~interest i~volvin yA r~pe~ns If It were presented as to some
inevitably seeks private mo~ives [. g bl?'lenc~ s own welfare, since human nature
" or pu IC actwns represented as purely unselfish.
5. It was stated that Europe does not . h . .
American sense. It was pointed out . WIS to produce a 'meltmg pot' in the
States has not resulted in an ins· 'd m /cesp?nse that federation of the American
further noted that the federat' lpl fcohn oSrm~ty of culture and character. It was
100 o t e w1ss cantons pr 'd d
on a small scale, of uniting areas with differin . 1 ovi :s.a goo example
for a greater strength with no sacr·I'fic f' . d' 'gd al~guages, religions and customs
e o 1n 1v1 ua 1sm.
6. "It was noted that Communist leadershi h d 1
for, the idea of unity in Western Euro e fh a~ eve op:d ~fear of, and respect
through Lenin and Stalin, has taught pthat the dommun~st Ide~logy from Marx
must collapse through internal stresses and the e;:lOcratic natlOns of the West
If effective unity is achieved this ba . . . 1ro~gC quarre!s among themselves.
' SIC prmcip eo ommumsm will be destroyed.
46
7. "It was observed that the present is a moment of historic European opportu-
nity. A momentum has developed which should not be permitted to slacken. The
result of slackening might be a recrudescence of national rivalries which would
gravely weaken the democratic forces and might lead to Soviet domination and
the destruction of freedom."
American feelings on the matter of European unification were described at
the beginni.ng of the debate by one of the participants, who said that in his
opinion the feeling of urgency expressed by some Americans was due to the
fact that history during the last hundred years had shown that a new formula
for harmonious relations among European peoples must be found. He em-
phasized that Americans were not being dogmatic and did not want to impose
a pattern of unification on Europe, but they did want a lasting solution to the
problem which had confronted Europe for hundreds of years. Americans
could not understand the attitude of opposition to the idea of some kind of
federation.
From the standpoint of this rational analysis, or emotional feeling as some
might call it, Americans were of the opinion that the only solution was for
Europeans to work out a system to meet their own needs. This could probably
be an adaptation of a federal pattern.
On two or three points, Americans were more fully persuaded than were
Europeans. They did not fear that the creation of a federal Europe would
mean a uniform and insipid cultural pattern. They believed that progress
towards political unification was more important than towards economic
unification and, while not seeking magical solutions, they greatly hoped that
the momentum of unification would not be lost and that the progress made
in the development of federal institutions and in the habits of co-operation
should be maintained.
Another speaker pointed out that there was widespread agreement in the
United States that Western Europe should be strong enough to face any
Soviet threat, and as a result, the creation of the European Defence Commun-
ity was the corner-stone ofU.S. policy. Americans thought that it was possible
to safeguard the danger of reviving German militarism through the guarantees
provided by EDC. In 1951 the American public favoured German rearma-
ment to help in the defence of Western Europe.
It should be borne in mind by Europeans that it was only since after the
first world war that the United States had begun to interest itself seriously in
European affairs and was consequently more impatient than was Europe to
achieve results. The United States watched Russian actions bearing in mind
the events which preceded the last war, and with the realisation that if steps
had been taken early enough the war might have been prevented. Americans saw
47
~ II
iII
that firm Western action in Persia, Berlin, and Korea had produced successful
results and they therefore believed in continuing a firm policy. Finally,
he pointed out that there was a strong feeling that if Europe were unwilling
to defend herself, the United States should not assume that responsibility.
Replying, one of the participants mentioned that on this subject America
often expressed herself like a governess speaking to bad boys. The things
Americans said were true, and they were entitled to say them, but such
language should be carefully used. When used too often or too loudly, it made
America unpopular in Europe and any increase in American unpopularity
was a step backwards on the road of Western solidarity. By too frequent
references to what America intended to do or not to do if EDC failed to come
into being, governments in Europe might be stiffened, but public opinion was
infuriated, to the great satisfaction of the Communists. The speaker pointed
out that since the governments of Europe did not need convincing about
EDC, whereas any existing doubts lay with public opinion and parliaments,
such language defeated its own purpose. It also produced the erroneous
impression that any steps actually taken were the result of American pressure.
Dealing with the way in which America might present her views on European
unification to Europeans, one of the participants expressed the opinion that
it would be in the interest of the Americans to put forward their point ofview
in a different and perhaps stronger way. They must make it clear that if
they are supporters of a European Union it is because it is in their interest
just as much as it is in the interest of Europe. The more the Americans talk
about common interest and co-operation, the more rapidly any feeling of
suspicion towards them will disappear.
In addition, it must be clearly pointed out that the European Union is
probably Europe's best weapon against Communism. The United States
regards Communism as Russian imperialism but it must not be overlooked
that i.n the eyes of a great number of people in Europe Communism represents
a new gospel, that is, not just the solution to economic problems but to all
problems. This is the reaction of certain simple mentalities and of those who
tend towards simplification, as academic people often do. It follows that
one can only fight one religious idea with another. The idea of "Europe" is
exactly the idea around which Europe could rally as long as she could put it
over as the great hope for the future.
Communist opposition to European unification is responsible for a number
of difficulties, and one of the French speakers drew attention to the feeling of
insecurity in face of the Soviet threat which in France is a serious difficulty
encountered by advocates of European unity. He did not think that the basic
problem had changed, but Russian tactics had been re-adapted and the threat
48
appeared to be farther ofL Perhaps there is only one fundamental question to
discuss with Great Britain. What danger does the Soviet Union represent to-day?
What new development has taken place since 1950 when France proposed the
EDC? The French Minister for Foreign Affairs recently told the Foreign Affairs
Committee that thirty days after mobilisation, the Communist bloc (with
the exception of China) could muster 400 divisions. To re-establish equili-
brium is the essential condition for peace and for disarmament. We shall
not succeed in building peace on compromises. It is not Communism which
is gaining ground in France, it is neutralism. It has hundreds of different
forms and leads to the same results. It is against this neutralism that we
must fight.
Another participant thought that it was worth while examining why Com-
munists were so much opposed to European unification in any workable
form. It was a fact that Communist propaganda was aimed against such
European unification even more than against United States aid or NATO.
The reason was that the Communists thought that European unification would
work if given a chance; and they were also opposed to it because it was part
of their creed that the capitalist countries of the West were eventually bound
to collapse as a result of conflicts among themselves. European unity, by
preventing that collapse and strengthening the West, was thus a major menace
to Communist beliefs. It was interesting to note that in this connection the
countries of the West were adopting a progressive, imaginative, and even
revolutionary attitude to meet the challenge ofmodern times, while Communists,
on the other hand, were behaving in a rigid and reactionary way.
The Swiss participant explained the difficulties which must accompany the
unification of Europe by giving the example of his own country in which
hundreds ofyears passed before unification was finally realised. It had needed
an internecine war to achieve unification. But he emphasized the fact that
at the present moment- and Mr. Molotov is the first to realise it- the idea of
European Union is both widespread and firmly established. In Berlin Mr.
Molotov had declared his opposition to a European union and suggested a
union of thirty-two countries, including the six satellite countries of the East
and Soviet Russia. For him, ..160 million Americans would upset the balance
in Europe, while 200 million Russians would be the perfect balance for the
thirty-two countries. The idea of European union is now so strong that Mr.
Molotov can no longer oppose it openly. This is why he seems to accept it
now, probably in order to thwart it later.
The desire for European independence was mentioned by another speaker
as a feeling to which an appeal could be made. He said that European union
is necessary from a political, economic and cultural point of view, and parti-
49
cularly in order to ensure European independence. There must be no feeling
of dependence. The Americans know it because they felt it at a certain
moment of their history with regard to European supremacy. The tables
are turned to-day. A European union, supported by America, would provide
much more independence for Europe, and the Americans must understand
this point. This is a psychological question which can be solved and which
would help to strengthen the Atlantic alliance itselL
The effectiveness of various forms of union was touched upon in several
instances, and one of the speakers, who is a member of the Council of Europe
and of the Assembly of the Coal and Steel Community, said that in his opinion
the Council of Europe is ineffective because few of its recommendations are
ever followed up. For this reason, he did not believe that it would ever lead
to any positive results. As regards the Coal and Steel Pool, its few achievements
were entirely due to its supranational character, which alone enabled any
progress to be made.
He considered that European organisations must have real powers, as
consultative methods only led to very academic debates whose results were
reduced to nothing. He would be glad to see European Federation on a
military level.
European unification is closely linked to-day with the problem of German
rearmament and ofthe EDC. Speaking on this subject, one ofthe participants
reminded the Conference that the time for theorising about Germany was
past. Western Germany was a resurgent and already powerful nation, and
German youth would sooner or later be armed. To-day Germany was
Europe-minded and the time was ripe for taking it into the European
family. At a later date temptations offered by the Russians might prove
irresistible.
The concept of the EDC and of Little Europe found vigorous opponents,
one of whom pointed out that the real issue was not the proposed Treaty
as such. The real issue arose over the conception of a small group of men
under the inspired leadership of M. Monnet, who believed in the necessity
of uniting the destiny of France with that of five continental partners, among
whom Western Germany would be dominant, under a supranational political
authority. From this supranational political authority or "little federation"
the United Kingdom and the Scandinavian countries would necessarily be
excluded.
Continuing, the speaker said that he was opposed to the "little federation"
because he believed it would result in the further division of an already
truncated continent; that it would be based on an uneasy and ephemeral
balance of power between France and a partitioned Germany, and on mutual
50
suspicions rather than common interest. Finally, it would have no historical
roots and no political, economic or geographical reality.
The importance of German reunification could not be too much stressed.
Germany was at present divided as a result of military events, which took
no account of political or ethnical considerations. As Walter Lippmann had
pointed 011t, anything built on the foundation of a divided Germany would
be to some extent built on sand. The dangers were obvious. The legitimate
oqjective of Federal Germany would always be reunification. Germany
could achieve this by force, or by agreement.
At Berlin the Western ministers had proclaimed that the Bonn Government
could not bind the government of a reunited Germany. This meant that
the Germans might one day have to choose between an association with the
West and a separate agreement with the Soviet Union. At Rapallo in 1922
and at Moscow in 1939 they had chosen the latter. The temptation to do so
again might be strong, since the Russians alone could give them back Eastern
Germany. If, however, they were taken into full partnership with the West,
German reunification might well be achieved by agreement, not between
Bonn and Moscow, but between the Western and the Communist worlds.
In conclusion, he thought that there were four essential points to bear in
mind:-
I. The necessity for solidarity in the West; at present this solidarity was lacking.
2.. The need for Franco-German reconciliation, at present in danger.
3.. The need for effective co-operation between the U.S.A., the British Common-
wealth and Western Europe, not yet achieved.
4. Recognition of the fact that there was no purely European solution to any
of the problems confronting the West.
As he saw it, the only solution consisted in a confederal European
defence organisation under United Kingdom leadership, of which the EDC
would form part, which would itself become an integral part of NATO.
NATO was the only organisation capable of defending the free world with
success, or of containing the German military potential without risk.
The West was now trying to conduct a global struggle against the forces
of Communism, without a global policy. The imperative need was for some
central organ of decision, within NATO, to co-ordinate the political, strategic
and economic policies of the Western world. At a later stage, a consultative
assembly for NATO might well be set up, which would meet periodically
on both sides of the Atlantic to consider reports from the NATO Council.
What he had in mind was not a rigid supranational authority, but a central
51
confederal political authority within NATO, which would co-ordinate the
policies of the West. He invited the Conference to examine the possibilities
of this proposal.
Replying, one of the members recalled that at Bermuda President Eisen-
hower had pointed out that the objection to substituting NATO for the EDC
was that neither France nor Germany was in favour of the proposal. Both
France and Germany would make considerable sacrifices if they participated
in the EDC. Other countries were also making considerable contributions,
while in the case of the United Kingdom it might take the form of refraining
from confusing the issue by putting forward alternative solutions at this stage.
Another speaker pointed out that a recent Gallup Poll in Germany had
shown that more than 90% of the population were in favour of a united
Europe. The unification of Germany was one of the tasks within the frame-
work of a united Europe. Germany was entitled to unity and self-government,
and no German Government could accept the present division of Germany
as permanent. This feeling should not, however, be interpreted as a return
to the nationalistic thinking of Germany in the 1930's, which he considered to
be now a thing of the past.
In Western Germany all political parties - except the small number of
communists- were in favour ofuniting for defence with the West, and opposed
both neutralisation and any idea of a second "Rapallo". Progress towards
European unification would necessarily be slow, but with real enthusiasm
and determination it might be made gradually step by step.
Continuing the discussion, another participant stressed that EDC is the
only hope of a sound reconciliation with Germany and without it France's
difficulties would be infinitely greater. A previous speaker had said that he
was against American intervention in the debate on European Unity. For
his part, he believed that this intervention must not be too flamboyant, but
it was most necessary. The United States must show clearly that they want
European Unity. He then spoke of Great Britain's attitude towards EDC
and the European Federation. He considered it a very important point.
At the time when the Federalist and European Movements were created at
the instigation of Great Britain, there was very little opposition in France.
Great Britain's withdrawal marked the beginning of the French hesitation.
That was why France, who considered that the defence of a civilisation de-
pended on the European Federation and Franco-German reconciliation,
asked Great Britain most urgently to ally herself as closely as possible with
the French efforts.
Another participant wondered whether it was fully realised to what extent
there were two ways of thinking in Europe on European matters, the British
52
and the Continental. Britain, as a previous speaker had made clear, wanted
to move far more slowly than did the Continent. The Scandinavian countries
followed Great Britain in that respect, but should it decide to move faster
towards European unity, they would follow too. A great responsibility rested
on Great Britain, and she had still not accepted without reservations the fact
that she was a part of Europe. On the other hand, Denmark did not under-
stand the position of France. Once Germany had become a fully integrated
par~ner, an epoch would have come to an end. In a sense it already had,
but the time had come to take a decisive step and if that were taken, the
future of Europe would look much brighter than it did to-day.
The discussion on European unity led many participants to the subject of
a larger Atlantic Community. At the outset of the debate, one of the speakers
said that his candid opinion was that the time had not yet come when America
could think in terms of an Atlantic community. The United States could
not abandon some ofits sovereignty to a supra-Atlantic State. He felt that the
Americans had good reason for saying that Europeans should work out their
own problems, although with American help and encouragement. The United
States, while prepared to work in close co-operation, was not willing to compli-
cate matters by attempting to create something larger and more complex than
a European Union.
Wishing to make clear his concept of the Atlantic Community, another
speaker pointed out that when thinking about the Atlantic Community he
did not mean a federal union, but the establishment of those habits of co-
operation which were developing from 1947 to 1950 until disturbed by the
outbreak of the Korean war. Certain events in the last few years had shaken
the confidence of European countries in United States' support for the At-
lantic Community. For example, if it were true that European countries
had been cutting down their arms drive, the United States was cutting down
to an even greater extent. He hoped that the United States would realise
the need to restore confidence in its determination to develop NATO into a
permanent community, and so to help the United Kingdom and France in
their difficulties.
53
CONCLUSIONS.
This Conference not being a policy making body was not concerned with
governmental policies, but directed its attention to achieving a better cohesion
in international affairs between Western Europe and the United States, a
better mutual understanding and a greater mutual trust.
The Conference was launched with a full awareness of the differences in
the psychological approach towards many present-day problems of; on the
one hand, the Americans and on the other, of the peoples of Western Europe.
This difference is greatest in problems which, for the Americans, have a
sentimental background not shared by Europeans. The American past being
completely different from the European, their reactions to certain international
problems are conditioned by this difference in outlook. The first Europeans
who settled in North America were often rebels who left Europe, generally
dissatisfied with the religious, political, social or economic conditions that
prevailed in the countries of their origin. They set up a new state, whose
freedom they jealously guarded, and did not want to be involved again in
all those problems on which they turned their backs when they came to
the United States.
This psychological approach to international problems is also at present
dominant in so far as the way of living is concerned. There is no doubt
that because of the origins of American civilisation, the American ''way of
life", with all that it has given - opulence, prosperity, and happiness - is
less susceptible to what is called in Europe the Leftist tendencies. Although
Americans have adopted some constructive socialist ideas, such as the public
ownership of certain public utility projects, certain techniques of industrial
management, and administrative planning, the general public in the U.S.
(not the experts) sometimes confuse Socialism with Communism. Because
of their social and economic sentiments, Americans react strongly against
"Leftist" trends, and their reaction to Western European Socialism, especially
among the non-political masses, is fairly often cricital.
But once this fundamental point was made, it was generally agreed that
both for the sake of defence and even more so for a constructive future, mutual
understanding must, and indeed, can be achieved.
The Conference found that many divergencies on economic questions could
54
also be removed without too much difficulty, both by considered agreement
and by greater mutual understanding.
Too often, however, governments and parliaments were taking decisions in
the economic field without giving due consideration to their effect on other
nations. Long term foreign policy should always be taken into account even
if the ec<;momic measures were primarily concerned with domestic conditions.
The Conference condemned all unilateral actions or unilateral decisions
without prior consultation with other nations which could be affected by
such decisions. It believed that the most suitable form of agreement is the
multilateral, although bilateral agreements are sometimes unavoidable.
Therefore, the general opinion was that whenever problems affecting the
whole of the Western communities were involved, a thorough consultation
with every country concerned is absolutely necessary. Many participants in
the Conference considered that the existing machinery for consultation should
be developed further, and that in particular the provisions of Art. 2 of the
NATO Treaty giving the basis for such machinery ought to be amplified.
All countries bound by the NATO Treaty should now contribute towards
the further development of personal and friendly international relations by
strengthening their free institutions, by bringing about a better understanding
of the principles on which these institutions are founded, and by promoting
conditions of stability and well-being. NATO is an example in the military
field of excellent co-operation, consultation and mutual trust - let us use it in
the vast civilian sector to the same advantage. In many cases new machinery
should be created (perhaps on the lines ofthe Bilderberg Conference). Various
participants spoke in support of this idea.
Many speakers suggested that fuller information (but not press propaganda)
should be made available to the general public about the problems discussed
by the Conference. This is an important suggestion, which could be dealt
with again on the lines outlined above.
Insufficient attention has so far been paid to long-term planning, and to
evolving an international order which would look beyond the present-day
crisis. When the time is ripe our present concepts of world affairs should be
extended to the whole world.
It was agreed that every country in the present interrelated world had an
interest in the domestic problems of every other country, in so far as they
affected international relations. No government, however, should interfere
in the domestic politics of another country involving purely internal matters,
such as, for example, elections, and in particular should refrain from bringing
pressure to bear on another country when an issue which local public opinion
would regard as purely internal is at stake.
55
Divergencies of views and methods are the very essence of the Western
concept of life, and are therefore certainly not extraordinary in themselve~.
Such differences will always exist even between close neighbours linked by a
single concept, as for instance, between Belgium and the Netherlands. A great
variety of historical and other factors is involved in each case in which diver-
gencies occur, thereby prohibiting a uniform system of counteraction; but
some forms of tactics and strategy can always be agreed upon.
There were, for instance, those at the Conference who considered that
although the fight against Communism and Communists should be conducted
according to local needs and the always different local situation, it should
nevertheless be based on international co-operation. General plans and general
strategy have to be made to meet the world-wide Communist threat. An
approach dictated purely by military considerations, which would not take
account of the psychological, social, and intellectual factors, is insufficient. It
might bring local victories but it is likely to risk alienating or making enemies
of whole countries or even continents.
The effort made to increase as much as possible the general and technical
education of the backward countries, especially in the Asiatic East, should be
commended, and more stress laid on educating in the West people from the
under-developed countries, especially in view of the fact that thousands of
them receive a very thorough training and indoctrination in Russia to-day.
With regard to religion, the general feeling of the Bilderberg Conference
was that insufficient attention had been paid in the West to the fact that
religion is a real and proper bulwark against Eastern materialism and to the
unethical aspects of some of the communist doctrines. A short and long term
policy should be directed to the building up of the proper moral background
both for the individual and for the state. Successful action in this respect
will provide a protection against Communism in the future.
*
* *
Finally, in view of the desire expressed by the majority of the participants
in Bilderberg, and on the invitation of the American members, it was decided
that a similar conference should be convened in the U.S.A., time and place
to be decided l!pon later.
56
