BILDERBERG GROUP
BUXTON
CONFERENCE
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY:
]. H. RETINGER
UNITED STATES HONORARY SECRETARY:
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON
*
ABs, HERMANN J.
ACHESON, DEAN
AGNELLI, GrovANNr
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARBOUR, WALWORTH
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRED
BEDDINGTON-BEHRENs, SIR EDWARD
BEITZ, BERTHOLD
BERG, FRITZ
BrRGr, MuHARREM Nuru
BLAISSE, P. A.
BODEN, HANS c.
BOHEMAN, ERIK
BRAUER, MAx
BURGESS, RANDOLPH w.
CAMu, Lours
CARLI, Gumo
CAsE, CLIFFORD P.
CAVENDISH-BENTINCK, VICTOR
CocHRANE, SrR RALPH
DETHLEFFSEN, ERICH
ERLER, Frurz
* *
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
ITALY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
uNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
GERMANY
TURKEY
NETHERLANDS
GERMANY
SWEDEN
GERMANY
uNITED STATES
BELGIUM
ITALY
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
GERMANY
3
FERGUSON, JOHN H.
GAITSKELL, H. T. N.
GoRDON, WALTER L.
GRIMOND, JOSEPH
GuBBINS, SIR CoLIN
HALLSTEIN, WALTHER
HARSCH, JOSEPH c.
HAUGE, GABRIEL
HEALEY, DENIS
HEILPERIN' MICHAEL A.
HEINZ, H. J ., II
H0EGH, LEIF
JACKSON, c. D.
KILMUIR, VIscouNT
VAN KLEFFENS, E. N.
KNOLLYS, VISCOUNT
KRAFT, OLE BJ0RN
KRISTENSEN, THORKIL
MALAGODI, GIOVANNI F.
McCLoY, JOHN J.
McGHEE, GEoRGE C.
MosELY, PHILIP E.
MoTz, RoGER
MuELLER, RuDOLF
NEAL, ALFRED c.
NEBOLSINE, GEORGE
NITZE, PAUL H.
ORMSBY-GORE, DAVID
OTTEN, P. F. s.
PINAY, ANTOINE
PIPINELIS, P. N.
PIRELLI, ALBERTO
QuARONI, PIETRO
RoBERTS, SrR ALFRED
RocKEFELLER, DAVID
Ross, MICHAEL
RuEFF, JACQUES
4
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
CANADA
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM
EuROPEAN EcoNOMIC
COMMUNITY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATE:S
UNITED STATES
NoRWAY
uNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
EuROPEAN CoAL AND STEEL
CoMMUNITY
UNITED KINGDOM
DENMARK
DENMARK
ITALY
uNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
BELGIUM
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
NETHERLANDS
FRANCE
GREECE
ITALY
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
EuROPEAN EcoNOMIC
COMMUNITY
RYKENS, PAUL
ScHMID, CARLO
ScHUYLER, C. V. R.
STEEL,]. L. s.
STONE, THOMAS
TERKELSEN, TERKEL M.
TIARKS, HENRY
TuoMIOJA, SAKARI
VERMEER, EVERT A.
WALLENBERG, MARC
WoLFF voN AMERONGEN, OTTO
vAN ZEELAND, PAUL
ZELLERBACH, J. D.
IN ATTENDANCE:
GoRDON, SIR ARCHIBALD
DE GRAAFF, F. A.
HARDER, HANS
LEGERE, LT. CoL. L. J.
POMIAN,jOHN
NETHERLANDS
GERMAL~Y
S.H.A.P.E.
UNITED KINGDOM
CANADA
DENMARK
UN~TED KINGDOM
U.N. EcoNOMIC CoMMISSION
FOR EuROPE
NETHERLANDS
SwEDEN
GERMANY
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
NETHERLANDS
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
5
I
I
I
t
INTRODUCTION
The Buxton Conference was the seventh ofits kind, the previous ones having
been held in various European countries and in the United States.
It is not the purpose ofthese conferences to attempt to make policy or to recom-
mend action by governments. Their sole object is, by bringing together men of
outstanding qualities and influence, in circumstances where discussions can be
frank and where arguments not always used in public debate can be put forward,
to reach a better understanding of prevailing differences between the Western
countries and to study those fields in which argument may be sought.
The discussions are so organized as to permit a broad and frank exchange of
views to take place. They are held in conditions ofstrict privacy and neither the
press nor observers are admitted. No resolutions are passed and no statements
have to be approved by the participants, who are free to draw their own con-
clusions.
Those invited to attend the Bilderberg Conferences are chosen from different
nations and from all fields of public activity and include statesmen, diplomatists,
business and professional men, intellectuals, and leaders of public opinion. All
participants attend the meetings in a purely personal capacity and the views they
express do not necessarily represent those of the organizations or Parties to
which they belong. The various topics on the agenda are introduced by rap-
porteurs who have prepared papers on these subjects. These documents are as
flu as possible circulated in advance ofthe meetings.
In the following text the views expressed during the debates are briefly sum-
marized under headings which correspond to the different points ofthe agenda.
7
I. SURVEY OF EVENTS SINCE THE LAST
BILDERBERG CONFERENCE IN FIUGGI
The Seventh Bilderberg Conference, presided over by H.R.H. the Prince of
the Netherlands, opened with a survey of developments since the previous con-
ference held nearly a year ago in Italy. The discussions ranged over events of
major significance to the Western Alliance and were introduced in turn by a
European and an American speaker, each giving an assessment of the world
scene as it was seen on his side ofthe Atlantic.
At the Chairman's request, the discussion concentrated on those issues which
did not arise for debate under later items in the Conference Agenda.
There were few reasons for satisfaction. In the previous twelve months Russia
had demonstrated her technical progress in the field ofmissiles by being the first
to launch an earth satellite, the United States had experienced a recession, which
had hit the primary producer countries hard although it now seemed to be end-·
ing. In Europe, France went through internal upheavals, and although she looks
like solving the problem ofher overseas territories, the future ofAlgeria remains
as uncertain as ever. The solution of the Cyprus question is no nearer. The
negotiations and manceuvring over a summit conference did not bring any
result one way or another, and in the Middle East the West had experienced set-
backs. Now the West was likely to suffer further reverses in the Far East.
There were, however, some areas of progress, as in the field of European
economic co-operation, where the Common Market had been set up and the
Free Trade Area negotiations were more likely to succeed.
Discussion concentrated on the two most topical problems: the Far East and
the Middle East, both ofwhich had an immediate impact on relations between
Europe and America.
A European participant remarked on the different historical circumstances
which conditioned the attitudes of Europeans and Americans towards China.
Whereas for Europeans, China was the most remote country in the world, for
Americans it was a neighbour across the ocean. Europeans looked upon Far
Eastern problems in practical terms of political or economic interest, with little
or no bias ofsentiment or tradition. America's thinking on China was tinted with
strong moral feeling. Unlike Europe or Africa, China carried for Americans few
unpleasant connotations and attracted, therefore, much of their sympathy and
9
attention. This had been expressed in the very powerful missionary effort through
which large parts of America were made aware of Chinese problems. Many
Americans regarded the Chinese as their spiritual children. During the Civil War
the bad Chinese had defeated the good ones, who retreated to Formosa. It was
now hard to leave these friends in the lurch. Another powerful factor was the
Korean War, which, in terms of casualties, was the second largest America had
ever experienced, and left a residue ofhostility towards the Peking Government.
Again, Formosa was the base from which the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbour
and it therefore had to remain in friendly hands. For all these reasons a strong
emotional streak was injected into American thinking on the subject. One ofthe
American speakers remarked that all nations develop on some point or another
an emotional attitude, a "sticking point" on which they find it difficult to yield;
China had become such a point for the American opinion.
All this influenced America's attitude concerning the admission ofChina to the
United Nations. Most American participants felt that China should not be ad-
mitted because it had failed to prove its willingness to abide by the United
Nations Charter. On the other hand, while some Europeans shared their view,
the majority did not attach much importance to this argument, considering that
the United Nations already included governments with equally bad records.
Most of the European participants were prepared to consider the case on its
political merits. Among the arguments put forward was the position of China as
a major power, and also the necessity of creating conditions in which peaceful
changes and adjustments could take place. Some European speakers considered
that the crisis over Quemoy and Matsu was typical ofmany situations in which
Chinese membership ofthe United Nations could prove helpful. Above all, how-
ever, there was the problem of China's relations with Russia. It should be our
principal aim to break this alliance and China's entry into the United Nations
might ease our task in this respect.
The exact relationship between these two powers was an enigma. It was noted,
however, that differences existed between their respective attitudes, as was shown
at the time ofthe Hungarian Revolution and, later on, over the second break with
Tito. We should not, however, put too much hope in major divergencies arising
between Russia and China in the near future. For a long time these two countries
would stand together.
Quemoy and Matsu naturally occupied a prominent place in the discussion.
It was generally felt that the question ofthe off-shore islands was creating serious
differences between Europe and America and that therefore it was particularly
appropriate that it should be fully examined at the Bilderberg Conference. Euro-
pean speakers pointed out that it appeared as if the United States was trying to
apply a right principle, that of opposing the use of force, to a wrong case. The
IO
d as art ofthe mainland, and that
rnaJ"ority felt that the islands shou~d be;reahte. _Psode in the Chinese Civil War.
. h ·0 reality a 1urt er ep1 .
the conflict over t em was 1 . . h e of force and aggressiOn across
h . ument agamst t e us h
For this reason, t e arg . . . M . . the islands were important tot e
frontiers did not sound co~vm~mgh. dorf:ovceero,f Formosa but as a forward base
. b stwn lOr t e e en ' b h
Nationalists, not ~s a a . I d Though such an invasion was today ot
for possible inva~wn of the mam an .f th participants pbinted out, it served to
unpractiCal and Improbable, ~s on~o. C~ k regime needed to maintain its hold
support a mythwhich ~he ~h~ang. ~1- o ee and also in Canada, was therefore
on its supporters. Public opi.mon mf. hur .Pl ' d and this attitude was further
. . t defence o t e IS an s, . "d d
unwilling to suppor a h "th the Nationalist regime. A rap! an
strengthened by a lack of symp:e yc:~ference evidently reflected this public
incomplete poll t~ken dunng . nalist re ime was generally considered ~s ~f
opinion. The surviVal of the NaEtiO gthought it could be of serious sigm-
d ly few uropeans .
little importance,.an on . .n South East Asia. Accordingly, the transfor~a-
ficance for the Chmese colomes 1 . d dent state of Formosa, followmg
· 1· · e into an m epen ·
tion of the Natwna 1St regim . 1 b" "t was suggested. In expressmg
f. 1 nsultatwn or p e !SCI e, . .
some kind o popu ar co d F the European participants distm-
M n, emoy an ormosa d"
their views on atsu, '><-u ' ff. h . lands and no European IS-
h 1 t and the o -s ore IS ' .
guished clearly between t e as db A r·I·cans that whatever the fate of
r: h ·ew expresse Y me ·
sent was heard lrom t e VI b 11 d to fall to the Commumsts.
. 1 d F osa should not e a owe . h
the off~shore IS an s, orm . 1" as that we were faced Wit
fl nt Amencan po 1cy w
The main argument or prese . 1 r fthe Soviet Bloc to provoke the West
another manifestation ofthe genera p~ Icy o . t" and will to resist. A line
. f. h 1 b to test Its determma wn .
at distant pomts o t ego. e, "d . .. th t the West was in a weak posi-
h nd cons1 enng a ·
should be drawn somew. ere, a ld r . t nee in Berlin-it was better to
1 d the wor -lOI ms a
tion in many p aces aroun 0 fthe American speakers said, however, that
take a firm stand from the start. ne oh d . backs of taking a stand in Quemoy
United States opinion was aware offit e raw the best way ofsecuring a respite
. b r ed that rmness was . .
and Matsu, butlt was e Iev . "t lffr·om this unpleasant SituatiOn.
. h u sA to extncate 1se .
which would permit t e . . . . . generally appreciated on all Sides.
The difficulty of the present posi.ti~n;as t d at the policy which had led the
The arguments, therefore, were mam y n~cted t that the United States had
bl "t"o It was pom e ou . .
West into an untena e posi 1 n. . .d f which followed the prevwus
. d . .the peno o peace .
lost a good opportumty urmg . bl sment ofthe situation and avmd
e to a reasona e asses .
attack on Quemoy, to com . F th" cason as one of the Amencan par-
getting into the present difficulties. f ohr. dis rb te it would help to rally public
· d t t the end o t IS e a ' · ·
ticipants pomte ou a . . d . t d that the United States m 1ts
. . E ope IfIt was un ers oo . .
opinion, m any case m ur ' . . . the status quo but at extncatmg
present predicament aimed, n~: at mamtammg '
itself from an unfortunate positiOn.
II
During the last eleven months, the West had experienced severe set-backs in
the Middle East. Some of the speakers felt, however, that Western action had
succeeded in averting still greater dangers, and that by stepping in in time we had
prevented a revolution spreading throughout the area. Whether we succeeded or
not was open to question, for the presence ofAmerican and British troops in the
Lebanon andJordan was only a temporary measure, and their withdrawal might
well restart the chain ofevents which was interrupted by their landings. As it was,
the situation was not wholly bad. The Baghdad Pact, though it could no longer
hope to become a rallying point for the Middle East as a whole, remained as a
shield in the north. Although with the fall ofthe Nuri Said regime in Iraq, Cairo
remained the sole pole ofattraction for the Arabs, some participants thought that
in time the emergence of other nationalist regimes, such as that in Baghdad,
might prove to be beneficial. Arab nationalism was dangerous in so far as it fell
under Soviet influence or Nasser's domination, but because it stood for inde-
pendence and produced apparently popular regimes, it might yet be valuable and
useful. Its three characteristics, one of the speakers observed, were jacobinism,
xenophobia, and anti-Israelism. Apart from these nebulous and mainly negative
attitudes it had yet to define itselfand find its expression in a more positive pro-
gramme. Nationalism could well yield positive results, as was the case in Turkey
under Ataturk. It was objectionable, however, when it reached beyond its own
borders hurting the interests ofothers. In such cases we had the right to protect
ourselves, and should be firm about it.
As it was, some participants felt that, in a sense, we had acted in the Middle
East to stop the Arab revolution. It was a natural process that had to run its cycle,
and our best policy was to try instead to come to terms with it. Otherwise who-
ever in the Arab world carries it through, and emerges as its leader, will do so as
our enemy. This was, moreover, an inevitable process which will continue, iffor
no other reason than, to get rid ofWestern influence in the area. That and its anti-
Israeli character were the two negative sources of its strength. It need not be
necessarily true, however, that a victorious Arab nationalism would be a greater
danger to Israel. So far, unstable governments, for reasons of demagogy, vied
with each other in asserting their hostility to the Jewish state. The temptation to
do that would be lessened for a unified Arab state or for popular governments.
In the Middle East we were witnessing not only a nationalist revolution, but
also a social revolution. The Arabs were moving from a medieval world into a
modern one, and this rapid change was not, and indeed could not be, accom-
plished by way ofpeaceful political evolution. They were following a revolution-
ary path led by small elites recruited from the newly emerging classes. As always
in history, the armed forces led by the younger officers were playing a prominent
part, and their outlook was in line with the Cartesian formula ofthe dismantling
I2
ofthe past and attempting a logical reconstitution ofthe present. What happened
in the Middle East indicated a social transformation, a transition towards in-
dustrial society and national emancipation, but it should not be confused with
Communism. It was accompanied by coercion and violence, but often no other
way was possible.
Internal violence was promoted and supported, however, by indirect external
aggression; .the use of pressure, threats, infiltration, and subversion. This could
hardly be tolerated in view ofour commitments and interests, and we had to act
to prevent force from succeeding. There was a difference between one successful
coup d'etat and an epidemic ofrevolutions and violence sponsored from the out-
side.
If the use offorce was to become a common occurrence, the transition would
prove a hazardous process which could lead to unpredictable results. It promoted
an imperialistic state ofmind which could occur in small nations as well as large,
leading to equally dangerous and unwelcome results. These circumstances, some
participants felt, considerably detracted from whatever sympathy one might feel
with the cause ofArab emancipation.
This concept ofresisting external, indirect aggression should not be carried too
far, however, for it might involve us in resisting national evolution. In spite ofthe
United Nations' resolution, some speakers felt that the West stood on weak
ground in defending present frontiers, as the frontiers of the Middle East were
imposed by the West and had little significance for the Arabs. Externally spon-
sored indirect aggression only succeeded when the internal ground for it was
favourable. Again it was in the Western liberal tradition to support forces oppos-
ing unpopular regimes. Bad as our dilemma was, it was further aggravated by
Communist action and influence. They had the techniques, the means, and above
all the determination to exploit such situations, whereas the West was practically
unprepared to deal with them. This was a problem to which attention was drawn
on several occasions. It was a particularly urgent problem, as similar situations
were likely to arise in other parts ofthe world, and maybe even in South America.
At present, as a European speaker emphasized, the Middle East with its uneven
mixture of bad and hopeful points, confronted the West with a problem which
was largely one oftactics. As was often pointed out, we found ourselves associated
with regimes on their way out. To try, however, to identify, let alone support,
the right forces of the future was a dangerous game and the likelihood of error
was great. There was no simple and magical formula. A realistic approach was
recommended. Too often we seemed to fall in for generalization and slogans.
Nasser, for instance, was sometimes made to appear as an ogre, sometimes as a
martyr. Again, the principles underlying our policy should be adapted to the
facts ofthe situation and the mentality ofthe people concerned. Ifwe need to be
I3
firm, if in extremis we have to intervene, let us at least do it openly. The more
explicit the threat the less the chance ofneeding to carry it out.
Economic means could be used. Whoever came to power in the Middle East,
as one ofthe American participants said, would have to bearin mind his country's
need for oil revenues, and he did not doubt the ability of the oil companies to
strike a bargain. Besides, the West could do more than anybody to promote the
economic development of this region, and the most promising course was to en-
courage the Arabs to pursue the same lines ofeconomic co-operation as were de-
veloping in Western Europe. Our search for new institutional formulae was of
great significance to the new nations trying to find their proper place in the world.
Larger economic entities could weld irresistible political aspirations with the
necessities ofmodern civilization based on the free market economy. The move-
ment towards economic unification in Europe was an attempt to reconcile
national sovereignty with economic necessity and social progress. It embodied
three principles-the large market, the price mechanism corrected and controlled
to eliminate excesses, and common institutions evolved to meet administrative
needs. The new nations might well benefit from our example and try to follow
this path.
II. THE FUTURE OF N.A.T.O. DEFENCE
In the course ofa special sitting devoted to this su~ject, one ofthe participants
outlined the strategy ofN.A.T.O. and some of the problems it had to face.
The task of the military planners, that of defining a minimum strategy to
achieve maximum security, largely turned on an assessment ofstrategy over the
next five years; so did the programming ofmilitary procurements. In view ofthe
rapid technological advance in weapons, what was appropriate five years ago
was unlikely to be suitable five years hence. However, the military planners were
satisfied that their policy was as sound today as it proved to be in the past.
N.A.T.O. strategy was based on the dual concept ofthe shield and the sword. The
task ofthe shield is to hold an initial attack, and it must be ofsufficient strength to
meet and hold an aggressor, so that the onus of deciding to extend the conflict
would rest with the enemy. This situation was naturally a delicate one to plan for,
and, for instance, it was considered doubtful whether an attack could remain
limited ifthe Soviet forces were directly involved. The shield force had thus three
functions:
I. To complete the deterrent.
2. To give military and political flexibility to our reactions.
3· To defend the European members ofN.A.T.O. if attacked.
Its strength had to be planned in accordance with the estimated power of the
enemy's limited or general attack. It was believed that the integration of our
forces and the maximum use ofscience and technology would compensate for our
manpower inferiority and would enable us to hold the balance. However, our
actual strength was constantly below requirements. In spite ofthe steady reduc-
tion in the manpower demands of S.H.A.P.E. the gap persisted. It was particu-
larly severe as regards ground forces, but much less so as regards the air force.
Moreover, a rapid increase in the use of missiles would necessitate an increased
financial effort, ofthe order of15 per cent on procurements, on the part ofgovern-
ments. Money and men continued to be the main headache of N.A.T.O.
planners.
The inadequacy ofthe available resources and the resulting problems attracted
much attention during the ensuing discussion. As one of the British participants
remarked, politicians found it sometimes difficult to explain the apparent con-
tradiction that whereas the resources put at the disposal of the military leaders
were chronically short oftheir demands, the political oqjective ofpreventing war
has been fully achieved in the past. Our reliance on the deterrent proved suffici-
ent and there might be, therefore, some hope ofreducing the shield, particularly
if, for instance, some agreement on the controlled reduction offorces in Europe
were to prove possible. The answer was that whereas N.A.T.O. was considering
the possibility ofworking out some scheme ofinspection and limitation ofarma-
ments in Europe, and there was no objection in theory to such proposals, we must
be certain that the balance ofsecurity will not be impaired as a result. As it was,
N.A.T .0. had to plan not only for present conditions, but also for any foreseeable
contingency. Since the Soviet atomic capability was growing, and the gap be-
tween the battle worthiness of Soviet and Western divisions was rapidly closing
as a result of Russia's modernization effort, the danger of Moscow risking a
limited engagement was increasing. Whereas we had about ten divisions near a
border over four hundred miles long, the Soviet were able to concentrate rapidly
about twenty divisions at a single point, and it was difficult to estimate precisely
how many we needed to make the shield force effective. There was no significant
reduction in the Soviet military strength, and some concern was felt lest the
efficacy ofour present strength would not diminish as a result ofthe progress they
might accomplish within the next three to four years.
It might be that some relief to the increasing burden of defence could be ob-
tained by lowering the production costs through the standardization ofweapons
and specialization ofproduction, but the progress achieved so far was considered
disappointingly small. There was little hope of progress as regards the simpler
equipment which any industrial country could produce, but some positive
results could be expected with new weapons.
Again, there was considerable internal pressure in the member countries for
the reduction ofthe period ofconscription. While it was difficult to generalize on
this point, as it was primarily a question oftraining and ofthe efficiency achieved
in different countries by units comprised ofnational service men, the position had,
therefore, to be examined case by case. The snowballing effect on others of the
reductions in any one country was the greatest danger. Regular armies, if these
could be provided in sufficient strength, would help in this respect.
Some concern was expressed at the reliance of the shield force on atomic
weapons as it blurred the line dividing it from the retaliatory force. This was said
to be largely unavoidable as certain installations, for instance, airfields, served a
dual purpose in defence and deterrence, and also because we had to take into
account the possibility that the Soviet armies might use atomic weapons. This
was one aspect of the more general and complicated problem of 'how does a
modern war start?' How can correct decisions be arrived at and orders given and
executed in the conditions of present atomic and missile warfare? The military
leaders hoped for a period ofwarning, which would be provided by the mounting
international tension likely to precede the attack, so that during this period an
interplay of political and military consultation would take place and the crucial
decisions would be reached before the attack was launched. In any event the
military commanders were confident that technical delays would be reduced to
an acceptable minimum. The atomic warheads provided by America to
N..A.T;O. countries, which under the United States l;fws, had to be in the pos-
session ofAmerican forces until the last moment, would be handed over without
any delay.
Once hostilities started involving the use ofatomic weapons, it was practically
impossible to estimate future developments. The initial devastation, which might
well be increased over the level expected today, could reach such proportions that
there was no reason to be concerned with the relative superiority in military man-
power left to either side.
III. WESTERN ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
with special reference to the political consequences ofthe
existence of separate currency areas within the Western
world and to the Soviet economic challenge in the under-
developed countries
The debate on this point ofthe agenda can be roughly divided into three main
headings: monetary policy, economic unification (i.e. problems relating to the
Comm.on Market and the Free Trade Area), and the development of the poorer
countnes.
MONETARY POLICY
Numerous speakers stressed the need for co-ordinating monetary policies
among the Western countries, and protested against the seemingly sacred right
ofindividual countries to inflate independently ofall others. The resulting strain
on the balance ofpayments jeopardized all efforts at economic co-operation and
was putting a brake on the harmonious development of international trade.
Several speakers considered the problem ofinflation as crucial to the progress of
economic unification. In this connection one of the participants made a plea for
greater consideration to be given to monetary policies. Budgetary control proved
insufficient to stem inflation in rapidly expanding economies. The old techniques
of regulating the supply of money through the manipulation of rates ofinterest
and the control ofthe volume ofcredit, which recently were coming into favour
again, proved much more effective.
The progress made on the road to convertibility was noted. All participants
who referred to the subject stressed the crucial importance of making sterling
fully convertible, and many felt the conditions for doing so were considerably
improved. This was of as great importance for Great Britain and the member
countries ofthe Sterling Area as it was for the other countries ofthe West. As one
of the Italian speakers pointed out, the Sterling Area provided a compensatory
mechanism for the operation of multilateral trading. It provided the liquid re-
serves on which countries could draw in times of need in addition to capital
markets for long and medium term loans. It permitted member countries to keep
~heir imports at a much higher level than would otherwise be possible, which
m turn benefited third countries. Ultimately some such compensatory system
r8
should be devised to encompass as large an area of the Western world as would
prove possible. Commonwealth preference wa~ part of the system and con~ri­
buted to the equilibrium in which we were all mterested. In the dollar-earnmg
countries ofthe Sterling Area it created, however, the impression ofconverting a
world wide currency into a limited one and gave rise to the suspicion that itforced
on them non-competitive sterling commodities. ,
Whatever measures were needed to bring full convertibility nearer, the ulti-
mate step, involving the abolition of exchange controls, would be a radical d:-
parture which would necessitate new techniques. As sever~l speakers observe~, 1t
required strengthening the reserves of the E.P.U. countnes and of the Sterlmg
Area. Though all recognized that, with some exceptions, their present level was
too low, and that consequently a jump into convertibility might carry too great
a risk there was some divergence ofviews as to the extent ofthe increase needed.
' .
The E.P.U. was a useful compensatory mechanism through which countnes ex-
periencing particular difficulties could receive help. The I.M.F. could also be
called to the rescue in more extreme cases. But this, as one ofthe British speakers
observed, was not enough, and the small safety margin available to most coun-
tries forced them, at the first signs ofdanger, to adopt deflationary policies which
slowed down their economic progress. On the other hand, a major increase in the
reserves might well prove too great a temptation. This reasoning was epitomized
in the story which one ofthe French participants recalled when, during an inter-
. I
national conference dealing with this problem at which a proposal to set up an
international fund was discussed, it was pertinently observed that the chief
purpose ofsuch a fund was to be emptied. . .
One ofthe proposals put forward in a report involved a roo per centmcrease m
the price of gold as a means of increasing reserves and creating a dollar fund to
support convertibility of sterling and the E.P.U. currencies. This proposal was
generally rejected on a variety ofgrounds, both political and technical. However,
the necessity ofinternational support for the reserves ofthe Sterling Area as well
as of the E.P.U. countries was generally recognized. President Eisenhower's
proposal to increase the reserves of the I.M.F. was therefore w.elcomed, thou.gh
some speakers doubted whether this measure would prove suffic1ent, so that, w1th
the continued upward movement of world prices and the constant growth of
international trade, in a few years' time we might find ourselves in the same
position as we are in today.
ECONOMIC UNIFICATION
Referring to the Common Market, several speakers from the countries con-
cerned emphasized its dynamic and outward-looking character. It was conceived
in a spirit ofliberalization, it excluded autarky, the philosophy ofthe Treaty was
I9
largely liberal, and above all it was not to be considered as a final construction but
rather as a stage forward on the road to a larger and more complete integration of
the Western economies. That is why an extension of the Common Market
through the setting up ofa Free Trade Area or through treaties ofassociation was
wanted by those ofthe participants who were most closely associated with it. On
the other hand, participants from non-member countries also stressed the im-
portance they attached to the setting up of the Free Trade Area, which could
eventually embrace the overseas countries of the Commonwealth. Some sug-
gestions were made for its ultimate extension to include the United States.
Concern was expressed, however, lest the present Free Trade Area negotia-
tions drag on for too long, or fail altogether. The Common Market was due to
come into operation on rJanuary 1959, and it was feared that, ifno solution were
in sight by then, the first appearance of discrimination would produce a schism
between the Six and the rest ofEurope. The future progress ofnegotiations might
be seriously impeded as a result. On the other hand, one ofthe participants point-
ed to some serious technical difficulties. The Commission of the European
Economic Community, which was formed earlier in the year and gradually took
over negotiations on behalfof the Six countries, had yet to work out a common
position. The Commission had not, so far, had the opportunity of working out
some aspects of policy, for instance on agriculture, which were left open in the
Treaty. Complicated technical studies on tariffs also took a long time. More-
over, there were much greater differences between the economic situations ofthe
countries involved in the Free Trade Area project than among the original Six.
The proposal to extend the roper cent tariff reduction to all countries concerned
in advance of general development was not yet accepted by the Six, still less by
the others. Further the speaker suggested that the FreeTradeAreaproposals were
not the only alternative to the European Economic Community. The notion of
association had a technical meaning, and various degrees of rights and obliga-
tions were conceivable and could be worked out between the European Economic
Community and individual countries on a bilateral basis.
At that point a speaker referred to the difficult situation confronting British
industrialists at the time of the publication of the Spaak's Committee's Report.
The United Kingdom could notjoin the E.E..C., as it wished to keep the imperial
preference system, which had preserved freedom oftrade over a large area in the
critical period ofthe thirties; to dismantle it now would be a step backward.. The
Free Trade Area offered the first ray ofhope and turned out to be the best solu-
tion for other countries, the so-called "other Six", which shared much the same
approach. A breakdown in negotiations might provoke the adoption of protec-
tionist measures and eventually result in a breakdown ofthe E.P.U. He believed
some of the difficulties and fears, particularly of French industry, were exag-
20
gerated. A detailed examination of the different industries, section by section,
would be the best approach. Also a general reduction oftariffs on raw materials
would go a long way to reduce the tariff problem. Provided the O.E.E.C. was
used as a basis he thought that the institutional problem would cause no insuper-
able difficulties and was therefore hopeful about the outcome. One of the par-
ticipants said that, although France would strive to see tl;l.e Free Trade Area es-
tablished, the Common Market Treaty took into consideration the special posi-
tion ofsome sections of the French economy, and provided the necessary escape
clauses. To press the negotiations to the point ofredrafting the Treaty could lead
to a collapse ofeverything that has been achieved. We had to preserve the exist-
ing structure, as a renegotiation of everything from scratch would hardly be
possible.
Another major problem facing the European Economic Community was the
co-ordination of monetary policies. As one of the participants pointed out, the
economic integration of the Six required the co-ordination of all fields ofecono-
mic policy. The Treaty was comprehensive but it recognized the evolutionary
and expanding nature of the association and certain aspects ofintegration were
left for later definition.. This was the case with the financial policies ofthe member
countries and although something has been done in this field it was not sufficient
to exclude the possibility ofconflicts arising which would result in balance ofpay-
ment difficulties. To be sure there was the possibility of mutual help being pro-
vided and there were also escape clauses. Here was, however, the greatest weak-
ness ofthe Treaty. Monetary policy was closely linked with national budgets and
budgetary discipline was notoriously hard to achieve. Finance Ministers were
usually more understanding and might occasionally welcome external pressure
but it was more difficult to convince the national parliaments. The speaker
doubted whether in the long run the problem could be successfully solved without
an appropriate institutional mechanism.
This point was taken further by a participant who looked to a common cur-
rency as the ultimate solution. Inflation was held to be the main danger, and
doubts were expressed whether the Common Market could develop unless some
means were found of dealing with this. However, pointing to the successful
operation of the Benelux Union another speaker felt that gradually most diffi-
culties would be overcome and that the co-ordination of parallel policies could
be achieved..
It was also suggested that some useful progress might be achieve([ in the co-
ordination of fiscal policies.. This field deserved close study which could also in-
clude the possibility ofreplacing the taxation ofincomes by some system oftaxing
based on expenditure.
On the wider aspects of the European integration one of the participants felt
2I
American support for the Free Trade Area would be helpful, while others con-
sidered that a greater effort should be made in the United States, and Canada, to
inform the public and rally opinion in favour ofEuropean economic unification.
This had a bearing on the danger that protectionist tendencies in the United
States might take advantage of public ignorance about the tariff adjustments
that were due to take place in Europe. The perennial problem of the American
tariff wall was also broached, some ofthe European participants pointing to the
dampening effect on European exports ofescape clauses in American tarifflegis-
lation. It was noted, however, that although the protectionist strength in the
United States was likely to remain a headache for many years to come there was a
steady improvement. It was significant that in rg58 in the midst of a recession,
considerable progress was achieved. There was a growing realization that trade
was a two-way traffic and that, as one ofthe participants put it, the eagle on the
American dollar was really a homing pigeon.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE POORER COUNTRIES
The roles ofprivate and public foreign capital in the under-developed countries
were discussed. They were felt to be complementary to one another, although
different considerations should apply to the provision of each. It was pointed
out that public capital should be directed primarily to the development of the
economic infra-structure. There was sometimes a tendency to direct it towards
verylarge schemes and although these might be politically attractive, particularly
at the project stage, Iraq was there to remind us that their impact on the econo-
mic well-being and political stability of a country was likely to be slow. Public
funds were used for a variety ofpurposes ranging from outward budgetary aid to
the provision of investment funds at market conditions, and it sometimes hap-
pened that, as a result, in the minds of the recipient countries the distinction be-
tween business and aid became blurred. One ofthe European participants plead-
ed that we should be more careful to draw a line between the two. As to private
capital, it was generally agreed that to depart from sound business principles was,
in the long run, harmful for everybody concerned.
In this connection one ofthe American participants feared that the multiplica-
tion ofinternationallending agencies, which could compete against one another,
might encourage a departure from sound business principles. The same might be
said in respect of some aspects of governmental guarantees offered on medium
term loans, though it was pointed out that this was an essential condition for
capital exports. Ifsufficient guarantees were provided and the business was sound,
interestrates were ofa secondaryimportance, as in the case ofmost under-develop-
ed countries, the interest rates were in any case considerably higher than in the in-
dustrial countries of the West. It was further observed that there was a strong
22
. . . 'tal to flow not only to the least developed, but
case for encouragmg Western ~api h' h h d a better supply ofmanagerial and
also to the more advanced regwns w IC a
industrial skill. d' . . ht be otherwise favourable, private capital might
Though the con Itwns mi~ There was in some cases, a certain element of
still prove reluctant to move m. :X ·t could be made on the part ofour
. d . . ested that a greater euor . .
inertia, an It was sugg f . t terprise to establish productive umts With
governme~ts tob~a~e:~: ~r~~v;a:t:rship with governments. More publi~ity
the help o .pu IC u . ements as have been made, as there was a notice-
should be giVen to such arrang . . rise in this field. In any case, the
able reluctance o~ the ?art of pnv~te enter~e arded as beneficial and helpful.
association of foreign .With local caphital w.ats 1rgequired and available for the de-
t f th gap between t e capi a
The extenf ~ e rer countries led one ofthe participants to suggest that per-
velopment o t. e. poo be used with advantage, and that, for instance, the
haps fiscal p~hCies ~o:;~ generated if the taxation ofincomes was replaced by
necessar~ savmgs mig . e . however was not enough and the growth of
the taxatiOn ofexpenditu:e: Mo::~skilled w~rkerswas equallyimportant for ~he
aclassofmanagers, techn:ci~~s, . A r.urther problem was to provide
f 0 e pnmitlVe economies. 1'
development o m r rts ofwhich the development of
stable mark:tsdfor pr;~r~bre~~:~de~:i~:~i~?;rogrammes largely rested on the
such countnes epen e ·. . h . . ings and some solution to this
size and regularity of theu foreign exc ange earn '
question wa.s urgently ?eedefd.eati'ng conditions of security for foreign invest-
! fi ther a questiOn o cr . ·
twas ur f creating an international charter for foreign Invest-
ments. There was a case. or. n all arties although some doubted the possi-
ments which would be bmdmg
0
p 'd fforts in that direction were held
bility ofim.ple~enting it in the nehar filudtu~e;~~m:de to run legal risks in addition
b th while Investments s ou n
to e wor . . . 1 d a multilateral agreement was necessary.
· and pohtica ones, an
1
to economic . . . h ld stand together to protect themse ves
It was also felt that ldendmdg cot~nt~~~s: ~:tters. Those who infringe them should
and the rules ofgoo con uc m
not be able to recei~eh~p e~s:r:~~~:problem offoreign investment was obscured
Finally, it was pomte .ou . d' d the lack of adequate information.
~e~~:,r::::~u;~:::~c~~~:~:e~~a~;lea:~the Export Import Bank, which pub-
lished details ofits loans, could be usefully followed.
23
IV. THE WESTERN APPROACH TO SOVIET RUSSIA
AND COMMUNISM
There was considerable unanimit on th .
the Soviet Union. Political consi"d Yt. e a~sessment of developments within
era IOns contmue to d .
every sector ofSoviet life whethe . . . . ommate the evolution of
. ' . r economic mihtaryo th Wh
are occurnng do not concern the f' . r o er. atever changes
T
essence o the regime b t h . .
here was an improvement . th d ... ' . u t e tactics It follows.
. m e stan ard of hvm d h
p~rceptible changes in the Soviet w frD g an t. ere were certain
differentiation with the attenda t ay ~ li e. There was the formation ofa class
Th
n socia economic d 1 ·
ere was also timid beginnings ofth r ' . . ' an cu tural aspuations.
d
. e 10rmatwn ofa p bl" · ·
aca ernie freedom and signs of . r . . u Ic opmwn, ofa greater
tion carefully, and' whenever po~:~lig~o~s :ev~val.. We should follow this evolu-
ticularly in the cultural field e e p It a ong. The value of contacts par-
' was stressed '
S~me ofthese developments were furth~r hel ed b .
While control at the top was strength d d P. . y rec~nt e.conomic measures.
d
. h . ene ' eciSion-makmg h d
war Wit the result that local official h db . was an ed down-
greater importance. These peo 1 .s ah fieen giVen_greater power and assumed
. P e, m t e uture might
m.ore effectiVely than was possible at . h' come to express much
d
. present t e growing· d · r
goo sand a higher standard ofl" . h" h . esue lOr consumer
. . . Ivma w IC might 11 d 1 .
as It did m the West. The class ofm~;·e hi hl . we eve op on Similar lines
n.ew generation ofplanners who d"d kg y pmd people was growing and the
. ' I not now the hard ·t" ·
greater consideration to pressure for er Imes, might well give
conditions. more consumer goods and improved living
Already, in numerous sectors a considerable ..
The former dogmatism was : . . reviSion ofoutlook was apparent
giVmg ground to pra . · . ·
arrangements were subject to revisio A . . 1 . gmatism, and Institutional
could be ofconsiderable portent fort~~ fi ~ncu ~re was a case in point, which
even the recognition ofthe price sy t udurfe. s one of the speakers observed
. s em an o some fo f h '
Ism were no longer beyond the realm of . . . . rms o t e market mechan-
have lately been given added e h . po;sibihties. The use ofincentives which
As it was the growth of th mp asis cou dwell be extended further.
' e economy and the im . . .
helped the government and increased 0 t r 0 1 provmg standard of living
could somewhat relax and pro t I s po I_tlca strength. The Russian leaders
mo e economic growth Th . k
sary and the emphasis was shifting t th . e Stic was less neces-
o e carrot. In these conditions, it was gene-
24
rally believed that if the system was to change, and this could only happen as a
result of internal pressures, it would take a long period of time. It was more
reasonable to expect a continuous growth in the political, economic, and military
strength of Soviet Russia.
It was sometimes felt that a general relaxation of tension in the world could
help that trend ofevolution which we hoped for within the Soviet Union. At the
same time, however, one of the European participants believed that were we to
give the Russians cause to believe that they might make headway abroad by the
use of force, it would reflect on internal policies and make it more difficult for
those evolutionary forces to operate.
The growing Soviet strength would naturally have its impact on Soviet foreign
policy. It was thought unlikely, however, that the Russians would engage in
direct military aggression. As one ofthe participants observed, it seemed as ifthe
Soviet leaders had no great confidence in their ability of keeping wars limited.
When confronted with a situation such as might lead to an armed clash, they
either used threats of massive retaliation or suggested negotiations. However,
speakers noted with concern the way in which the possibilities and merits ofpre-
ventive attack were being discussed lately in the Russian press. Also in view of
their growing strength, they might feel more inclined towards an adventurous
policy.
True to their philosophy, the Russians saw victory through third areas. They
paid to them increasing attention, they appraised their position much more
realistically and adapted their policies in consequence. They recognized that
the new nations were independent, and, in spite of their capitalist system, were
not necessarily in league with the West. They also recognized and exploited
nationalism abroad, although they opposed if within the Communist bloc, in the
satellite countries, or among the minorities within the Soviet Union.
At the same time it was noted that there was a greater tightening up among the
satellites in both the political and doctrinal fields. It was particularly noticeable
in the case of East Germany and some participants expressed concern at the
future course of developments. The possibility of another blockade of Berlin or
of an explosion similar to that ofJune 1953 was mentioned.
As it was, developments within the Soviet bloc confronted us with what were
in one sense more subtle dangers. In some respects Stalin had been an easier
opponent to deal with than Khrushchev. In the long run it might prove more diffi-
cult for us to mobilize our public opinion and find a common line ofpolicy. This
difficulty might arise both on the national and the international planes. To be
sure, there were some opportunities and some hopeful signs. General disarma-
ment was hardly to be hoped for but some possibilities of limited agreements
existed.. The possibility of the Russians accepting, at some point in the near
futur~, some f~rr:n ofcontrolled disengagement in Europe was mentioned by an
Amenc~n participant. Also the seeming Russian interest in preventing the spread
ofatomic weapons could lead them to conclude some limited agreements.
There were numerous opportunities for us to take the initiative, and it was un-
fortunate t~at so many were m~ssed. The Satellites, referred to by some speakers
as t~e Ach1lles heel of the Soviet bloc, provided many such "targets of oppor-
tumty". So~e of the~ were mentioned. We failed to expel the Kadar regime
from :he Umted. NatiOns, although this proved possible in the I.L.O. The way
Amenca gave md to Poland practically neutralized its effects. In spite of the
recent escape of the Rector of the Jena University, Western universities sent
delegations and messages ofgoodwill on the occasion ofits fourth centenary cele-
brations. At ~~e Economic Council for Europe meeting in Geneva, we had practi-
call~ no positive proposals to make, leaving all the initiative to the Russians.
~gam, we should r:nake ~ much greater effort to co-ordinate our propaganda,
d1rected at the So~Iet orb1t .an.d also to third countries. We could usefully speak
to them of Russ1an colomahsm, of Soviet efforts at disrupting commodity
markets, and about the essentially political character of Communist economic
ventures in the under-developed regions of the world.
..several ~articipants pointed to the continuing lack ofa global strategy and of
JOint plannmg among the Western countries. A high degree ofco-ordination has
been achieved within such organizations as N.A.T.O. or O.E.E.C. and there was
no ~alid reason why it should not .be attempted on the world scale. Some sug-
gestiOns _were m~d~ su?h as the settmg up ofa centre ofstudy of Russian policies
and tactics. Agam It might be that within the Atlantic framework we could tackle
the problem ofexpanding technical and economic education, which was funda-
me~tal to our eco~omic progress .and to our hopes for the development ofpoorer
regwns. The Russians were makmg much greater progress in this field than we
were. As one oft~e speake.rs obs~rved, it was a question ofbroadly disseminating
modern productiOn techmques m all their aspects, and somehow our universities
lacked the necessary co-ordination and seemed unable to deal with the problem
on a large enough scale. Maybe ifa joint policy decision was taken on this matter
through N.A.T.O. or some other body, the necessary progress could be made. But
above all, as one of the participants pleaded, we should and we must agree on a
general grand strategy, in. t~e s~me way as was done between the Allies during
the last war. We are not hvmg m peace now. There was too much discussion of
what were, after all, tactics, while the priorities of our aims were not clearly
defined. He suggested, in particular, that the separation of Russia and China
should be our principal target, as the combination ofthese two powers constituted
for us the greatest danger.
The problem of a common strategy and of a common attitude attracted the
attention of many participants. One of the speakers w~o dis~u~se~ this sub}ect
more fully believed that the importance attached to f~reign pohc~es m the natwn-
al politics ofour respective countries seems to.be gettmg less. This would seem to
be noticeable both in the United States and m Europe. We all spoke about the
importance of the West speaking wi:h one voice, but .this was more a~d more a
case of paying lip service, and the time had come to Itfiprove ~ur attitude. Co-
ordination of our respective policies, and particularly of our a1ms, should have
top priority. These were listed as: . . . .
1
• The rapid increase of our econom1c potential wh1ch was at present In-
sufficient to meet all our requirements.
2
• The stability and development of the uncommitted countries irrespective
ofwhether they join our side or not.
3
. Progress in missiles and atomic weapons and a much greater effort to
diminish the risk ofsuicide inherent in our present defence strategy.
4· Concerting policies. . .
While it was realized on both sides ofthe AtlantiC that the Western all1ance was
the core of our policies, the implications of this wer: t~o o~ten forgotten. We
should pay more consideration, for inst~n~e, to the l~qmdatwn of unprofitable
and hopeless ventures which were stram~ng t~e alhan~e. We ne:d not tr.eat
unanimity as sacrosanct, however. In the d1scus~10n on th1s ~roblem 1t was p01~t­
ed out that often disagreements reflected a genume clash ofmterests or a g~n~1~e
difference of opinion. While in general a unanim~ty on .fu~dament~l pnont1es
was essential, more thought should, therefore, be g1ven w1t~m the alhance to the
problems of grand strategy. Occasional differences o.n tact1cs or on problems of
lesser importance and the resulting jerks were u~~v01dabl:, and ~ll we could do
was to strive at a better climate which would fac1htate the1r solutiOn. But, as one
speaker observed, diversity ofviews and interests was a defect which occasionally
could even prove useful. .
The Soviet bloc was now entering the field oftrade w1th ~he u~der-~e:eloped
countries on a big scale. Soviet interest in those areas was pnmanly poht1cal ~nd
the Communists looked upon their trade relations as yet another means of achiev-
ing their political aims. This was, therefore, a matter ofdeep concern to the West.
On the other hand, however, some speakers pointed out that inas:nuch as we
could not possibly do everything ourselves, t~ere was no great harm m th: Com-
munist countries contributing to the econom1c development of poorer regwns.
The Communists benefited from certain advantages, but they also suffered
from certain drawbacks, though these might not always be i~media:ely appar-
ent. For many people in the under-developed areas Com_mumst Russ1a has been
able to achieve in one generation what the West has done m three. It offered them
in many cases an alternative to commercial relations with the West and enabled
them to secure better conditions for themselves. In partic_ular, the Soviet Union
was a buyer ofraw materials and was better able to satisfy the need ofthese coun-
tries for long term stable markets. To be sure the trade ofthe Soviet bloc was com-
paratively small but through bulk buying and the conclusion of bilateral agree-
ments, the Communists received considerable publicity for their deals. Their
buying methods seemingly provided an answer to the basic problem of the de-
velopment planning of these countries, which was to estimate correctly future
foreign exchange earnings with which to pay their imports ofcapital goods. Some
participants felt the provision ofstable markets for primary products the crucial
problem for us to solve. The idea of buffer stocks, originally considered as part
and parcel of the Bretton Woods proposals, has been abandoned and the com-
modity agreements concluded since the war have generally failed. However,
some speakers believed we should not abandon the search for a solution along
these line~ and that maybe some technical improvement in the working ofcom-
modity agreements might provide the answer.
The advantages which the Communist bloc had to offer in this respect proved,
however, often more apparent than reaL The commodities they purchased were
occasionally resold, affecting world markets in a way prejudicial to the producer
countries. Moreover, the Soviet Union was itself an exporter of some primary
products, such as tin and oil, and their sales, in competition with the exports ofthe
under··developed countries, often took the appearance ofdumping. In return for
their purchases, the Communist bloc, apart from armaments, supplied almost
nothing but capital goods. There were no fears oftheir competition in the field of
consumer goods, though it was observed that this was likely to arise within the
next decade. Even as regards the supply of industrial installations it was sug-
gested by one ofthe participants that, since the Soviet Union itselfcontracted for
complete factories fi:om Western countries, their own export possibilities must be
limited.
As it was, there was general agreement on the need ofstepping up the develop-
ment ofpoorer countries, though one ofthe participants remarked that in adopt-
ing this approach not enough attention was given to maintaining stability.
Though in some cases private Western investments were flowing in at an adequate
rate, and economic progress was satisfactory, this was generally not the case in
what were, politically, the more critical areas. It was noted that in many in-
stances, even if conditions were otherwise satisfactory, one could not rely on the
free play of economic forces to attract capital in the time and for the amount re-
quired. Moreover, Western industries often lacked capital for investing abroad,
and it was suggested that government funds could be usefully channelled through
private industries. More extensive governmental guarantees on the part of the
lending countries would also prove helpful.
It wa~ also believed that we could make considerable headway in. our pa:tner-
ship for the industrial development ofthe poorer coun~ri:~ ~y adoptmg a sm:able
h Which would take into account the susceptibilities of the newly mde-
approac . . . . .
pendent countries. A right political attitu~e, recog~izi~g then .msistence on
U ality was ofparticular importance. In this connectiOn it was pomted out that
eq ' "d . . . t 1
b MID E C S A expressed these very consi eratwns it was ex reme y
ecause . . . .., . . ,
well received throughout the Middle East. . . .
In a general way, many participants expressed their behef that the settmg up
of the European Economic Community and event~ally o~ the Free Trade Area
would considerably improve our position in our dealmgs with the under-deve_l~p­
ed countries. Our economic strength would increase as a result, ou.r com~et~tive
position as regards the Soviet bloc would improve and t.he underlymg prmc~ples
of European integration were likely to prove attractive to the uncommitted
nations, and might be taken as a good example.
29
'
...
PRESS STATEMENT
The seventh conference of the "Bilderberg· Group" pr 'd d
' esi e over by H R B
Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands, was held from I 3 to I s · · ·
Buxton, England. 5 eptember I958 at
The conference, like the previous ones was private a d ffi · 1
. . . ' n uno cia . It was t
tended by some eighty participants coming from eleven E . . a-
U
· s d c . uropean countnes th
mted tates, an anada, chosen from a wide range of' t . · . ' e
. . d . . fi m erests mcludmg poli-
tics, m ustry, commerce, nance, labour and education Th ·
· d ffi . . ' · ose attendmg did s
m a personal an uno Cial capacity and the opinions offe . d h
0
. f h k d re were t e personal
views o t e spea ers an were not expressed on behalfofan . .
. . h' h h . h b y governments or m
stitutwns tow IC t ey mig t e attached. -
The discussions did not attempt to formulate conclusio Th .
I
· . . ns. e emphasis was
p aced on the contmumg need to foster the closest underst d' . d
~r . d' . an mg an the most
euectiVe co-or matwn among the Western nations in relat' t
lems. IOn o common prob-
The conference began with a review ofthe main political d ·
. h . . . . an economic events
smce t e previOus meetmg, m the course ofwhich an excha . f ·
. . nge o views on events
m the Far East and Middle East took place.
This was followed by consideration of the progress of W t .
. . . . . es ern economic co-
operatiOn, particular attentiOn bemg giVen to the political .
. . . . consequences of the
existence ofseparate currency areas Withm the Western wo ·ld th .
f h fi ld
· h · · 1
' e co-operatiOn
o t e ree wor wit the countnes m need ofincreased devel
S
. . . . . . h . opment, and to the
ov1et economic activities m t ese countnes. Special attent' ·
. . Ion was giVen to the
subJect of the Common M.arket and the Free Trade Are Th
fi 0
a. e progress and
uture ofN.A.T. . and the Western approach to Soviet Rus · d c .
were discussed. Sla an ommumsm
This was the first Bilderberg Conference to be held in B 't · p. ·
r . n am. revwus con-
1erences took place at the Bllderberg Hotel in Oosterbeek N h ·I
)
· B b' p . (M , et er ands (May
I954 ; m ar 1zon, near ans arch 1955) ·in Garmisch-P ·t k' . h
S b )
. ' ar en uc en, Ger-
many ( eptem er I955 ; m Fredensborg near Copenhage (M G)
S
. G · ' n ay I95 · at St
1mons Island, eorg1a, U.S.A. (February I957) and in F' · I 1 ( '
)
' mggi, ta y October
1957 .
I5 September I958
Annex A
A COMMON POLICY FOR THE WEST
l
By an American Participant
May I also start my remarks by referring to the importance ofthe West speak-
ing with one voice. This is a thing which a lot of us say all the time. It means of
course the importance of concerting policy, but I think that we are likely to
regard this as something which is useful to say and then pay very little attention
to it afterward. The real question is how important in national policy is the con-
certing of international policy, that is within the Western Alliance. There have
been times when it was highly important within national policy. It seems to me
that it is getting less important as I observe what is going on. It's hard to illustrate
this without being offensive one way or the other. If I illustrate it with my own
Government it seems partisan; if I illustrate it with other governments, it seems
as though I were pointing to others. So I shall take the worst of both worlds by
illustrating it from both.
It seems to me, and this may undoubtedly have a large element ofpartisanship
in it, but it seems to me, that there is less concern in the government ofthe United
States today about concerting its action and its policies with those ofits allies than
there was, say, during the period when I was associated with the government; I
don't mean because of that fact, but merely to compare these two periods. For
instance, the concern of the government of the United States on limiting the war
in Korea to South Korea was very largely, but not entirely, out ofrespect to the
views ofits allies. It would have been easier within the United States to have ex-
tended it. I think this would have been unwise; but the pressures were for that.
Our allies were unanimous that this was unwise and it seemed to us at the time
that our allies were entitled to have their views respected in this matter; and we
respected them. Today I do not think the same respect is given to the view ofour
allies in regard to the present crisis in China.
Now if we turn to some other countries. To what extent do we suppose that
concern about her allies is reflected in any way in French policy toward North
Africa? I should think the element of concern about the position of the whole of
the West was very small. I may be wrong about that. I do not mean that France is
not entitled to sympathy and support. I am all for giving France sympathy and
support. But I am now talking about to what exten:t in French national policy
on this particular question, are the views ofher allies important. I should think
not at all. One ofthe classic examples of the complete disregard ofthis factor by
everybody was Suez, by the United States, by the British Government, by the
French Government, by the Israeli Government, by everybody.
Now we are always told that this is because oflocal political pressures, and this
is true. There are local political pressures in the United States and in our allied
countries. But I think the recent experience of France shows us that times come
when a continued yielding to political pressures, means that the whole system
which gave rise to those pressures has to be remodelled; and I think that will
occur to us, and to all ofus, if we continue in this way. So that the concerting of
policy does not seem to me merely a moral desirability. It seems to me a practical
necessity. I do not think time is on our side. I think time is against us. I think
vastly more efforts have to be made than have been made; and if each one ofus is
unable to make this effort or to concert the effort with another ally because there
are political difficulties at home, then it will not be made. And the system which
so endangers the whole world must give way to one which will undoubtedly be
worse; but I think may be more effective.
Now when we go a little further into this we get into realms which we have been
discussing here today, realms of propaganda forming public opinion abroad
and in our own countries and somewhere else. May I suggest that I have great
respect for this endeavour. It is one ofwhich I know very little, but it has always
seemed to me that to consider this as an action apart from other action was ex-
actly wrong. The best propaganda in the world is right action. The Marshall
Plan was the best propaganda the United States ever engaged in. Surely it is
important to be articulate about it and to explain it; sometimes it really hurts to
do that, but, generally speaking, it is good to explain what you are doing. But to
explain that you are doing something that you are not doing is the very worst
thing in the world. Therefore, while propaganda can be used as a sword to attack
other people who cause confusion, and this is all to the good and I am for it, it is
ofsecondary importance. The vital and primary thing is what we do. And let me
talk for a few moments about that.
We have been talking this morning about changes which have occurred in the
Soviet Union or may not have occurred and personally I agree with the view ex-
pressed by the preceding speaker. I don't undertake to deny that there is not some
merit in the views which have been expressed that there are changes. But I submit
to you that these changes are not relevant within any period oftime for which any
of us will be forming policies. These may have an effect in twenty years, thirty
years, fifty years, but they will not have an effect in ten years, and we must make
policies for the present. Whatever changes may be occurring in the Soviet Union
32
will not, it seems to me, affect international relations with any degree of signifi-
cance within the next decade.
Now let's look at the sort ofthing I mean by concerting policies. I do not mean
that there is a possibility, or much sense, oftrying to get a lot ofN.A.T.O. ~e~re­
sentatives together on every matter of action and trying to produce. unammity.
This will never be produced. A lot oftalk will occur, the representauves haven?
authority anyway, some governments are incapable of gi:'i~g them an_Y. So this
generally is, useful but not terribly important. But what IS, Important IS to ?ave
agreed on policies which go to the heart ofthe situation, to follow those out I~ all
our countries, and then have a certain amount oftrust in each one ofthe nauons
to do whatever it is doing in accordance with those policies. Now these must be
of a very broad, but I think vitally important, nature. . .
Let me just mention two or three that seem to be at the heart of this. . .
The first point of agreed policy should be one which we have be:n discussmg
here. It is the necessity for a very considerable increase in productiOn and pro-
ductive power in the Western world. It is not now strong enough to m~et all the
requirements we should be putting on it. We all need greater productiOn capa-
city. To do this will require more management. o~ our ec~nomy tha~ some
people, at least, believe wise. But the price of a rapid mcreasem productw.n ~nd
productive capacity is increased government management of our economic hfe...
Then should come agreement on the problem of the under-developed. areas. A
much greater effort by developed countries is necessary to p~o:note theu. econ~­
mic growth. It should be made plain to them that th.e West IS mtereste~ m their
economic growth and stability and not in attemptmg to force them mto a~y
political alignment. To be effective here depends on the growth ofour economic
potential referred to above. . .
In the field ofmilitary policy we are fallmg behmd. We must make the greatest
efforts to get our nuclear missile armoury completed. This is an absolute neces-
sity. Elsewhere the trend in defence policy, especially in Europe, seems to me
wrong. Defence policy should aim at producing results not merely on a battle-
field. Military power and strategy project themselves ahead of the battlefield.' If
there is no power or the strategy is wrong, then consequence~ oc?ur long before
any battle. Our alliance may lose its battle without ever fightmg 1t. Therefore, I
would go much more strongly for a new inventiveness in non-~uclear w.eapons
and in the strategies which will appeal to those whose countnes are ?emg de-
fended. What is the use ofsaying to people, we will defend you by blowmg you to
pieces? That I think is not an appealing strategy, and one which in the long run
willn~~d. .
Now a final word on what I mean by concerting political policies. These agam
can only be ofthe broadest nature but, ifthey are really understood, they will be
33
ofthe greatest help in solving specific problems. I have been preaching in my own
country that the fundamental doctrine of American foreign policy ought to be
that the Western Alliance is the heart ofit: that this comes first. Now everybody
says this in a speech, but nobody really acts on it. They are concerned whether the
uncommitted peopleswill approve our policies ofsolidaritywith Europe, whether,
for instance, our association with France will hurt us with India or somebody
else. Well, any policy of association is going to be unpopular somewhere. We
either have a Western Alliance which lies at the heart ofourpolicy or we have not.
Ifwe have, it should take first priority with us and with others. Ifour allies want
the United States to feel that the Western Alliance is the heart ofpolicy, they must
feel the same way. And they must adjust their actions in the interests of a larger
entity than themselves.
Now I further think that putting the coalition first ought to include liquidating
hopeless individual ventures. We cannot say that we will continue for ever an in-
dividual national effort which has no chance ofsuccess whatever, and merely in-
volves everyone in ill-will and a losing struggle. You can think of examples of
those as well as I can. We have some, and you have some, and they ought to be
liquidated. We ought to be turning to more productive fields.
Finally, please do not let our policies all become sweetness and light. I am
eager to help everybody that we can help, but there are occasions when we must
hurt as well as help. Do not let us be carried away by a moralism which makes us
say tut-tut every time a suggestion is made that someone who is vitally injuring
the interests of the Western Alliance must be brought up with a sharp jerk. This
can happen, and though military measures don't shock me at all, economic pres-
sures might be a little better. There are plenty of them which can be applied. It
ought to be understood that we are to be respected, our Western Alliance is to be
respected as well as to be regarded as benevolent. It will not be respected ifevery-
body who wishes to can exploit us with impunity.
34
AnnexB
TACTICS IN THE COLD WAR
By an American Participant
There were some very interesting and important and true things said this
morning.
The problem I think we face is the fact that we used to have such a useful ally
in the simple, byzantine brutality of Stalin. You knew where you were, and you
also knew that if you bumbled your way into trouble you would be rescued by
Stalin.
That is no longer true today with Mr Khrushchev, who is an infin~tely more
subtle character-not only because he himselfis more subtle than Stalm, but be-
cause he has to be more subtle in view ofthe things that are going on behind his
back. Therefore, we are living today in an extraordinary paradox-the paradox
of greater danger, and at the same time of greater opportunity. How to operate
between the two is a complicated and tricky problem.
I think that some of the speakers were quite correct when they implicitly or
explicitly said that we are in greater danger today than w? h~ve ever been. But
also more hopeful signs were pointed out-on the economic side and.elsewhere.
One ofthe participants talked about China. Sure, ':e now hav~ tw? Big Brothers
instead ofone Big Brother. But maybe one of the Big Brothers IS bigger than the
other< It is an interesting situation and undoubtedly gives Mr Kh~ushchev pause.
There is the problem ofeducation in the Soviet Union. One pomt that was not
brought out this morning is that you cannot take tens of t~ousan~s ?f young
Soviet citizens and educate them for science without developmg cunosity-and
you cannot limit their curiosity to scientific matters. Their cu~iosity .is bound to
go all over the place-and that is a source ofdanger to th: Soviet Umon.
We have talked also about nationalism. And too, there IS my pet hobbyhorse-
namely, the Eastern European satellite countries. I stil~ claim this is the Achilles'
heel of the Soviet empire, about which we are not domg what we should. And
I'm not talking now about "liberation policies".
So we have this paradox and this opportunity.
* * *
Now I am going to say some things against what the Americans ~ave b:e~
doing, and about what they have been failing to do. (Lest anyone thmk this IS
35
- ------ .................. .t''-'.L.LUVc.t..l.lVJ.l\,...C' ~·:WUUlU araW
your att~ntion to ~he fact that I spent full time on this work ofpolitical warfare in
mternat10nal a:ffaus for a year under the Truman administration and a year and
a half under the Eisenhower administration, so except for a six months edge the
scales are even.)
There are two things that can and should be done. One ofthem is to take ad-
vantage ofthe targets ofopportunity which present themselves all the time. The
other _is to have the kind of set-up which would permit forward thinking and
planmng. We have done far too little on both scores.
To illust~ate what I mean by a target of opportunity, let us take Hungary. I
am not talkmg about the Hungary of rg56; I am talking about the liquidation of
Imre Nagy and Pal Maleter in rg58.
In a very interesting way, there was a greater world revulsion against the
murder ofthese two Hungarian leaders than there was at the time ofthe Russian
suppression of the Budapest insurrection. Yet in the United Nations none of us
neither the United States nor anyone else, did what could easily have been don~
at virtually no cost-that is, get the representatives of the Kadar regime dis-
accredited in the U.N.
This is all the more serious and shameful because it was not a question ofun-
seating an accredited representative. These people had never been accredited.
They ~ad applied for it, but they had not gotten it; but also they didn't get dis-
accredited. All ofus together-all ofus brave Western nations seriously concerned
with politica~ warfare, seriously concerned with the Communist threat, seriously
concerned With a thousand and one things-just kicked that accreditation item
under the rug, three times.
Beg~nning this week there is going to be another opportunity to do something
about It, and I am not sure we won't kick it under the rug again.
I_ know that. the _State Department people and the Foreign Office people of
vanous countnes will say, "Oh, there are grave dangers; there is the danger that
the Kadar regime will close down the U.S. Embassy in Budapest and we won't
ha~e that _window there any more." Well, I think that in this great Game, our
pn~ate wmdow on such-an~-such a street in Budapest just doesn't stack up
agamst what would happen m the hearts of Hungarians ifwe could muster the
manliness to disaccredit the representatives of the Kadar regime. In passing, I
would draw your attention to the fact that the I.L.O., which is not in the habit of
roaring like a lion, managed to dojust that on this subject. Ifthe I.L.O. can do it,
I don't see why the U.N. can't.
So that is the kind oftarget ofopportunity that comes up every now and then-
quite frequently, actually-on which unfortunately we do not act.
* * *
The torward thmkmg and plannmg which we do not do are best Illustrated m
the American case, I think, by Poland-Gomulka's Poland.
.We agreed along with a lot ofother people that the Gomulka development-
you might even call it the Gomulka-Wyszynski_development-in Pola~d was a
very important, significant, and delicate one which should be handled With great
intelligence. I think it was particularly significant that ?ractically all Poles ou~­
side of Poland-no matter what their political complexiOn, no matter what then
background, no matter how long they had been out of Poland-agreed that we
must not rock this boat. '
What happened next? The Poles came to us and said, "We need three hundred
million dollars, Mr U.S." And what did we do? We went into a surly brown study
and finally decided to give them go million dollars. Conceivably this was all they
needed or deserved, but the way in which the study was made, and the way we
made news working out whether it was go million, roo million, 150 million, or
300 million, was all negative, chip-on-the-shouldery news. . .
Finally, we did not take advantage ofan incredible opportumt~ for crowdi~g
the Polish switchboard with Western sounds in general, and Amencan sounds m
particular. Ifwe had immediately given them go million dolla:s, ~nd let them.call
it a token instead ofhasseling over it, and then asked them to mvite an Amencan
study group of agriculture, economics, healt~, medicine, and in~ustry to work
out with them their problems, we would have mdeed crowded theu switchboard
with our sounds and made it difficult for Moscow to get on the line.
* * *
We have all been taking a most incredible beating over the months and years
on the word "Colonialism". We have never pulled up our socks in forward think-
ing to the extent ofeven beginning to nail thefact of "the new colonialism" on to
aggressive, imperial Communism. . . .
At the first Bilderberg Conference four years ago we had qmte a discussion on
the American viewpoint versus the British and French viewpoint on colonialism.
But we all know that from our side of the fence colonialism is dead-we simply
do not use that word. The entire trend of Western activity is to bring individual
peoples forward. Yct here we are still stuck with the label, and we have not do~e
the most elementary first lesson to pin the word "colonialism" on the Soviet
Union, where it really belongs.
* * *
Above all ofthose matters ofdetail that I have mentioned, I think the essential
thing for us to do is to put our own fraternal house in order. We have got to be
agreed among ourselves. We have far too often allowed the atmosphere to be
poisoned.
37
If among ourselves, the countries represented here today could agree on the
elementary principles of political warfare toward Communism, and the Soviet
union, and Communist China, and the new Colonialism, we would be able to
set up the kind of"centre ofmagnetism" which is the only realistic and irresistible
way to get through to these people. As o~e ofthe participants said this morning,
the good citizens of Moscow are not gomg to swarm on the streets and build
barricades and string Khrushchev up by the ankles-that's not the way things
are going to happen.
We have to set up our own centre ofmagnetism here in order to make ourplace
our system, our way ofdoing things, our people's welfare, self~evidently better tha~
imperial Communism.
Not long ago we poisoned our own atmosphere with Suez; we ourselves
poisoned it forty-eight hours ago with Quemoy; a month ago it was the Near
East, and tomorrow goodness knows what. We should be considerably smarter
than we have been in the past.
Part ofthat smartness could be to find the formula whereby in political warfare
our nations could get together more often, and actually have an international
group to think and plan above the poisoned-atmosphere elements. One of the
miracles of N.A.T.O. is that they have been able to do that. These N.A.T.O.
members sort of sniffed around each other like strange bulldogs for a couple of
years, and finally decided that they could stick together no matter what was
happening. There is a similar co-operative situation in O.E.E.C. on economic
matters.
Well, if we can do it in O.E.E.C. and we can do it in N.A.T.O., we can do
it in political warfare. I submit that in political warfare this is the moment to
do it.
AnnexC
PROBLEMS OF THE COMMON MARKET
By a European Participant
I should like to emphasize one particular aspect ofthe problem which is under
discussion today. I would suggest that we give some thought to the possibilities
implied in the integration ofthe six countries into the Common Market. Here are
my reasons.
The Treaty establishing the European Economic Community, like the whole
process ofintegration, is dynamic and evolutionary in nature. When we drafted
the Coal and Steel Community Treaty we had already in mind its extension to
products other than those ofheavy industry. We got that and went even beyond
the mere extension ofthe reduction or the abolition of tariffs. We integrated the
greater part ofthe economic policy ofthe six member states ofour Community. It
followed logically from the creation of a common external tariff that we were
almost driven to this further integration. The moment you create a common ex-
ternal tariff commercial policy becomes a matter of common concern, but as
everybody knows we went even beyond that by integrating other fields ofecono-
mic policy, agriculture, transport, and so on. Now, how does monetary policy fit
into this picture?
It is true on the one hand that we have not been able to bring the essence of
monetary policy into this framework. There is no real integration of monetary
policy such as is realized for instance in the field of, say, agricultural policy where
the community is required to develop a real common agricultural policy for the
whole area of the six countries.
On the other hand it would be wrong to say that nothing has been done in the
direction of integrating monetary policies. We have a number of provisions
in our Treaty, in order to facilitate or make possible the execution of the
Treaty itself-such as that all states have to strive to approve the monetary
arrangements necessary to permit the free flow of goods. The Treaty has done
more, it has included a commitment for the six states to follow a sound monetary
policy and this is not only a "fa~on de parler", it is not only fine words, it has im-
plications for all institutions of the community which have to make decisions,
recommendations or have to take administrative measures. Even more than that,
certain organizations can try at least to establish co-operation or even co-ordina-
39
tion in the field ofmonetary policy. There is a provision saying that the Ministers
and the Central Banks with responsibilities in this field shall co-operate. The
Treaty established a special monetary committee which gives advice in this field,
and we base our measures upon this advice.
There is a trend to establish co-ordination ofmonetary policies, but neverthe-
less there remains the possibility ofconflicting policies, ofpolicies which may even
jeopardize the execution ofour Treaty. The Community has faced this situation.
The solution it has found in order to meet this difficulty may appear somewhat
artificial, but I think it is easily explained by the complications of the situation
we have to deal with.
This problem results in balance of payments difficulties which may have dis-
turbing effects on the execution ofthe Treaty. Ifsuch a situation should arise, the
Commission has first to examine the situation and to give recommendations to
the state which is in difficulties; secondly, there is a possibility ofthe other coun-
tries providing mutual aid to the state which finds itselfin difficulties, and only in
the last resort is there the possibility of applying an escape clause. There is no
_doubt that we are faced here with the greatest weakness of our Treaty. The
Treaty must be completed in this direction, and undoubtedly a greater measure
ofco-ordination ofmonetary policies if not real integration is highly desirable if
not absolutely necessary. Development in this field should be organic, it should
be an outcome ofthe work we have started.
Now, there is not the slightest doubt that we shall meet with considerable diffi-
culties before we complete our Treaty in this direction. It is not my intention to go
into detail, but I should like to draw the attention of this audience to one point
which is perhaps the most difficult, that is the link between monetary policy and
budgetary policy. I think it is one-third ofthe national income ofall the member
states which is distributed through the budget, so it is hard to see how one could
come to a really integrated monetary policy without dealing with the problem
ofcreating some sort of budgetary discipline among the member states. There is
no doubt that we are here faced with a great political difficulty, perhaps not so
much on the part of the ministers of finance, who sometimes would be glad to
quote international commitments in order to restrain the desire ofparliaments to
vote big budgets, but on the part perhaps ofthe parliaments. The main conclusion
which I draw from these premises is that I doubt whether without some insti-
tutional mechanism we can cope with the problem. It would evidently be an
illusion to hope that self-discipline will suffice to bring about a good and sound
situation in this field, otherwise we would have it already. And I doubt too
whether we can find that automatism without institutional measures would meet
our problem.
I do not want to enter into a discussion of the techniques of this integration.
"l
l
This is another question and here we must be open-minded. I think there are
different solutions possible, and one should not make out ofthis whole pro.blem a
matter of pseudo-religious belief. I think these are really technical questiOns.
Ifwe go this way, do we risk being faced again with the criticism that this would
be a step in the direction ofsplitting Europe? I do not think so. W~en we drafted
and when we implemented the Common Market between the S1x, we bro~ght
about by this very fact the negotiations for the Free Trade' Area, and there 1s no
doubt that we would not have had the Free Trade Area negotiations had we not
first creafed the Common Market. And I dare say the same will happen if we
should be successful in the field ofmonetary policy.
