BILDER BERG .\I EE TI.NGS
MEGEVE
CONFERENCE
19-21 :\pril 1974
CONTENTS
1. LIST OF PARTICIPANTS. 5
2. INTRODUCTION. . . . . 9
3. WORKING PAPERS:
A. A French viewpoint. 11
B. A British Yiewpoint . 13
C. A German viewpoint 15
D. An American viewpoint . 17
-t· DISCCSSION:
I. The Process of European Integration . 19
II. The Character of East-West Detente . 32
III. The Essence of Present NATO Strategy 39
IV. Economic Considerations . . . 41
V. Energy Developments . . . . 49
VI. European-American Relations. 53
5. CLOSING RE~IARKS. . . . . . . . . . · · · · · · · · · 57
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CH..\IR~IAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HO::\ORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERXST H. VAN DER BECGEL
HO~ORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JosEPH E. joHssoN
.\c;sELLI, GmvANSI
.\IRD, JoHs B.
.\LLISOS, GRAHA:ll T.
.\LPHASD, HERVE
.\NDERSES, K. B.
.\NDROSCH, HANNES
BALL, GEORGE "'.
RAC~GARTNER, \V11.FRID S.
BESSETT, SIR FREDERIC
BERGSTE:--i, C.FRED
BETTIZA, Exzo
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
BIRGI, ~1. NuR1
BRI:'-iKHORST, LAl'RENS J.
C.-\:llPS, ~hRIAM
CHACF., JAMES
CITTADINI CF.SI, IL ~1ARCHESE
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
CoLON:'llA DI PAuA:-;o, PRINCE Gumo
DAHRF.NDORF, RALF
DAVIGNON, V1co:11TE
Dccc1, ROBERTO
ITALY
CANADA
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
DENMARK
AUSTRIA
uNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ITALY
TURKEY
TURKEY
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
ITALY
UNITED STATES
ITALY
INTERNATIONAL
BELGIUM
ITALY
5
Dcp1:v, :\IIcHEL
Fo:-.:TAI:'\E, A:-.:oR.f:
GILES, FRA:'\K T. R.
GOODPASTER, .·\:'\DRf~\\" .J.
GREE:'\HILL, LORD
GRIFF!:\, A:-.:TI!O:'\Y G. S.
GRC.'."WALD, HE:'\RY A.
Gn:-.:nEv, Gn1.L\1·-.1E
HALLGRBISSO:'\, GEJR
HAt:GE, GABRIEL
HEALEY, DE:'\IS
HEI.'."Z II, HE:'\RY J.
HERZOG, ~fAt:RICE
HeEGH, LEIF
IGLER, HANS
JANSSEN, DAXIEL E.
JONES, AUBREY
JusTMAN ]AcoB, Pot:L L.
KAISER, KARL
KIEP, WALTHER LEISLER
KOHNSTAMM, .MAX
LA MALFA, GIORGIO
LARRE, RENE
LENNEP, jONKHEER EMILE \"AN
LEPRINCE-RINGUET, Louis
LEVI, ARRIGO
LEVY, WALTER].
LIOTARD-VOGT, PIERRE
LORD, WINSTON
LuNs, JosEPH M. A. H.
MATH1As, CHARLEs Mee.
MONDALE, WALTER F.
MONNIER, CLAUDE
MONTBRIAL, THIERRY DE
MYRVOLL, OLE
NETHERLANDS, H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX OF THE
PERKINS, ]AMES A.
PESMAZOGLU, )OHN S.
RIPPON, GEOFFREY
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID
6
(~SADA
fk.\.'<C~
L"!>irno KJsoPON
lsnaSATIO.l'C..\L
L"srn.o KJsGPON
C.\!oiAIM
L"srn:o ST..\TU
f'kASCI:
lcf:l..ASO
l "srn:n STATU
l"srn:r> KrsoDOM
l "Sln:I> STATU
FRAscr.
.:\°oRWAY
:\nnrA
Brr.r.rno1
l ":-.--rnn KrsoDOlf
.:\°F.THf.Rl.ASDS
GrRwA:-.·v
GF.R\fA:\"Y
hnRSATIOSAL
hAIY
f:"<TFRSATIOSAL
hTI:RSATIOSAL
FRANCE
hAl.Y
l"srnm STATU
SWITZERLAND
l
0
NITF.D STATE.S
l:•..-rERNATIO:'iAL
l°SITED STATE.'I
l°NITF.D STATES
SWITZ F.RLASD
FRANCE
NORWAY
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
GREECE
uNITED KiNODOM
UNITED STATES
RocKEFELLER, NELso:-.i A.
RODGERS, WILLIAM
RoLL, SIR ERIC
Ro:-ocHEY, ALBERTO
Rossi, REINO
ROTHSCHILD, BARON ED~IO:-:D DE
SAUvE,jEANNE
ScHLEIMANN, j0RGEN
SCHMIDT, HELMUT
ScHRODER,GERHARD
SNov ET D'OPPUERs, BARO:s"
SOMMER, THEO
SoNNENFELDT, HELMUT
STONE, SHEPARD
TERKELSEN, TERKEL l\I.
THm.IPSON, GERALD
TIDEMAND, OTTO G.
l!MBRICHT, VICTOR H.
\VALLENBERG, ~!ARCUS
\\'IcKMAN, KRISTER
\VIsCH:-OEWSKI, HANs-jt.iRGEN
\VoLFF voN AMERONGEN, OTTO
IN ATTENDANCE:
PITn-FERRANDI, RoBERT
vERNEDE, EDWIN
GETCHELLjR., CHARLES \V.
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM
ITALY
FINLAND
FRANCE
CANADA
DENMARK
GERMANY
GERMANY
BELGIUM
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
UNITED KINGDOM
NORWAY
SWITZERLAND
SWEDEN
SWEDEN
GERMANY
GERMANY
FRANCE
NETHERLANDS
uNITED STATES
7
INTRODCCTION
T~e twenty-third Bilderberg ~leeting was held at the Hotel Mont d'Arbois,
~Iegeve, Franc~, on 19, 20 and 21 April 1974 under the Chairmanship of
H.R.H. The Pnnce of the Netherlands.
~~ere we~e 87. ~arti~ipants,_ drawn from a variety of fields: government and
pohn_cs, umvers1t~es, JOUr~~hsm,. diplomacy, industry, transport, the law,
banking, foundation admm1strat10n and military service. They came from
fourteen Western European countries, the United States, Canada and various
international organizations.
. In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke
m a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever gov-
ernment or organization to which they might belong. To enable participants
to speak frankly, the discussions were confidential, with no press reporters
admitted.
The Agenda 1cas as follo1C's:
"Prospects for the Atlantic \Vorld.''
In opening the meeting, H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands invited all
the participants to stand for a moment of silent tribute to the memory of the
late President Pompidou. He then read a telegram which he had sent to
President Poher, expressing sympathy to the French nation at the loss of
~Ionsieur Pompidou, who himsdfhacl been a Bilderberg participant. (President
Poher's telegram of response was read later in the meeting.)
The Prince reported that Secretary Kissinger had written to convey his
great disappointment at having been prevented by his official duties from
attending the meeting.
His Royal Highness gan· a special welcome to Professor John Pesmazoglu,
who had been unable to attend six previous meetings by reason of the refusal
of the Greek government to issue him a passport. Professor Pesmazoglu
replied that his presence was a sort of accident, and should not be taken as a
sign of change in his country. His thoughts went out to his compatriot~ under
arrest and threatened with deportation. The Greek people were committed to
continue their struggle for constitutional rights and liberties.
. d h p · turned to the subiect of the
After recallmg the rules of proce ure, t e nnce J
agenda. 9
WORKING PAPERS
The groundwork for the discussion consisted of four working p d l"
. . . apers ea mg
with the agenda topic, written from the point of view of a French, a British, a
German and an American observer.
Following are summaries of these working papers, and of the comments
of their authors in introducing them to the meeting:
A. The author of the French paper claimed that history was the key to
France's attitude toward the Atlantic world. The theme of independence
abroad and centralism at home was traceable to the reign of the Capets and
had survived the vicissitudes of intervening centuries.
French policy, designed to harness all the nation's wealth and energies to
its service, could not be explained solely in material terms. It was based rather
on a concept of cultural identity: the belief that France possessed a distinctive
personality conferred by her special inviolable mission.
This refusal to accept any assimilation and the determination to preserve
the national identity were the crux of what Secretary Kissinger had once called
the "transatlantic misunderstandings". In fact, there was no misunderstanding,
but the confrontation of two flatly contradictory philosophies. The US, like
the USSR, was an imperial nation, bearer of a universal ideology. When
ideology and interests conflicted, interests usually came first. Did not "the
Atlantic spirit" and the "defense of the free world" sometimes constitute the
"fig leaf of American respectability"?
The Gaullists thus saw the world as a jungle, in which France too had to
defend her own interests. This had led her at times to err on the side of mistrust,
prejudice and ignorance, but that was matched by the recent emergence of a
harsh American Realpolitik.
These philosophical differences had prod.uced cont~adictory a?pr~aches. t~
the alliance. The US had foreseen an evolving Atlantic commumty, m whic
it would perforce exercise the leadership. For Gaullists, though, alliances were
always ad hoc. They reflected the interest of the moment, and shoul~ nev~r
result in the forfeiture of one's identity or power of decision, especi.ally !?
d
r d . "A t people has no friends .
e1ense matters. As de Gaulle use to say· grea . e
Although de Gaulle's disappearance had brought little substantive chang '
. . d t ule out openly defiant
It had served to mute the v01ce of France, an o r
I I
attitudes. Pompidou had sough r .in1 m111111< l.1r11m \'uh rl1r l ·S .a1Jd dw l'SS~aa
t f. his drive for indusrrial awl u muurrn.il f.M1\\ rr, wluJc CtJnct'IHrating
par o . . f"I-.-..~
his diplomatic efforts on rlw .\J1·d11rrrM1r.rn .allCl 1m rl1r .f.uro~;a~ -"-"Ullllf
_ "the only hope for the pe11plcs 1,fE11n1pr ro 1 n11\ rr rl1rtr dnun~· .
The spectacular Sovie1-.-\mcrica11 rapprod1rmr11r h;ad confukd and UOUl:Wd
France as well as other Europeau cou11 rrin, ;Kcomp.uurd .n II h;ad bttn by lht
strengthening of Russian military forcn and rl1r crat·kdmu.1 .on d~ml ~~
lectuals. The Yorn Kippur war had tlw11 rn r.1lrd rh;1r rhr l S, "·halt rrnwnmg
in close contact with the Kremlin, did rwr rroublr ro coniulr "·id1 ir.s £uroptan
allies whom it addressed instead in cr11soriom ronr:s.
Th'e explanation probably lay in \\'ashington':s clr:sirr ro 'rrrngthm irs hand
before the new phase of SALT and ~IBFR ralk'..\ny clh-ision wirhin lht
Western world was thus viewed as obsrrucri\·r ;111cf 'ingularl~· unrimcfy. \Vhilt
such an intimidating approach might srrvr rn r;1JI~· \ff.1k gm·rmmmrs, ii
would not facilitate the creation of a united Europr :supporlrd hy lht ~I
majority of its peoples.
The defense of the "free world" against rhr So\'irr rhrr.11 in which no one
outside government circles still hdiewd) wa.~ no longrr .1n acfrqual«- inspiration
for European unity. Only a broad \'ision of a EuroJ><'an frdrralion - able lo
defend itself, imbued with an idral of soeial jmrirr and a rrdrlinition of its
relationship with the Third World - could rr,·iw thr falrrring European
political will. It was futile mrrdy to plastrr owr an ;\tl.1ntic fa«;adr riddled
with cracks, and to speak of "partnership" 1which wall anyhow untranslatablr
into French).
•
• •
The author pointed out to the meeting that hr had writrrn his paJM'r in thr
full expectation that France's path for some time to rnmr would ht- thal of
Monsieur Pompidou. This was now not to be the case, ancf a drarer \"it'w of
the future would have to await the outcome of the French prrsidential drction.
Some general predictions could nevertheless be hazarded. \\'horn·r won, it
was u~Ii_k~Iy that t~e French emphasis on independence would ht- revrf'S('(f,
No_ pol>bcrnn could >gnore the 'esults of a 'ecent poll, which had shown tha~
while 6~ per ~ent of the electorate were critical of the government's social and
economic policy, some 73 per cent favored the current foreign policy. France
could he '."Pected to he in the forefront ofa re-launching of "Eumpe", hut in
a way which would preserve the identity ofits member nations.
12
It w., cleru- that french foreign policy could no longe, he set by one man.
Leaders of all important parties could hope to retai·n th · · ft
. eir m uence only b
takmg proper account of elements in the programs of oth · (" . y
. er parties mcludmg
the Communists, who would be the last to be enthusiast· b W
. . ic a out estern
European mtegrat10n) .
. Finally, the Frencl.1 author conceded that he had been struck by the rela-
tively more cons~ructive tone of the other working papers. He did not mean to
be less construc~ive, but ~e fel~ keenly the urgent need to seek and nourish a
current of pubhc enthusia~m m France, without which the patching up of
a European - or an Atlantic - fa<;ade would be of little use.
*
* *
B. The role of history was also invoked by the British author, who said that
it had compelled the British people to think in terms of cooperation in an
Atlantic world. They would accept partnership between Europe and America
without question. ~loreover, they believed that only US support could give
the Nine the sense ofsecurity necessary to the assertion of their own identity and
unity vis-a-vis their real opponent, the Soviet Union. Nevertheless, Britain's
confidence in the American administration had been shaken by the presiden-
tial crisis, and it would be folly to take for granted the American commitment
to Europe regardless of European attitudes.
Although they were somewhat mystified by the continental preoccupation
with the definable European identity, the British would want the European
side of any partnership to be as strong and assertive as possible. All the same,
the first year of Common :\1arket membership had been a disappointment to
its British supporters and a joy to its critics, with the attendant rise in domestic
prices, the ineffective performance of the Council of Ministers, the eccentric-
ities of Brussels procedure, and above all the behavior of those who had been
foremost in questioning the British commitment to Europe. .
In short, the attitude of the majority of British people towards Europe, if not
one ofindifference was at best one of caution tinged with hostility and at worst
one of outright o~position. British opinion was thus confuse~ and sus~icious
of both its natural allies - Europe and America. It recognised the nsks of
standing alone yet resented the need for allies and the sacrifices that this
demanded.
B
· · · d · · h elf near the center of three
ntam would be well advise to pos1t10n ers
· · d l.t. l influence· a reformed
groupmgs: a strong EC for her prospenty an po I ica ' .
. . . d . d t "al Western groupmg as the
Atlantic alliance for her secunty · an an m us n .
. ' t m built in sympathy with
framework of a world economic and monetary sys e
13
the developing world. But little hop<'. could I~ st'tn for any of thar poupiap
in a continuance of existing attitudes and pohcy.
The attempt to create Europt" via rhe economic rourt was Wlin,; DOC oaJy
was the Community structurr u11_\afisf:.u:toq·, l,ur die wilt IU mUe ir "Wt
was lacking. Theoretically, a "root and branch" soturjon couJd be u.ndtnaba,
but no one could realistically envisage a renegorjatjon of rhc Trnry mlomt
at this time.
But simply to carry on as a loosely cormectcd group of European aaliaa
states, renouncing the possibility of becoming a coUccri\·dy decisive -.Id
influence, would be an appalling loss ofopportunit)'· As a pracricaJ aJla'Dativt,
the author proposed urgent concentration on work ro crratc a common Wman
European political \vill, a realistic EuroJ><'an drfcnS<", •md rhc ace~ of'a
flexible partnership with the l·s.
As regards political will, certain unpalatable facts had to be faced; lhac lht
economic and monetary problems cauS<·d by du· energy crisis couJd only bt
resolved multilateraJiy; that a customs union and CAP were imufficiau to
create Western European unity; that d<'tente wa.s more app&renl lhan raJ;
and accordingly that present defense arrangements were inadequa1e. To hdp
create an effective political will, European leadt"rs should meet rqrularly IDd
frequently, without ceremony and with no subjecrs barred.
Even if the EC stagnated for the time lx-ing, defense arrangemenrs ought
to be revised. European-North American collaboration should be strcngthmed
and a council of European defense ministers created to replace the Eurogroup.
The North Atlantic alliance was where Europeans and Americans found cheir
most important common interest, and defense was the fi<"ld now offering tht
best prospect~ for fruitful cooperation.
•
• •
T~e author remarke? that his paper had been written just after the British
elec~on. Alth~ugh the issue of European Community membership had in fact
~eceived relatively little attention during the election campaign, the author fell
In retros~ect th~t he had perhaps done the British public an iajusticc by
exaggerating their lack of interest in the European question which appeared
to have greatly revived. '
•
• •
C. The German ~riter felt the present cns1s was unprecedented in that it
threatened the survival of Europe and Atlantic cooperation Only b t" 11
. . · y ra 10na y
confrontmg potential dangers would the Atlantic world be able to marshal its
resourc~ to ~aster the pr?blems ofthe approaching age ofscarcity.
Tensions m the Atlantic world had resulted from basically defensible posi-
tions being blown out of proportion. As an example, Europe and the US were
quarreling about Europe's world role when it had none, and about its identit
which was only just emerging, in such a way as to jeopardize both. But Eurd-
peans should not overlook valid reasons for American positions. At a time when
the US was practicing "crisis diplomacy" for peace in the Middle East, and
attempting to resolve matters of vital interest to Europeans as well, theoretical
discussions about Europe were out of place. Unlike authoritarian powers
which could implement decisions arbitrarily, democracies like the Nine were
hard negotiating partners because of the difficulty of revising positions once
taken, so outside powers naturally sought consultation at an early stage.
A major impediment to EC progress had been France's refusal to go along
with Community decision-making. While claiming a world role for Europe,
she had denied the preconditions for such a role, accepting common external
policy only when it agreed with her own views. While expressing fear that Ger-
many might become neutralized, she had declined to join groupings which
would bind the GFR to the West. Without US protection and strong EC
integration, Germany might be forced onto a neutralist course. The Commu-
nity's progress - internally and in world affairs - required either a change in
French policy or a decision by the remaining eight to proceed without her.
In the current debate, the GFR was caught between France and the US.
Because of its contiguity with Warsaw Pact nations, it had to give priority to
security considerations. It had therefore cultivated good relations with the US
and was the only government to help finance the US military presence,
although such actions benefited Europe as a whole. France,. th~s guaranteed
security to the east, could afford to leave the military orgamzat10n of NATO
in the assurance that no others would follow.
Bilateralism was a dangerous approach to economic problems. While g.o:-
d · · th gy cns1s
ernments on both sides of the Atlantic had resorte to it m e ener •
France's hasty measures had had a particularly negative impact. Neverth~less,
. . . b'l 1. h uld not be entirely
while mullllaterabsm was preferable, i atera ism s ?
renounced. Diversification of approach was also beneficial. .
. . · · · 1 f mutual consultat10n.
Unilateralism violated the basic Atlantic prmcip e 0
. Ch h and London energy
Examples were Kissinger's Atlantic arter speec . d d
Th EC m turn ha acte
proposals and the Nixon-Brezhnev agreement. e d d
, r. lt tion were not eman s
unilaterally vis-a-vis the Arab states. Calls 1or consu a
15
r I · · 11, r \•·'!"IT f'lr ,., fi,r .lll l.C 11Jlr i11 rhr .\fidr4.tl Urnt cl inti-
1or SU JmJSSJCJll, ) • . • . .
Americanism. A C!><>rdi11a1rd .1ppr1J;u J1 1111 rl1r .\d.a111u, f.uroprao •uwf n.bOnal
le\'cls was needed.
Three !Jasic altcr11;11in· strunurr' fi,, .\rl.111111 l""l"·r.al1•111 crnC"tgnJ. lfrht
concept of par111ership w;1., tu be punurd, h .111t:c h uuld l.1.-.' c I~ .accrpr ~·s.
European security and ccouomic n·btio11' .and 10 l·o11Lrdr f.C drt:tllOfl-lllU~
power. American support of Europr;u1 111111y would. ii.a\ r lo hr rrsriarnJ ~
with it, recognition of Europr as ;111 rq ual p.1r111rr r1111rlrd lo th own - ~'ll~ly
divergent - views. Tiu: "empty chair" .appro.ad1 w.n h.a.!lrd 011 die con\'lc!Jo~
that joint undertakings should 1101 lw subjnr lo rlar \ rro of onr couniry·. Thu
would mean continucd part11nsliip hut wirho111 Fr.111cr. In rhr p.ur France
had often left Europ1· 110 choicr bur ro pro<Trd wirl111111 hrr, rlmui:h she had
always been welcome to occupy hn rmpry ch.air. \\"hilr rhi, .!pprooad1 Ii.id lhc
merit of breaking some dcadlorks, ;1 trunc-.11rd Eun>J)(' w;u hound lo hr com·
paratively weak.
The third and least altrartivr rourse was "nx>J)('r;lli\r hil.arrroali.,m", rnuf.
ting from a breakdown in existing mulrina1io11;1f fr.1rnrwork., .1nd ;111 innt>.uing
trend toward nationalism. There were many dan.~rrs In '.'f,1hility in lhii ap-
proach. Only multilateral procedures based nn in1rrdrpn1drnn· .uni COOpt'T·
ation could find satisfactory solutions lo rconornic .111d ~rr11ri1y qur,tioru. The
Atlantic world could not be allowed to disi11tr~r.11r inlo .i 1ir1wnrk of hil.llffal
relationships.
We needed a cooling of emotions, a sobrr an.ilysis of thr di'11,1rou' conw·
quenccs of the present course, and a dear rrslalemenl of the gn<1I' of COOpt'T·
ation. A coordinated approach to tlw enrrgy prohlrm w.u n...
wnti.11. Thr
approaching era of scarcity would have a deep rfkrr on thr Atl.rntk world,
with rising inflation, the scramble for r;iw matrrials, and inrrr.1,in~ !{on·rn·
ment intervention in free trade aggravating the prohlrm. :\ strmrning ~iprr~nl
trends was a prerequisite to continued dctente, as rhr Soviet t ·nion w;u likrh·
to take advantage ofAtlantic disintegration. .
•
• •
The ~riter said he was grateful to the author of the Frenrh workin~ pap<'r
for _havm_g demonstrated how deep was the French attachment 10 the'idr.1 of
natwnal mdependence. As long as that tradition surviwd it would stand in
f~ndamenta_I con~~ct with the.c_oncept of European integr~tion - whether on
t e. ~conom1~, m1!1tary.or poht1cal level. \Vithout some form of Community
deciswn-makmg, m which dogmatic interpretations of national indcJ><"ndenc~
16
were at least reduced, there would be no role for Europe in ld 1. ·
· · · f · · · wor po itics and
no possibility o orgamzed lmks with the US. '
:Mr. Callaghan's speech in Luxembourg had come J·ust at th t. h
. . e ime w en a
British contribution _to a common European approach was needed more than
eyer. It seemed to signal the relapse of British foreign policy 1
·nt " h" 1
. . ,, . o paroc ia
msulanty , which was unfortunately bound to foster bilateral relationships at
the expense of the multilateral system.
*
* *
D. The author of the American paper conceded that Atlantic relations were
adrift, mainly because of the unprecedented weakness of individual govern-
ments in a time of rising demands by their citizens for economic security.
Blame for failure to fulfill these expectations was inevitably placed on foreign
causes. But the author questioned how serious the crisis really was. Personal,
idiosyncratic diplomacy had contributed to problems which were more of
style than substance. Economic relations, conducted recently in an atmosphere
of improved goodwill, had pron'd less troublesome than security negotiations,
marked by rancor and consultative disorganization.
The essential Atlantic problem lay in the "deeply rooted asymmetries" which
spanned the entire relationship. While Europe had bridged the economic and
technological gap, it remained dependent for its security on the US, whose
commitment it had begun to doubt. America in turn was questioning the
wisdom of defending allies who did not pay their share and who withheld
their support on important issues. The US could no longer use its "security
blanket" for political leverage in the face of a Europe unified for the purposes
of power but rarely of policy. . .
The US would have to (1) wait indefinitely for a common European posit10n
to evolve, or (2) deal with countries individually, which would disrupt Europe
and contradict stated American policy, or (3) do neither and stand acc~sed
of abandoning its allies. Fundamental to the choice among these alternatives
was an assessment of what "Europe" would amont to. .
Whil
. d · · had evolved the idea of
e a certam European stan on security issues ' .
h "E · · bl E nomic and monetary umon
t e uropean Community" was 111 trou e. co
h d be
. . fi d hange rates were to prove
a en unrealistic from the start, as xe exc b
fl ·b·1· EMU had really een a
unworkable in the face of the trend to exi i ity. .
Deutschemark zone· floating the French franc had underscored.this. d.
' . ld food prices excee mg
The CAP had also proved ineffective, with most wor h ( d f some
C . t f the Frenc an °
AP pnces. This tended to erode the suppor 0
others) for the EC as a means of a.5-!luring agricuhural incomt. The ~nu
union also appeared vulnerable, with euergy-rclatt:d expon corurols~
d the possibility of import controls as wdl to combar rradr drfici11. Jomt
an .
1
d' L-
E ean Policy was Jacking in a number of arca.j, me u 1ng Inc rnpomt to
urop ,, . . ___, . .
the energy crisis. Any "great leap forward. 111 Euro~ sccmcu rnnocr. m \itw
f the lack of innovative ideas and potcnu<sl lcadcnhtp.
0 . . ..____
Paradoxically, those who most fc-.1red a rMtorauon of Amtncan ""A'"""'ny
in Europe were inviting it by default. This ~1?ccrtainry as to "whirhtt Euro~"
exasperated those in the L·s who ha<l tr;1d1t10rrnlly fa\'ortd dOllC rransadanuc
ties and undermined their inflm·nn·.
'
In spite of weaknesses and asymmetries, :\tfaruic economic rt'lariont ~d
been marked by impressive progress. The monetary !}-Stem had bttn drtLStJc-
ally reformed; confidence in the dollar w01s returning; Arab oiJ money was
being recycled; import controls had not yet been imposc-d; agricuhura.l rrade
had been liberalized; and Europe and th<" t:S continurd to welcome each
other's investments. Energy as such was no long<"r th<" crisis it wa.s purported
to be, but was a "surrogate" for the deeper political trnsion lx-twn-n Ammca
and Europe.
Although the Atlantic countries and Japan Wf"rc coping skillfully now with
their economic problems, greater issues might lie ahf'ad: inAation muffing in
export controls; competition for scarce raw matrrials; coopt"ration to dM't'lop
new energy sources; guidelines for intt>rvcntion in the rxchange markrts;
and excessive tapping of private capital markets.
Despite the weakness of the political underpinnings, thf' outlook for economic
cooperation was nevertheless reasonably favorable, thanlu to th<" dt"\'l'lopment
of transnational communities, which Wt>re ovrrriding tht> shoncomin!fS of
governments to deal with economic issues.
One danger, though, was that the more politicized f'conomic i!l.Sut'S bt"came,
the less susceptible they would be to transnational inf1uencr. Th<" unlikdihood
of "spillover" of economic success into the security area was also duf' to the
misplaced focus of the European integration movement, which was punuing an
unnecess~ry economic community at the expense of an df<"ctin· political
commumty.
Europe ?ad eit~er to (1) restore momentum toward economic union, (2)
re~orm the mte?1"at:J.on movement along security lines, or (3) admit that nation-
alism had agam prevailed. As far as the Atlantic relationship was concerned
the fi~st two o~ these alternatives would reconfirm the basis for past EuroJM'an~
American poh~y. Conceivably, both economic and political community
could proceed simultaneously, though divisions might arise and a commitment
to a costly security orientation seemed unlikely.
18
Econo~cally, t~e third ~hoice woul~ be ~cceptable but politically it would
b~ uncertam,.po~1bly lea~m~ to a spec1~l U S-Germa~ relat~onship. Psycholo-
gically, scuttling Europe might be as difficult a task m the mdividual nations
as setting it ~oat again, but a consensus to shelve it might be reached. Any of
the three options would be preferable and more conducive to a clean-cut
policy than the uncertainty of the status quo.
*
* *
In introducing his paper, the author said that the British call for a funda-
mental renegotiation of the terms of entry into the EC had reinforced his
feeling that the very survival of the Community was in question. At the same
time, international economic cooperation was continuing to register notable
successes in extremely difficult times. The period immediately preceding this
conference had presented an even sterner test than had the months prior to the
writing of his working paper. ::\luch of the credit for the constructive handling
of such a wide range of economic and monetary problems had to go to the
emergence of transnational forces, i.e., effective working relationships among
individuals and organizations in the private and public sectors.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
The discussion was organized around six principal topics:
I. The process of European integration; causes of the present disarray; temporary
setback or total brealcdown?
T
. d European integration
he diagnoses as to the state of the movement towar .
. f h th r of the American
ranged from "senescent near death" (the view o t e au 0
. ' . d 'bed" The latter was
working paper) to "not nearly as bad as it has been escn ·
h
. . . . . h ld not believe that the very
t e impression of a Belgian part1Cipant, w o cou .
. . . t'ng would not survive.
important agreement reached at the Pans summit mee 1
h E
ssive and t at urope
Several participants felt that the current gloom was exce A
1 1. peaker
. . . h d . ones n ta ian s
would surmount the present cnsis as it a prevwus . · .
1
ent in
. . h d I d t this part1cu ar mom
argued that strong elements of comc1dence a e 0
19
E h. tory and it would b« nai\ c lo apph· lot1 rarional an ~ysis. He
uropean 1s , ·
suggested an analogy co Swiss chcc!lr; one 'ho~ld lt•1l al r~ic cbtnt and not the
holes. It had to be remembered 1ha1 rhr prunord1al obJcCl tJfGl!•t European
movement had been rhe a\'11ida11ce of a1wd1cr w..ar bcr"·ccn crmany and
France. Transnational forccs were 110\"' rvc11 'lrongcr in rlac Europtan emiron-
ment than in the transatlantic setting.
Few went so far as to endorse the co11tcn1io11 of dac .author of rhc American
paper that the Economic Commuuity \,.·;as prrla;1po; ;in u1mcc~~u1· link ~tween
the strong European national t·co1wmirs ;111d an oprn, liberal multtlateral
system. But many seemed to sharr his ;1.'1s<·ssnw111 1la.11 - i1_1 spire of d.i.sappoin·t·
ments in the evolution of the EC · int<·rn<ilion;al rnmom1c cuopcr'1Uon was m
fact registering notable successes, th;mks 1..rgrly lo rlu· opcrarion of trans-
national forces.
It was difficult to be optimistic, howcvrr, ;&ho111 the ~t;atr of affain within the
EC. In the view of a Dutch participant, this was not "ju111 ;mothc-r crisis". The
unprecedented accumulation of economic ;mcl politic.11 prnhlrrm posed a
serious threat, not only to the life of the C.ommunity, hut to thr wrlfarr of the
member states. Transnational forces, although usrful. wnulcl Ix- in.1drquate in
his judgment to cope with many problrms which c.11lrcl for form.1lizrd inter-
national cooperation: inflation, environmental pollution, unchrckrd growth,
relations with the Third World.
The current spectacle of economic and politicitl cfo.ur;a~· in Europt' lrd an
American speaker to remark that "the clothrs h..,.e no rmJwror'". In'titutions
often decayed and disappeared without war. If Europ<· wrrc to lrn<- its inner
meaning and purpose, it could become just "" rich 8;1lk.1ns tomorrow, !hen
a poor one the day after". This vision should hr rnadr ,-i,·id in our \"arious
countries, he said, and should supply the cemrnt of fr.u t h.11 wr no longer
derived from the Soviet Union.
The mood of pessimism was felt most keenly hy those who h.1d attrihuted to
the EC primarily a political significance, and who wrre still aw.1iting some
manifestation of a common will. An lnt<'rnational particip;mt ol.>M"n.;d that
we had lost our sense of direction in moving toward Europ<-.m intrKration.
Very little ha? been achieved in the way of cooprr;ation on monrt.u~.' affairs,
external relat10ns or defense, and it was hard to imagin<' thr suhstancr of an
European relance, whoever might lead it. Nor was therr arw rral S<'ll~ of ur-
gency about this in any member state. Governments liked t~ point to thr fact
that p~oblems were equally bad in neighboring countrirs, but no S<'rious rffort
was bemg made to work out common solutions.
T~e speaker drew some encouragement, however, from the cvidrnce that
peop e seemed to have a bad conscience about the present state of affairs.
20
While we could probably expect a pause of at least a year or two, in which
little progress would be seen, he was personally convinced that European
union would eventually be achieved, although perhaps not by 1980.
Another International participant said that it was not enough for the Nine
simply to stick together; they had to find a common sense of purpose. The
image evoked by a Belgian speaker was that ofa headless body. Europe weighed
heavily in the world economy, but it would remain relatively impotent politi-
cally so long as the veto power existed. An International speaker supported
this view.
An Italian speaker said that his nation, like the US, had come into being
because its people had decided, above all, that they wanted to be independent.
Until Europeans, as a whole, took a similar decision, little further progress
would be made. Europe might show great economic strength and a degree
of independence in the formulation of foreign policy. But as long as it was
dependent on the US for its security, it would always have to yield to the
superpowers. It was time for Europeans to stop talking about what kind of
Europe they wanted and to attack the political question of whether they really
wanted to be able to speak with their own voice.
Two American participants suggested that the focus in the EC might better
be shifted from economics to political/security matters, as economic coopera-
tion was likely to take place on a much broader field than just Europe. A
Danish speaker warned, though, that the Community's political content and
the European nuclear striking force were taboo subjects to many voters at
present. He said that the Danes would not have come into the EC if they had
foreseen that priority would be given to political aims over economic ones.
At the same time, the speaker was personally convinced that a European
"political continent" was needed to match the other "political continents"
that had emerged in the post-war era: the US, USSR, China, Africa ~nd Asia.
Perhaps Europeans had lagged behind in this because of a sense of gmlt about
their colonial past. But the Third World looked to Europe to assume a larger
role than the regional one indicated by Secretary Kissinger. "To be a European
today should mean to be concerned with the whole world and Europe's place
therein."
Another Danish participant sought to dispel the notion that his country
was particularly opposed to political cooperation. He wondered whet?er. the
electorate in any ofthe Nine would now empower supra-nationa~ orgamzati~ns
to take political decisions. But for the Nine to focus their cooperatwn on security
· NATO of non-EC
matters was especially difficult, as they were partners m
members.
ADutch speaker thought that shifting the European emphasis from econom-
21
· 1
1
·r1
·n 111 d v·n1ri1\ \\l>ul.J f;r puu111i( d1r c.in f.Jtfore the horse. Ifthe
Jes to po - • · · · · aJ · · h
stalt·matr iu rlir EC \L1' 111drrd .1l!r Jl,11r.il,Jr '" 111 pohuc onentallon'.t .en
li!!lt· would br l.('.tirird f,\ .11 t rr1t•ut111~ !11r polll1LJI .&.tJx-Cf ~nd de-emphas1zmg
I I
·,. f>-1• 1
·• \\ hid1 d!rr di JH••\ 1dnl rlir c:omrnon infrastructure ofthe
t It" ('C:(J!llJffl L • ' ·' • • • • • • '
, ... ·1·1 - l'·ir·i·· ,urru11it n>111111111111p1r "' 1117.: Ii.id IK"«-fl loo amb1ttous, but1t
·"lilt. I t • - ' _ _ '
had been ril.('ht i11 c.tlli111{ for .rn n r11 ~rr.11rr toorclm.;aUon ~f econonuc and
monetary policirs, which \\," n.~ri1r1.1l to prrw-nr rbt achievements of the
last dozen yi·ars. . .
:\n In11·r11atio11al spr·akrr, \\-ho w.1~ H1ppor1nl Ii\ .an hahan, ar~ed ~hat.it
was artificial ro try to srp.1r;11r "ri .. 11..11111" from "poliricaJ'~ questions 1~ dis-
cussing the proprr fon1s ofthr EC:. \\"r wrrr \nfnn.muc a rebirth ~fthesc1ence
of "political economy", in which r\ rrv d1~nn1r"W" .it.our cco~o~cs. was seen
to be fundamentallv a discoursr .11>0111 powrr, .111cl tirncr pobbcal m nature.
\\'e were mo\"ing to.ward i11nr;1~i11g ~·'' rr11rnr11r inrrrvrntion in economic life
on a case-bv-cas~ basis "ad ho«-rry" . Thr i11'1ir11rinru d1arged with executing
these discn:tionary drcisions rrq11irnl .1 l.1r~r rnr;L,urr of .1uronomy, which had
not been the case undrr a sntnn of ru/,r .1~rrrd 11pn11 in .1d\·ance (e.g., GATT
and Il\fFj. The EC mrrnhrr st;11n thrrrfnrr h.1d fn rn.1kr a "quantumjump"
in delegating authority to an indrpn1drnr rntil\·.
If the structure of the EC was nnt \Tl wnrkins,r ,.1ri,f.1rtnrily, it was the fault
of the member states, who would not .tllnw it tn funninn, ac-cording to another
Italian participant. This wa,<; a rrflrctinn of thr wr.1knr'' of nearly all Western
governments, most of which had to oprr.1rr with prff•trious parliamentary
majorities. Under these conditions, a :\"nn'TL!i.111 spr.1krr s.1id that it would be
unrealistic to trust in regular frank summit rnrrtinl.!:<i. ·•·'proposed in the British
working paper. Go,·ernment kadrrs would hr l.1hnrin,I.! under the feeling that
domestic political opponents wrrr const.11111\" ward1inl.! n\-rr their shoulders.
Furthermore, although thcrr had hrrn a~rrrmrnr in princ-iple on the election
of the European Parliament by unjvrrsal ,<;uffral.!r and m.1_inrity rule in the EC
(except where the veto was deemrd esse11ti.1l ro prr,<;rn-r vital national inter-
e~ts), realization of those objecti,·es still sremrd a Inn!.! W.l)" off to many parti-
c1pa~ts. A German speaker was willing to agrer with thr author of the French
workmg paper. that majority \"oting might hr diflirnlt if not impossible at this
stage, but he said that small steps in that direc-tion had to f){' taken.
Several speakers pointed out that the European mo\"emrnt was fundamen-
tally one ofpeople. A German participant frlt that thr citi:r.ens of member states
would agree to give more power to a central Europe.rn authority if their gov-
ernmen~s would only explan the need for this, without resorting to hypocrisy
euphemisms and wishful thinking. It was ironic to he·i r n1~mb f t. 1'
. • ~ ers o na 10na
governments and therr opponents complain about the lack of progress in Euro
22
pean integration, when they themselves had failed to mah it 1k;tr t" 1lwtt t , 1111
constituents that Europe was faced with problems which could 11.,1 \w s11\, .-.I .,11
a national basis.
The European crisis also involved a test of our parli;unn1t.1n dt· 111111 1.it it,
he said. The electorate would one day discover tlt;1t tlwir ;,.prt·,.-11 1. 111 \ .. ~
could no longer guarantee their economic and social wl'ILm·, .111d 1,, 1111· 11 11
would be too late for the nation states of Europe to go h.11 k t11 "l>11,111t" .....
usual".
A British speaker observed that governments tc11<kd to 111111 t· ,\t '" 1, 1111\.-.,
they were pushed, and a Belgian participant thought 1\1;11 111.Ji111 .ti 1•.11111
were the "natural engines" to get things n1ovi11g. !11· lt;1d i11 111111il 111;111J11.i
political action on a supranational level, as had i><'<'ll propost'd \1v I >1 . \ l.111,I" ,J 1.
This idea was endorsed by an Italian and an 111tcr11;1ti11n;1I sp1·;1 k..1.
A continuing campaign would be required to cd11c1t1· .111d 1·11J1,1 1111\.\11
opinion, particularly among young people. As a British p;1rt j, ip.111 t \" >1111 • d •1111.
half the present population of Europe had not yet \wen \111111 wlw11 till' '\
11
11\1
Atlantic Treaty was signed. We had to dcmonstrat<' to tlw 11>11tl1 1.t "'11 '1 •J111
tries that we cared about problems of the cn\·ironm1·111, "" i.11 111111< l• , .111'1
regional development.
An Italian speaker characterized the current E11ropl';111 nisis .1, "'" 1111.dil
the sum of various national crises, and a suhstanti;t! p;1rt 111 111
1
· tit"
1
1'"'"11
dealt with the implications for European integration of mt I 1·11t tin ,.\
1
•1
1
1111·
11
1.
in France, the UK and Germany.
Several participants laid the blame for the E11ro1w;111 st.t\1'111.11
1
· ·'' t1
11
il
1
""
of France. In the words of an International speaker, ''Fr;11H
1
' h.
1
' 1
11
"'
11
tli•·
one who has blocked the deepening enrichment of thl' C:
11
111
1111111
\l.
1
d""
1
·"
foreseen by the Treaty of Rome". A German particip;111t 1kt•·
1
1.-d ·'
11
'"'' "'
hypocrisy in the attitude of the French, who pffachcd Fmnpi· whik 1'
1
·"
11
'
111
1!
Capetian nationalism. "It's like castrating a frllmv ;rnd t lwn "
1111
rln 1
111
'. "!iv
he speaks in a high voice". . . .
"d h } ., · · ···t\I' i'TTlll \i l'fl\f lfl·
Another International speaker sai t at, w 11 c '
11
<'' ss. ,
• {' L' ·· · • tf WI' \i.11.\ !11 fllld
ments had recognized the European mtcrcsts o
11
·
1111
' · . ·
· • d · · . t J 1· fl I" IC t I I d \\! 'l I.. "I t Itr
this conviction being translated mto cc1s1011s m
1
·. · . .
I
C rkllll.'. p qin I 1.1111 r •
EC. In the judgment of the author of t 1c ,crman \\II . • • 1
. . . . I . 'rrc,., n1 int"•" .111»11. i.!11• '
notion of independence was mcons1stcnt ~it 1
P
1
' g · . . . •
. f J 1 w.-r 111 tlH I.<··
required the transfer of a measure o sovereign )
1
< > I..
. . · . . ... to thrsc 1 lt.1n'.r'. 11
•· 'f'r.
1
rt
French participants offered vanous ,lns,., < rs . 1 , 1
, . . . llf' 11
t !· 1 •1111 r' 11 t111 ..1 r
emphasized the importance of European 1111
"
111
.is " . _. < ,.11 trdri .111..11
. . db p . I' t Pollljllr\1111 111 I q'.. .
aims. This had been reaffirme Y rcsH <
11
1 1. l l I
I C\Tll \'r.11' \,11t t ir ... 1rn• i i.u
might not be achieved within a few mont is, or ·
· · f 1 · their chair unoccupied. Indeed, they had often taken
no mtent10n o eav1ng . . .
more concrete action than their partners 1n the bmldmg of Europe. . .
They were likely to attach great importance, however, to two cond1ttons,
whoever might be at the head of their government:
1. that the foundation stone of the EC - the Treaty of Rome - not be called
into question. Solutions could be found for the particular problems of each
member country without reopening debate on the Treaty;
2 • that an excess of new international organizations not be created, as much
better use could be made of the existing ones: the EC, NATO, GATT, OECD.
In the speaker's view, the notion of independence was not incompatible
with that ofalliance, or of the delegation of certain powers. .
Ifone was prepared to be patient and to work gradually and pragmatically,
there was cause for optimism about European integration. And it should not
be forgotten that, if France had produced Capetians, she had also been gov-
erned by Carolingians.
Another French participant cautioned against taking the expression "nation-
al independence" too seriously. In France, as elsewhere, there was a vast
potential reservoir of public opinion in favor of the application and extension
ofthe provisions of the Treaty ofRome. It could easily be channelled in support
of such proposals as monetary integration and the election of the European
Parliament by universal suffrage.
An American participant wondered whether the Schumanj.Monnet interlude
had simply been an aberration growing out of the particular postwar situation,
or if it had reflected a more durable vein of French thinking. The author of
the French working paper replied that the Schuman/Monnet policy had em·is-
~ged a slow. movement toward European federation through a gradual econom-
ic_construction, e.g.,. the Coal and Steel Community. This policy had received
w1desp.r~ad s~pport i~ France until it appeared that it was leading to political
and military mtegrat10n, at which point the French wanted to slow down. The
European Defense Community had been rejected by France with something of
the f~eling that had once been expressed by Monsieur van Zeeland: namely,
that. it was far easier to mix together two bags of coal than two platoons of
soldiers.
The consensus seemed to b th t h · · ·
h . e a , w oever won the presidential elect10n,
~ ere.was hkely to be a French relance of Europe - but a Europe with its own
identity. The author of the G k.
. erman wor 1ng paper warned, however, that the
r~lance s?ould consist of more than just words. There would have to be substan-
tia~~ohcy changes, or we would revert to a set of bilateral relationships.
F ehauthor
1
of the French working paper claimed that the British like the
renc , were ess attached than th E · '
0
er uropeans to the ideal of supranation-
ality (although a German participant argued that recent public opinion polls
indicated that the French were not in fact all that opposed to supranational
solutions). In any case, it was to those two peoples - both "oppressed by their
past", as an Italian speaker put it - that one had to look for a new impetus in
the EC. The attitude of the UK toward Europe in the light of the recent
change in government was thus a subject of capital importance.
One British participant expressed serious doubts about the outlook for the
EC in the best of circumstances. From the beginning, it had been a curious
amalgam of a common agricultural policy and a free Adam Smith-type
market in industrial goods. Although a Common Market now existed theoreti-
cally, and tariff reductions had been carried out, the price of industrial goods
still varied tremendously from country to country. History had shown that
"democratic governments would not be allowed by their electorates to renounce
their right and ability to protect their own people, or groups of their people,
against the operation of blind market forces."
Moreover, he said, it was generally agreed by member governments that
the idea of creating monetary and economic union by r980 was totally impos-
sible of achievement, and most governments thought it was not desirable
either. A major problem was that a number of measures to which governments
had committed themselves in Brussels were justifiable only as steps toward a
complete economic union. If such union was indeed not going to be achieved,
it was foolish to pursue vain measures - such as the harmonization of taxes -
that were extremely damaging to the ability of governments to run their
economies or to win public support. "The idea that a Sicilian landowner can
ever be persuaded to pay the same rates of income tax as honestly as a
Dutch manufacturer has only to be stated to be rejected."
The Common Market could only get out of its impasse and achieve greater
. . . . . areas where all member
umty by concentrating on seekmg cooperat10n m d
· . · · 'bl · terest such as energy an
countnes genuinely recognized a v1s1 e common m ' k
. · ·d E rope would only ma e
defense. And in both those fields, cooperat10n msi e u . US d
. . . f f cooperation with the an
sense if it were an mtegral part o a program 0
1l
. J well) Europe wou c
Canada (and in the case of energy, with apan as .
1
· . . f a type
b h
't f "an imposs1b e v1s10n o
e well advised to renounce t e pursm 0
b r can be
of economic union which nobody in his heart of hearts e ieves
achieved until the end of the century." t' reaction from
. . . k d t g and lively nega ive
This hne of reasonmg provo e a s ron . seemed to echo
. . h f th German workmg paper
many participants. The aut or o e . . already as good as
h fi
. 1 h h h aid that Bntam was .
t e eelmgs of severa ot ers w en e s b d ·ts goals as unreabs-
out of the EC if she really believed that it s~ould a a;. on i ponsibility for the
tic. This was tantamount to Britain's optmg out
0
its res
political stability of Europe. 25
In reply, the same British speaker conceded that on balance it would
probably be more sensible for Britain to stay in the EC than to get out, but
only if her net external financial burden could be.reduced t? a level accepta~le
to British voters. It did not much matter how this was achieved: by offsettmg
the cost of the CAP, by creating a regional policy which would bring the UK
countervailing benefits, by reducing defense expenditures, or by sharing the
EC budget in a different way.
The British needed to effect a redistribution of their nation's wealth and
income and to achieve an export-led growth. The status quo from which they
had to start was worrisome. Britain's GNP was well under half that of West
Germany's, but it was spending on defense 50 per cent more than Germany,
measured as a proportion of GNP. In addition, Britain's contribution to the
EC budget was about £roo million net, which was likely to rise to £5oomillion
by 1980 as a result of the existing terms of entry. This was on top of a deficit in
trade with the Common Market of over £ I ,ooo million (accounting for two-
thirds of last year's balance of payments deficit).
Unless this external financial burden could be reduced or eliminated,
continued membership in the EC would be rejected by Britain, which was
growing tired ofits reputation as the "sick man of Europe" and was determined
to improve its performance.
Another British speaker thought that the reckoning of the cost of getting
ou~ o_f the EC would be the most important element in the final equation for
~ntam. It would weigh more heavily than the supposed advantages ofstaying
Ill.
_An American participant intervened to observe that, if the UK's problem
with EC memberschip was essentially one of short- or medium-term financial
accomodation, that could somehow be managed. It was much less worrisome
than a fundamental philosophical difference would be.
. There were many references to Mr. Callaghan's recent controversial speech
m Luxembourg. One British participant said that he had only been speaking
the truth, and that there wo Id h b 1
bd d . u ave een ess alarm had the rhetoric been more
su ue . A compatriot tho ht th M C
. . . . ug at r. alaghan had performed a useful
service m pomting out th t " h
th" k. b h a t e emperor has no clothes." Some sort of re-
m mg a out t e EC was called for.
Two other Britons remarked th t h
for home cons t' d a t e speech had been essentially designed
ump wn, an should not h b k .
ened politicians It b . ave een ta en so seriously by hard-
. s su stance had Ill fa t b f: .
1
. . .
Mr. Callaghan's spe h · h H c een air Y moderate, 1n hne with
ec Ill t e ouse of C M
pressed the hope then that the Treat ommons on arch 15. He had ex-
y of Rome, and perhaps even the treaty
of accession, would not have to be renegotiated, and had spoken of the need
to "steer round the rocks".
Disagreement with the foregoing analyses was expressed by still another
British participant, who was inclined to take Mr. Callaghan's Luxembourg
speech at face value. Abroad, he had said exactly what he thought, whereas in
the Commons he had been restrained by the presence of pro-EC colleagues
looking over his shoulder. The main trouble with the Luxembourg speech,
though, was that it narrowed the room for maneuver.
An American intervention also alluded to this risk that the rhetoric ofLuxem-
bourg would survive, acquiring a momentum of its own and leading Britons
to think that withdrawal from the EC might not be a bad thing. A German
speaker said that, if the danger of verbalism in France was of the government
not living up to its words, the danger in the UK was just the opposite: that
the government would prove true to its word.
More important than the wording of 1\fr. Callaghan's speeches, in the
judgment ofan International participant, was the actual strategy of the Labour
Government. What did they want to do with respect to the EC, the US and
the rest of the world? What position did they mean to take with the voters in
the next election? The speaker said that he had fought elections in his own
time on the assumption that it was the task of candidates for public office
to try to convince the electorate of the merits of a certain program. What
exactly was Labour's program?
A Dutch participant said that if the Labour Government's str~teg'.' was
indeed to seek renegotiation of the Rome Treaty as a means of stay1~g m the
EC, and not as a prelude to getting out, they could generate sympathetic u~d.er­
standing and support by saying so frankly. The other members. would be ':"illmg
to accomodate Britain and to adapt themselves to the exigencies of her d~fficult
circumstances, ifthey felt the perspective was favorabl:· But itwould be difficult
to have to negotiate in an atmosphere of threatened withdrawal.
. ·d h t ·t would be equally
The author of the German workmg paper sa1 t a
1
,
. . . . . EC d l ed it Mr. Callaghan s
unfortunate if Bntam remamed m the an para yz · f h
. . t the political nature o t c
statement that the British were unw1llmg to accep . . d" t
.
1
(AB "f h participant iscoun -
Community went to the heart of tlus prob em. n is
ed such a risk.) d · ted the effect
. . k y had un erest1ma
Accordmg to an American spea er, man d the momentum
of de Gaulle's veto of UK membership in 1 963. It had sdtoppe b restored by
. 1. h" h ha not een
of Europe, and had caused a loss of vita 1ty w ic
Britain's subsequent entry. f · t. n in his country,
. . . . k f th t ong sense o rejec IO
A Bnt1sh part1c1pant spo e o e s r M e sti"ll not sure that
. bl" . . n any wer
and the resultant vacuum m pu ic opm10 ·
. h EC that her interests lay there. There was an
B . . as wanted in t e ' or . I h . '
ntam w . . . h CK at the moment, or litt e ent us1asm ior
absence of European sp1nt m t e.
h 'n in a supranational authority. 'b d
s an g . 1 l' . 1 .t ation since 1970 had contn Ute to a
M reover the interna po it1ca s1 u 'od f
~ . ' h b' t Labour's loss of office, followed by a pen o
Polanzat10n on t e su ~ec · fi · Id L
. 'th uncertainties about how irm It wou •x:
Conservative government - WI . h
and how long it would last - had pusl:ecl t.he Labour party mto a rat rrex-
treme osition, leading to the present situat1or.1. . .
Th. p l't' 1 b ckground together with comnclcntal economic factors such
is po i ica a , . · d · · cl · h
· fl t' d the ri'se in food prices had to be kept 111 mm 111 JU gmg t r
as in a ion an , .
"parochial insularity" referred to by the German at~thor. .1 he IX'st coum
now was to "sit tight, cool it, and be a little more patient with thC' harshnes.~
of the British government's present approach". Theirs was not the langu~gr
ofdiplomacy, but politicians who resorted to that language were often remO\rd
from reality and were "on the way out". . .
Another Briton was apprehensive that the prC:'sc11t mood of d1scontC"nt m1gl~t
be exploited by the leaders of both major parties, leading to a waw of ant1-
Common Market sentiment.
At this critical juncture in the life of the EC, for the British gmTrnmen~ to
call a referendum on the issue of UK membership would be a rcprC"hens1blr
"abdication of political leadership", in the \·iew of the author of the German
working paper. It would be like "putting their head on a d10pping block''.
according to another German. The decision of such \·ital issues should be takrn
on the merits, and not be left to demagogy. The introduction of pkhiscites into
the conduct offoreign policy ofrcpresentati\·c democracies would set a "baneful
precedent", he said.
Several other speakers argued that the renegotiation of the Treaty of Romr
was not authorized, and that even to propose it compromised respect for thr
legality of other international institutions and agrct'mcnts, such as the treaties
with the East. An International participant found it disturbing that England
was expressing disdain toward solemnly negotiated international obligations in
the same way that Germany had in the thirties.
Son:e .British ~peakers, though, felt that the facts of domestic political life
made it imperative to review the conditions of UK membership and one said
it was "theological" to worry about whether this process constitt:ted an imper-
missible "renegotiation".
The analysis of another Briton led him to quite an optimistic outlook. Al-
t?ough ~he UK was faced with complex problems, its position was relati,·ely
simple: it shared many common interests with its partners in the European
Community and in the Atlantic alliance, and as the Duke of Welli'n t h d
. . . , ' g on a
said, "mterests never he' .
In supporting Britain's entry into th~ EC in 1967, Mr. Callaghan had said
that he could see no problem more easily solved outside the Community than
in. However, one would still have to expect to hear the language of the hus-
tings. The important thing about a speech like :Mr. Callaghan's recent one
in Luxembourg was not its rough tone but its content, which was really not so
frightening. It expressed a concern for expanding trade, for reforming the
common agricultural policy, and for finding a fairer way of financing the EC
budget. (We had always recognized that the size and shape of that budget
would change over the years, and that room would have to be made for region-
al policies.) A Tory Government would have pursued the same aims within
the Community.
The speaker felt that the wisest course now was to talk about important
questions - such as what we wanted to do with the European Community -
and to let the civil servants handle the detailed problems. Care should be taken
to keep the list of issues as short as possible and to avoid a political confron-
tation. It should also be remembered that Europe was not just the EC. En-
largement of the Community should have been followed by a more manifest
effort to bring in associate members. Better use ought to be made of ~E?D
and the Council of Europe, and consideration should be given to estabhshmg
a political secretariat for Europe.
What future was there for the EC if, after all, the role of the UK and/.or
France were to be limited or ended? Some thought that there was no s~ecial
magic in the number g and that if necessary Europe could move ahead :-"ith at
' 1 h h th t ould be difficult.
least one "empty chair", and maybe even two, a t oug a w . . b
I
. . t nJ'ust a hm1ted num er
t would not be easy, however, for Bntam to coopera e
0
ofsubjects. .
1
f c major member state
Others were convinced that the w1thdrawa 0
any _on EC An Inter-
would make it pointless, if not impossible, to contmue the · E rope of
. . . 1 t try to return to a u
national participant thought that it was unrea
0
· h the UK no
the Six, or the Seven or the Eight. A German feared that'. witthe inevitable
I EC ld not survive
onger present to act as a buffer, the cou - 1 tter speakers
F
. · · · of these two a
ranco-German confrontat10n. The misgivmgs t had devised
. B ·tish governmen
were mtensified by their feeling that the present n UK 'thdraw from the
. . . d 1 d the to w1
a strategy which seemed hkely m the en to ea
EC. l' for the Germans, who
The consequences would be profoundly unsett.mg 'bution to the pacifi-
h d
. s their contn d
a accepted the partition of their country a k'ng paper observe
. f h German wor i
cation of the Continent. The author o t e
that no other political unit in Europe was so thoroughly shaped by the int~r-
. 1 t m i·ncluding the "European idea", as was the Federal Republic.
nat10na sys c , . . . . .
A particular constellation offorces ~a.d deter~med its constitut10.nal and mt~r­
nal structure, the nature of its political parties, and the consc10usness of Its
class of political leaders. .
The breakdown ofthe EC - which for the Germans had become a substitute
fatherland - might set Germany dangerously adrift, "without home or harbor,
goal or national purpose", in the words of another German participant. It
was difficult to discuss this issue openly, though, without seeming to suggest an
incipient madness in German political life.
The monetary crisis and the "empty chairs" had already forced on Germany
the unwelcome de facto leadership of a sort of "North European co-prosperity
sphere'', according to an International participant. Paradoxically, it was
largely the current French and British policies which had obliged Germany
to take up unwillingly this role it had aspired to a generation ago. The prospect
of continued "empty chairs" would only add to the disappointment of Ger-
many's hopes.
An Italian speaker said that Germany, with its strong economy and mone-
tary reserves, would necessarily be an important factor in determining the
momentum of European integration. Other participants agreed that Germany
was the "sleeper" in the situation, and that it would be useful to have a clearer
idea of the intentions of German leaders.
Whatever the future held, we had come to an end of a chapter, in the opinion
of an International participant. It was not the end of the book because no
European country had any real alternative to effective cooper~tion. But it
was _now clear that there was no "royal way" to unity. The expectation of
makmg regular progress in 1 · ·
. comp ex matters accordmg to a simple calendar
had to yield to a flexible, undogmatic attitude, content with piecemeal achieve-
ments.
In his view Europe would d . . . .
. f ' . nee an improved mstitutional focus, and
groupmgs o parliamentarians a d h h
Th · · . n ot ers s ould be studying possible forms.
e mstitutions we would need t .
had today but t .
1
omorrow might be the same as the ones we
, no necessan y.
A German participant rejectin th h .
the author of the A .' ~ e t ree opt10ns for Europe suggested by
mencan working p
1
should take a step £ d . ~per, counse ed a fourth way. Europe
orwar every time it co ld d b .
could not. It should k . u ' an not e nervous when 1t
see pragmatically th 1 .
European establishment d h Id e evo ut10n of a sort of common
' an s ou not des · fi · h
there would be many in th' 1 pa1r a ter every setback, ofwh1c
. Is ong process.
A Belgian speaker said that E
uropeans had to re-create a framework in
which ~hey could talk to 01~c another again, to see if they still agreed on the
final aims of the Commumty, and to set limits within which civil servants
could work. The essence of the Luxembourg compromise was that philosophi-
cal differences among the member states need not be an obstacle to their
coope~ati~g on com~o~ problems, such as energy policy. But unfortunately,
organizational defic1enc1cs had the effect of inflating crises within the Com-
munity out of proportion.
As had been pointed out by an International participant and by the author
of the American working paper, the major differences today were not trans-
atlantic but intra-European. The US would be watching European develop-
ments, not with hostility, but in a mood of disenchantment and withdrawal,
according to an American speaker. Europeans who had worried about Ameri-
can hegemony and dominance should be more concerned with the opposite.
:Two other Americans observed that the "special relationship" with Britain
was a thing of the past, and that a reiteration of that fact should serve to
strengthen Britain's ties with the EC.)
An Italian participant addressed this problem from a European perspective.
The European movement had been started in order to establish some sort of
balance with the CS, but one could say that Western Europe today was essen-
tially no stronger than it had been 30 years ago. It was still completely depen-
dent on America for its defense, and the recent crisis in oil and other raw
materials underlined its lack of economic independence. "We thought we had
crossed the river, but nothing has really changed," he said.
He agreed with the author of the American working paper that there w~s
no cause for undue concern about the broad framework within which economic
· · d l "th b t he was fearful of two
and monetary questions were bemg ea t w1 , u
ewntualities if Europe remained divided: d
1. that the US would finally cease to hope for a federated Europe, an
would turn to some sort of imperialistic policy; and . . .
. . ld t anti-American tens10ns m
2. that this change m US policy wou genera e d h ·
" h h still hope to exten t eir
Western Europe which would encourage t ose w
0
influence over Europe as a whole." · t z t ur valable
"f E d"d ot become an in er ocu e '
The speaker predicted that, I urope i n . . .11 "
" . . h h E but against their wi ·
someone else will deal wit t e uropeans, . t" " i·n Europe
h
t "open s1tua ion
A Danish speaker suggested that t e presen . f "E ropeans" had
. d" · Th first generation o u
could lead m more than one irect10n. e t" would be
1
th t the next genera wn .
been Atlanticists, but it was not c ear a . .11 sidered European
C
. d d h ther Americans sti con
onversely, an Itahan won ere w e h coming to prefer
. . . fi 1 orld or were t ey
mtegratJ.on as conducive to a peace u w '
bilateral relationships?
31
On that point, a Greek and a Dutch participant referred to recent 81
.g
1 E
· . ns
that Americans realized that successfu uropean mteg~ation .was still very
much in the interestsofthe US. A French speaker added his conviction that th
A
. ' . d e
construction of Europe required mcnca s . active a~ continued support,
not
1
·ust its benevolent interest. The alternative to an mdependent Europea
. . n
Community stron~ly linked to the US was a "Finlandized" Europe within
tlu· Soviet orhit, helpless and incapable of acting or reacting.
While not disagreeing with the foregoing reasoning, an American participant
was pessimistic about the prospects for European integration. He thought that
the scarcest commodity in international relations was the kind of constructive
imagination that inspired collective efforts. And the most fruitful source of
such efforts was the clear perceptions of short-term dangers, especially of a
military nature.
The Europeans did not seem to perceive any immediate threats that could
hr countert'd with current institutional arrangements, and were thus not
motivatt'd to try to perfect those arrangements. One could evoke the dangers of
international political impotence and of economic and monetary disorder, but
it was unlikely that present European leadership could succeed in transforming
thest' problems into rallying points for European unity.
That lt'ft the military threat from the "boa constrictor of the East", as another
Amnican participant referred to the Soviet Union. But the presence of US
troops on the continent made it difficult for Europeans to perceive that dan~er.
Furt.h.ermorl', progress in integration was not seen by most Europeans as bemg
a enttcal prerequisite for the continued presence of American troops, whom
they rt'garcled as sufficient insurance against the military threat. W
Tl. . E t est
. us analysis led the meeting to a discussion of the process of as -
clrtrntc.
*
* *
,.. 11. The ch~racter ofEast-West detente; assessment ofSoviet intentions; prospectsfor a
r.uropean foreign policy.
0 . f the word
"t 1t'. pr~bl~m m analyzing the character of detente was the use o ta static
• sc l'. '.n t ic Judgment of an American participant It might sugg~shlY fluid,
cone 1t10n whereas we · f; • a h1g' 'th
dynamic 'set of relations~~;~. ~le~c:n~on~erned wit~ a proce{~' be [lli1'ed w1
rlemcnts of I tT . s o cooperat10n woll I
. ws_ I ~ty, nvalry and competition. . uatio!la
Thl' Soviet U man, still relatively young as a nation oll the 111ter
32
..........___
scene, was j·ust emerging as an imperial powe1· ancl ·ts lll'l" · t· t I
• • • , c l con ~tc s spreac
beyond her own continent, friction was hound to be generated. At the saml'
time, a maturing process was at work in Russia, bringing a rcalization of limits
beyond which the USSR could not push. The need for tl'chnoloo-ical and
commercial exchanges, combined with pressures from China and 1-:;,;~ Europe
favored a period of calm. '
While Europe and America would not always view the dc'·tcntc prncl'ss
from the same vantage point - because of differences in geographical position,
military strength and international commitments - their intnests wen· not
incompatible, and the essential process ought to be viewed as indivisible.
Although the two superpowers did have certain things to talk to each other
about, it was not true that a special US-USSR relationship was dcvdoping
which threatened to override the Atlantic alliance, with the US paternalistic-
ally seeking to define Europe's interests vis-a-vis the Soviet Union. (Two
French participants had expressed their concern about this.) The speaker
also denied the charge that detente was too much a creature of personalized
US diplomacy. Although top level contacts had received the most publicity,
the process was in fact proliferating into many levels and departments of
government, on both sides. The American government was consciously fos-
tering this development, feeling that it would create vested interests in the
success of the process, and would inhibit its more negative and dangerous
aspects.
As for the liberalization of conditions within the Soviet Union, the l'.S
view was that it should be an implicit, but not explicit, condition of progress m
detente.
A
. . . h · d h d" t'cti"on between the US-
Norweg1an mtervent10n emp as1ze t e is i
. . , · E In the latter area the
Soviet detente and the East-West detente 1n urope · . . 'E
R
. . . . . . f th ·r sphere of wflucnce m ,ast
ussians had achieved a leg1t1m1zat10n o ei ·c1 1 · I
E
. . . . . ll h d to pursue the 1 co og1ca
urope, while mamtain1ng domestica y t e nee . . c
. . d b 'Id up their military 1orces,
conflict. At the same time, they continue to U1 . •
. , . . b t ny generalized dctente.
which confirmed the speaker s skepticism a ou a f I Id
To a Turkish participant "detente" was essentially a new phaslc 1
° tfliie ct~
' . . le but rcmarka ) y e cc ivc
war, in which the Soviets were turmng to simp cl ·I that the
1
th often repcate s ogan
psychological methods. An examp e was e - . ,,- _ f n, attack from
· "fi d by their 1ea1 o a
Russians' defense expenditures were JUStl e cl ,r scs would be
h 11 d our own e1cn,
the West. If such propaganda went unc a enge ' . 1 Iready weakened
r cl" ment wh1c 1 our a
endangered by public pressures ior isarma .. ' h Id I made to realize
d
. t 0 r citizens s ou JC '
governments would find har to res1s · u ' 1 t gc in the struggle
h
, . . h" t but mere ya s a
t at detente was not a pos1t1ve ac ievemen '
for true peace.
33
----------------------
?
This assessment of dt:tentr as a co11ti11u<ttion of the cold w'."' in ~btr forr::
hared by a Danish snraker. \\"cstcrn Europe was bcmg subjccttd 10 a
was s ,-- . poli . .
massive Soviet offensive in the fidds of cuhurc, informauon, Ila, uac~
unionism - e\'erything short of military confrontation. TI1is offmsin "J.1
probably most intense in the trad<· union_ fidd, wh~r~ strenuous dforu_ i.-m
being made by the Russians to ck-<·m ph.1s11.r rl1r political content of the tnlt'T·
national union movement.
We were returning to the situation of 19.JB, with the imponant difference
that this time we were naively unaware of the thr<"at. Those who wm con·
cerned were reluctant to speak out and he labrllrd "cold warriors". TheSJ>(alcr
was not opposed to more contacts with thr East, llO long as \\"estcrn public
opinion would not be led blindly to hclirw that this was tht" way to grratrr
safety and security.
The author of the German working paprr thought that the c\·olution drsc-
ribed by the Danish speaker could be interprrtrd quite diffrn-ntly. ~one of
the Western architects of dctentc policy had rn·r thought that it would not
result in more contacts and communications, more mertings of organizations.
and increased movement across borders. That was indeed thr whole point of
detente. But it was a two-way strert, in which rach systt"m challt"ngt'd thr
other, and we would be mistaken to look only at the nt"gativt" implications.
Another German speaker argued that the preceding Danish intervention
was in fact a demonstration of the existence of d~tente. Onr no longt"r worrird
about a blockade of Berlin or a closing of access routes, but about the stupidit~·
of trade union leaders! This marked a notable improvement.
Still another compatriot thought that it was unrealistic to expect that
detente would remove the causes of tension between Russia and the West.
A more modest objective was simply to lessen those tensions. The treaty of
Moscow, renouncing the use of force, had been a step in that dirt"ction. But
detente would be more superficial than real so long as the Russians thought
in absolute terms, as opposed to the Western notion ofa modus vivendi.
An International participant pointed out that one's assessment of the process
of detente was bound to be influenced by his subjective views and individual
hopes. Nevertheless, there were certain objective facts that could not be ignored:
the massive Russian rearmament; the unrelenting Soviet opposition to US
policies, in the Middle East and elsewhere, despite professions of peaceful
cooperation; and the unwavering commitment of the powerful Communist
party leaders to revolutionary action. Russian methods had become more
subtle, and their propaganda had made substantial inroads in Western intellec-
tual, academic and religious circles. In view of the realities mentioned above,
34
·-------------------1
ho\\'t't'tt, we bad lO be on guard a~amsl pn-ssures lhal would lower our de-
ifmtS.
.-\n American spcakn referred lo dw d<rn~erous lendency in Europe and the
CS to lake dtttnte for gTanted. Sovicl ubscrn-rs uf llic curn:nt American scene,
for instance, might find a number of rrasons lo be skeplical themselves about
detcntt. Legislation for liberalized So\'it·t tradc and credils was in deep trouble.
In the ~liddk East, the Soviet Cniun's plan- was being eroded by active US
diplomacy. The new American cntcntt· wilh China ga\·c cause for concern.
.-\nd the US was building up its own milil<irv strength.
An International speaker, who w;is supported by German and Norwegian
participants, made the point that <1 n01tion's intentions and the pattern of its
relationships could be altered much more easily and quickly than its defense
capabilities. Thettforc, we had to nq~~otiate dhente from a position of strength,
and it was CDCDtial that thr milit;iry halanre of power be maintained. Detente
"ithout defense was a delusion. Thr Sm·ict l. nion had managed so far to
combine these: two aspects more sucrcssfully than had the West, but the
Hanncl Report had concludrd that adrquate defense arrangements had to go
hand in band with detmte.
As the International speaker pointed out. dctente was one of the legitimate
objectives of NATO, along \\"ith defense, deterrence, and the preservation_ of
solidarity within the alliancr. The phenomenon of detente covered a wide
range of poaibilities, from scientific, cultural and professional exchanges t?
negotiations such as SALT, ~IBFR and CSCE. We might hope that all this
would bring about, not only a reduction of the feeling of tension, but a reduc-
tion as well of the cau.sts of tension in \«Hying degrees. We had to be care:ul,
though, not to alter the substancc on our side in exchange for a mere alteration
of appearances on the other side. d b th
An American participant addressed himself to the problem po~~ . Y e
f;
• • d"l than capabilities. The
act that mtent1ons could be changed more rea
1
Y . d
. - · f the Soviets an to
pohcy of the West had to be to try to shape the mtentions
0
' 1 t d
ffi
- to if they contemp a e
a ect the calculations that they would have to enter m
a change in their policies. "t ld not be
Bcca 1
. t d procedures i wou
use of their own intcrna constram s an ' d t the next.
all that easy anyway for the Soviets to change course fro~ one ayd odeterrents
They would be additionally hindered by any impediments an
which we could skillfully contrive to put in their way. h h USSR had at
Th
. fortunate t at t e
e speaker went on to say that it was un . ·nterests and had
· . - pursued its own i
times - m the Middle East, for instance - . ocess which was
heh
· · · · h d't t But this was a pr d"
aved ma way mcons1stent wit e en e. b · ed in J·ust one i-
bo
d "t hould not e view
und to have its ups and downs, an i s
mension. 35
The US saw clearly the varied nature of the d~tente ~rocns ~d tht ~gm
inherent in it, and was prepared to respond as the occa.s1on ~tqw~cd. ~\hen thr
Americans had perceived in October 1973 a potential Ruman ,.-1olauon oftl_ir
ound rules of dctcnte, they had rcckom·<l that they had only fh·e houn 111
gr . . h .L • an·
which to take resolute action, which prccludrd con.sultauon wu wnr •~.
However, eight days before that occasion, the L"S had made ~wo dcli~tr
efforts to raise within NATO the question of Soviet conduct an tht ~hddlr
East and what the West might be able to do about it. The rcspome then by
America's allies had "not been overwhelming", and it did not lit well "ith
them to claim that the issues raised by the CS military alert were new to thrm,
or were violative of the spirit of Atlantic unity.
An Austrian participant saw a continuing clang('r of military confrontation
with the Soviet Union in the :\liddle East, esp('ci;illy if the rdath·c stabilit~·
of that region were to be upset by changes in local lt"adenhip. This risk madr
it more imperative than ever that we seek to norm;ilize Ea.st-\'\lnt rt'lations
- but not in a way that would undermine \\"est('rn political unity.
A Danish participant referred to the recent spt"culation in Vit"nn01 about thr
Soviet Union's plans to make a military tt"sting ground of Yugosla\ia after
the passing of Tito. At any rate, tht" Yorn Kippur war had shown that com-en·
tional wars could be unleashed, fought and stopped without deteriorating into
nuclear conflict, depending on the good offices of the t:S and the USSR.
An Italian speaker thought that the Russians might frcl frttr to undertake
military adventures if China were to assume a more passiw· 11tancc while con·
centrating on its internal development.
According to two German participants, the most serious threat was no
longer military aggression, but the transfer of military power into political
influence. There was some dispute about whether "Finlandization" was the
appropriate word. A French speaker alludt'd to Russian intimidation of Finnish
publishers, while a Swede argued that Finland's experience was actually
proof of its remarkable independence. In any case, what was meant was the
use ofexternal interference to restrict domestic choices in other countries.
The author of the German working paper said it was essential that this
threat be m~de _clear to Western public opinion, especially the youth, if we
were to mamtam adequate defense budgets. The public would no longer
respond to appeals based on the assumption of all-out military attacks, which
now seemed fairly unlikely.
The need for our g?vernments to maintain their credibility among the
yo_ung was also emphasized by a Canadian participant. They would insist, she
said, that a part of the national budgets previously reserved for defense pur-
poses be devoted to what they considered more worthy aims, such as social
36
justice and the protection of the em·ironmtnt. 1t seemed logical that detente
should result in a certain reduction of military capability.' Since it was not
prud~nt to undertake this unilaterally, could one not hope to find among the
Russian youth an echo of the anti-militarist freling being expressed by our
own young people, and somehow to transform this sentiment into pressure on
the So,;et regime?
One German participant feared that the process of detente might enable the
So,iet Cnion to impose on the \\"est certain forms of so-called "good conduct"
in their internal affairs, which would pose a particularly serious problem for a
country like Germany, on the border between East and West. The speaker said
that the result of the "Third Basket" talks in Geneva concerning the free
mowment of persons had been disappointing for the West. The Russians
should not be allowed to pretend that a satisfactory understanding on this
subject had been achieved.
Arepresentative of Greece, another border nation exposed to direct pressure
from the East, felt that the great majority of his people, despite their harsh
experiences since 196i, still understood the significance of the overall power
relationships and would stand in support of the Western alliance. But it was
false and dangerous to believe that the suspension of democratic procedures, in
Greece or elsewhere, was necessary for military security. The protection of
human freedom and dignity was <:'ssential to the cohesion of Western society,
and a departure from basic democratic rules in any country was of concern to
all. The obligations under Article II of the NATO treaty were thus as impor-
tant as the military provisions. This thesis received strong support from a
Norwegian intervention.
With respect to the economic aspects ofdetente, an American speaker warned
that the West might be taken advantage ofin the transfer ofvaluable.technology
to the Russians against long-term credits. He questioned whether this was a safe
d
. A · d that this would be
an productive way to proceed. Another mencan agree .
r l" · · · d alings with the Soviet
100 1sh if 1t were the only aspect of our economic e
Union but that was not the case. He believed that we should conduct our
' · t"ve to behave
· l" · · h · · · th Russi·ans an incen i
econormc po ic1es wit a view to givmg e .
in a way that would maintain a political climate in which those economic
f "l" k "
policies made sense. This came back to the notion ° m age · 1
d h
f; t that one of the recent arge
A German participant referre to t e ac d" If ecessary
R
. . . h db for cash not ere it. n '
ussian orders for capital eqmpment a een '
h S
. . d · · ld for our technology·
t e oviet Umon was prepare to pay m go 1
. "th the Russians
· b · deaing wi '
A Swiss speaker counselled firmness m usiness · cl who
cl
r 1 s developed countries, an
who usually asked for terms reserve ior es - 1 rty rights At
d £ intellectua prope ·
had not yet demonstrated a proper regar or
37
the same time, he thought we should st-i-k avrnucs of coopcrarion \\·irh ti1r
Soviet Union on grounds other than the military and political: ri.::., rcolr~.
public health, population control <me! urban problems. .
An American participant suggested, howc\'cr, that WC' should guard ali(atrl't
the Russians' subverting such cooper;1tin· rfforts to thC"ir own C'nd\. Thn
might propose, for instance, that the risks of <·nvironmrnlal pollution woull:
be reduced if supertankers were supplantrcl by pipdinr splrm.s - unclrr rhr
Japanese Sea, say, or across East Europe. This would thrratrn lhC' principlr ,,f
freedom of the seas which we had alwayc; tahn for grantC'd. \\.hilc thr ri~k ,,f
open war was probably receding, we might ha\'r to contrnd with a rrdurtion
of choices, a slow squeezing down of many frrrdoms to which W<" had l)("rn
accustomed.
Detente was not unrelated to thr process of Europf'an intr!tfation. To .m
Italian and an International participant. it seemed that thr Rm,<iiam would
try to use the ESC and l\IBFR to impede European unity. and th<tt thr W"trrn
European countries had to takr c-arc not to makr c-mKr~<iionii whic-h would
tie their hands politically.
On the other hand, a Belgian speaker ohsrrnd that thr fon-ra.t't that thr
enlargement of the EC would pro,·okc incrrascd So,·ict h~tility had apparrnth
proved wrong. l\1oreon-r, the Russians had raised no ol~jrction at thr Grnf\.1
conference when the nations of the EC had spokrn with onc \·oicc. In thr firld
of political cooperation, the Sc1Yiet l"nion had grown ""cd to thr prartirr of
waiting for the outcome of thr ddiheratiom of the C.omnmnity'~ politir.11
committee. This official changt' was a function of the emeq~rnC'r of a unifird
European position. Conwrsdy. any 1-rtrrat on thr road to Europran unit\'
held obvious dangers, as had been suggestnl hy those who had spokrn of
"Finlandization".
T.he noti~n. of a European foreign policy was supported in principlr. and .111
Italian part1c1pant pointed to thf' near-perfect unity that had hcrn ad1irvrd in
the conferences of Helsinki and Grne\'a. \\.hilr a French SPf'akrr thought that
the room for maneuver in developing such a common polin· was fairh· 5mall.
a G:rman urged that the search be continued, without a;w ilh15ion~ ahout
fin~mg p~rfection. Perhaps the most promising ground for C<~lJl<'r.1tio11 would
be m regional agreements, such as for the l\liddlr Ea.st. when· each countrY
would ag_ree to.look after one particular aspect of a joint undertaking. .
On this sub1ect a British p t. · · · · · ·
• J ' ar 1c1pant wondf'rcd, mndcntallv, wht"thrr It
would be desirable to bring the USSR · · ·
E into a peact"-kre1m1(1' role in th<" :\liddk
ast. ~ ·
.\n International speaker obscrwd that "t k
. . . . . I was aw ward for the EC to tr to
car~ on a d1plomat1c dialogue with outsiders because f th d"ffi 1 y
· tl · d"f · · 0
e I cu ty of sub-
'equen ) mo 1ymg a prenously agreed position.
.\nother International participant wondered h th · · ·
. . . w e er It was reahstic to
expect detcnte to advance much so long as the EC · d · ·
!
. rema1ne In uncooperative
c1sarray.
*
* *
. ~II. The e:sence of pre.sent NA TO strategy; prospects for a European defense capa-
b1h0'.· ·~detailed resume of the NATO strategy was offered by an International
part1c1pant. He began by noting that the NATO "forward style" of defense
was marked by a flexibility of response, capable of being adapted to the partic-
ular threat in question. As a purely defensive alliance, though, NATO always
had to accord the initiative to the other side.
There were three principal military elements: conventional forces, a tactical
nuclear force, and a strategic nuclear capability. The move towards parity,
which was most important in the latter field, was one of the main causes behind
the strategy of flexible response, which put more emphasis on conventional
clements. NATO had an intermediate, "stalwart" conventional capability
- less than a full capability, able to respond to any kind of attack, but far more
than a mrre "trip wire" capability.
Our balance with the East was dynamic, not static, the speaker continued.
It required a continuous monitoring of the other side's capabilities to enable
us to hold them in some sort of credible check. NATO's strategy was based
on the belief that the Russians did not have a "master plan", but a determi-
nation to exploit their force wherever they could with acceptable political
effect. As long as NATO stayed militarily strong, there was little chance of the
kind of massive Russian attack for which we were prepared.
The current re-thinking of nuclear strategy in the US involved an incre~sed
emphasis on the capability of acting against targets which were es~entially
military. That capability had existed all along, but it was now bemg sub-
stantially refined.
According to the speaker, the recent Middle East hostilities ?.ad revealed
· · · d · 1 · th mpos1'ti'on of military forces.
no mnovatlons m octnne, p anmng or e co .
They had, however, produced valuable confirmatio_ns of estimates tha~ had
been theoretically derived in such fields as electromc warfare_ and anti-t~nk
f
· · d of vigorous qmck-
means. The war had also shown the value o trammg an '
acting military leadership.
39
In the MBFR negotiations, he said, the Wnt wa.!I !tt'king an unbalanced
reduction in order to achiew balance, while the Soviets favortd balanced
reductions to perpetuate imbalanc<·. .
A Belgian and an Italian participant rxprn,<-d rrgrt-t that Fra~e, "'.bi~ had
championed the principle of military inclepcndrncr'. wa.!I not partJctpabng!nthe
MBFR discussions. The author of thr French workmg paper agrttd that II was
senseless for the French not to take part in thr \"irnna talks. Anod1tt French
speaker predicted that his country would in fact participate as soon as those
negotiations could be placed in a suitable political framework. For the present,
though, the discussions were "asymmrtric" and wrrc not sure to lead to any
positive conclusion. This speaker went on to claim that France was cooperating
actively with its NATO allies in many fields, including tht" military.
The prospects for a greater integration of Europ<"an defense efforts were
discussed from various angles. An International Sp<'ak<"r thought that the
useful work of the Euro-group might well lead enntually to a rt'al European
defense capability. The development of such a Europt"an fore<" could give
an impetus to the safe and dclibrrate reduction of l"S troop lt"n·ls in Europe.
The need would remain, though, for a central American rol<" in the formulation
of doctrine and planning within the NATO context.
For a Danish participant, it was difficult to foresee an end to Europe's
double dependence on the US: for the nuclear umbrella as well as for the
advanced electronic equipment needed to cope with anti-tank and ground-to-
air missiles. A Swedish observer reflected on the reasons ~hind Europe's
inability to insure its own defense. To him, thr ineffectiwncss of intt"rnational
cooperation in this and other fields was due to "disintegration within our own
societies and the lack ofstrong governments".
A British participant pointed out that Sweden spent mort" pt"r capita on
defense than any country except the US. He went on to argue that no grouping
larger than the nation state could maintain a degree of "social morale" ade-
quate to support the necessary defense expenditures. In his view, both NATO
and the ~C were too "large and vague" for this purpose.
Assummg the morale requ.ired to justify greater defense spending, the prob-
lem was th~n :o define th.e nsk to be defended against. The speaker said that
such an objective evaluation was difficult within NATO whose strategy had
been f~ozen by the vested interests of the military establishments in member
~ou?tnes.. Assessments of t~e Sovi~t threat were always much graver in the
em~-pubhc ~AT_O ?ouncil meetmgs than in private national cabinet dis-
c_ussions. The mstit~tion of:~~ATO had become "fossilized" around a rce -
tionlof ~threat which had m fact changed since the institution had i!:n s~t
up. n t e same manner, the vested interests of the Soviet military establish-
40
ment in Eastern Europe presented a major obstacle to a Soviet re-evaluation
~fthe threat t~ the~..A comprehensive NATO defense review was long overdue,
mthe speaker s op1mon.
To this suggestion, a Turkish participant replied that an adequate review
had been contained in the Harmel Report. The Soviet threat was still very
real, although it might have changed somewhat in form. If the Russians had
become "conservative", it was only to hold on better to what they had seized;
and they would continue to seek to expand their influence.
This speaker and a number of others gave strong support to NATO in its
present form. A Dane said that there was no credible alternative to NATO,
precisely because of its Atlantic character, as exemplified by the presence of
American troops in Europe. An Icelandic participant judged NATO to be the
best natural forum for European-North American cooperation, but he advo-
cated greater efforts within the alliance to keep the public informed about the
extent of the Soviet military build-up. Publicity about SALT, MBFR and the
CSCE might lull our people into a false sense of confidence, which would
threaten the maintenance of adequate defenses.
Interventions by a British and a Norwegian participant laid particular
emphasis on the work which had to be done to make the role of NATO ~ettcr
understood among young people, whose strong support would be nee~ed if.t~c
institution were to survive. The youth of today were probably less natwnahstic
and materialistic than earlier generations had been, and appeals would have
to be directed to their more idealistic concerns.
*
* *
. if .,-r:z · . validity of the neo-classical
IV. Economic considerations : the impact 0
WJ ' ation' d r, t d .
. if th . th weifare state an J ree ra e'
market concept and the hope/expectation ° grow ' e . ·ded a brid"c
. . . AB .t. h ·ntervent1on prov1 "
organized power and economic liberalism. n is
1
. d h' e The speaker
d. t topics an t is on .
between the discussion of the prece mg wo . · t between the period
said that the Yom Kippur war had. marked ~a~u~~i:~~t~~~for raw materials in-
of potential superpower confrontation and t . d matically the economic
. . · b und to increase ra
side theWest. This competit10n was 0
. h And if we failed to con-
d
th rn henusp eres. .
gap between the northern an sou e the East-West conflict
. . h W t f. r scarce resources, .
trol the scramble ms1de t e es 0
M er the increase 111 raw
d
s forms oreov ' .
might take new and more angerou · h menon of inflation, which
t d the p eno .
material prices had greatly aggrava ~ 11
W tern societies. In what dircc-
was now the major problem confronting a es
tion should solutions be sought?
· f h" · · . it was basl"d 011 his coll\ inion that national
The analysis o t is part1c1p,u . . . . . fl
· · 1 · ti"tttti"ons ·rnd burcaucLtllc structurn h.ul far less m uence
and mternat10na ins · • . . . . . f ·
1 ·magincd 011 eitlu-r tlw d11Tl't1011 of thr tUllt) o economic
than was common Y1
• · · · · I nity that
· Th US } "c}1 ·dre·idv t"llJ.OV<·d the tvpr of mstl!ullona u
policy. e , w 11 ' ·' • · · . . · ·
eekl
.ncr still Ind ;1 hanl ti11w .1d11n ml{ unity or economic
Europeans were s no ' . · I ·
1. ~1 nongovcrnmcnt·il bodirs i11cl11cli111{ m11h111.1uona comparnes,
po icy. n any • '. . '
had a major role there in shapmg policy. _ . .
In looking for the causes of inflation, our coulcl 11111 '" 01J placing some
responsibility on the welfare state. But it w .1~ not mlrlv to 1>1.unr: S~me .coun-
tries with the worst inflation had little clrn111cr.1cy .ind no rrd1s~nbut10n_ of
wealth; others, such as Brazil, had man01gcd to n·durr i11ffat1011 wlule effectmg
a redistribution.
It seemed to the speaker that one oft he 111.1i11 roots of inl1.1tion w.1s connected,
not to democracy, but to the pri\·01tc cnt<·rprisr sntcm. That "!IY"!ltem depended
critically, he said, on the artificial stimubtion nf m.1xim11m ron~m~~r de~and,
"by persuading ordinary pt'ople that they're cntitkd to .1 stc.1d1lv nsmg m1d_dle-
class standard of life - wht'ther thev'rc working cl.1ss or middle d.1ss, Amencan
or Egyptian". Restraint was ach·o~atcd only at the timr of wai;re negotiations
with workers.
Out of this system, the speaker foresaw the emergence of intrnS<' competition
for raw materials between nations and multinatin11.1l n>mp.mirs, in their
struggle to hold a maximum share of shrinkin~ m.1rkrtc;. If it wrre not to
produce divisive friction in \Vestrrn soC"irty, this competition would need
to be mitigated by our governments' increasin~ their control ewer the private
sector.
The analysis of a Canadian participant had a different point of departure,
in that he was fundamentally inclined to place grratrr trust in thr efficacy of
market forces. But he saw that the cconomir reforms of the past half century
had substituted human judgment for the automatir corrrcti\T dc,·ices of the
market, emasculating the power of the system to control inflationary pressures.
Inflation had been sustainable only through continual growth, which in turn
had been achieved only through the plunder of natural resources.
But now "the ball game is over'', he said. The oil crisis was just the first
phase of a larger crisis, to be marked by increasing shortages, bitter struggles
for the control of resources, and greatly moderatt'd growth. This might be
followed by a destructive hyperinflation which v.·ould be one of the great moral
failures of the West, as history had shown that no countrv was likdv to survive
as a derr.10cracy when its annual_inflation rate reached 20 .per cent. The problem
was social as much as economic, and could be surmounted onlv bv superior
political leadership. · '
42
Similar coaclusions were reached by a German participant, who feared
that the fabric ofour societies would be torn apart within a decade unless some
means were found to overcome galloping inflation. Anything less than the
jointmanagementofthechanging world economy was doomed to failure, and
the speaker was optimistic about the effectiveness of the transnational forces
described in the American working paper. Half a dozen knowledgeable people
had managed, in effect, to set the world's monetary system working again,
and it was important to try to knit together our networks of personal contacts.
We had to resist institutionalism, bureaucratic red tape, and the creation ofnew
procedura and committees. Official bodies should be put in the position of rat-
ifying what had been jointly prepared in advance.
Above all, the speaker said, an agreement ought to be shaped which would
oblige the governments of the major economic powers to support each other in
resisting domestic pressures for inflationary policies: bigger budgets, lower
taxes, cheaper money. Governments should feel bound, as part of the world-
wide fight against inflation, to slow down the volume of money and credit
and to follow sound rules of financing their central budgets. The voters had to
be taxed in the aggregate as much as they were benefited by the spending of
public monies.
It was not enough to adopt international resolutions defin.ing the.se ground
rules. Procedural arrangements had to be devised under which nat10nal gov-
ernments could help one another to resist inflationary pressures.
This speaker offered his opinion, incidentally, that the floating of excha~ge
. d" . l" ff, t of havmg
rates had exacerbated inflation by removmg the iscip mary e ec
to defend fixed parities against market forces. d d
· · fl t" th re was a broa agen a
Beyond the urgent task of combating m a ion, e . .
. . t" al cooperation was needed.
of economic goals on which Western mterna ion
f: .1. t. the fl.ow of short-term
establishing a coherent monetary system; ac11ta mg . .
. . . . f 1 b d duction. coordmatmg our
capital· rationalizing the d1v1s1on o a or an pro ' .
' . . h h USSR. and elaborating our
economic and technical cooperation wit t e . ' . W hould not
"d · h d veloping countries. es
programs for investment and a1 m t e e k as a
. f k. the world economy wor
lose sight of the fundamental aim o ma mg
whole. the German government was well
An Italian participant thoug?t thatUS in initiating proposals to combat
placed to give a lead, together with the ' . . The immediate task was
. . . h t dangerous crisis.
inflatlon, which was now t e mos f nts deficits of the Western
to find a way of covering the balan~~eoUk~X::,~ich had been most affected
countries - notably France, Italy and . 1
. . ·1 d ther raw matena s. .
by the mcreased prices of 01 an o t b en felt and it was not bkely
The full brunt of this problem had not ye e '
43
LL
·------
that it wotdd he soh·nl tl1roul{h rlw opn;11io11 of rl1r prfrarr banking system
or other t1·ansnational forces. Go,·,.,-11rnr111-~pom.orrd ~du·mn would probably
be more cffi.ctin· and l1·ss i11flatio11arv. It ust'cl to l.>r s.1id, rht speaker remem-
bered, that crises promot1·d int1-r11ational 1111i1~-. Bur rhc- prNtnr economic
crisis might w«IJ fosttT mon· natiou;distic polici<'s, ;md rhrc-arrn rht' progress of
European integration. .
An American participant was 1101 incli11t·cl to look to gon·mment m the
first instance to furnish a cure for inflation and rdatrd economic ills. It seemed
to him that inflation and national aurarkv had arisrn from rhc samt" central
circumstances: the modern combination .of tlw wrlfarc srarc and widening
demands for economic participation, uncfrr the drmocratic notion of egality.
Promises and expectations of "hca\Tn on earth for cn·ryonc" had put un-
bearable pressures on the whole economic system.
At the same time, the restraints which had kept these pressurt"s under control
had been greatly reduced as people around the world lost faith in rhdr belief
that economic rewards were being justly distributed, and demandt"d a reallo-
cation. This was true not only within nations, but from country to country
and region to region. One of the aspects of the oil crisis, for instance, was the
belief of the OPEC countries that they had to make up for 200 years of in-
justice at the hands of the West. The restraints had been further weakened by
the current bankruptcy of Western political leadership.
The welfare state, with its centralist origin and style, had itself been held in
bounds in the past by the larger notions of the European and Atlantic commu-
nities, both of which were now in disrepair.
Societies produced their governments, and not vice versa. The restraints we
now had to look for were outside government, in the hands of individuals and
transnational groups. The task would become less difficult as social pressures
eased. Therefore it was essential that we continue the advances in social prog-
ress made over the past 20 years, while recognizing that the era of limitless
growth was ended.
The author of the American working paper was not optimistic about in-
flation being brought under control in the very near future. It was probably
an even more critical problem than we had recognized, but the causes of its
recent virulent form were not all that evident to analysts. We knew that it was
probably more than economic in origin, but we could not be sure what means
would be effective in fighting it. It was to be hoped that the diagnosis and
treatment would be clearer after completion of the comprehensive study
recently undertaken by the Brookings Institution, in collaboration with other
research institutes.
One key question had to do with the effect of floating exchange rates. The
44
move to flexible rate~ had eliminated the big balance of payments disequilibria
of the past, but had it also served to fuel inflation? The speaker recalled Herr
Emminger's statement two years ago that the fixed exchange rate system was
one of the major engines of world inflation. One was led to wonder if the
flexible rate system was not in fact less inflationary.
For one thing, in a flexible rate system there was a countervailing currency
appreciation for every depreciation, which had an anti- inflationary result.
For another, the inflationary effect of a depreciation produced a genuine con-
cern for the balance of payments position. In the US, there had never been
much concern about the payments deficit under the system of fixed rates based
on the dollar. Today, on the contrary, the monetary policy of the Federal
Reserve took much greater account of the balance of payments.
The speaker said that the US and Germany were the key countries in the
fight against inflation, serving as relatively stable anchors of price stability.
If the new system of flexible exchange rates encouraged both countries to hold
down rates of inflation relative to where they would otherwise be, there was
perhaps reason to be hopeful.
An International speaker said he could not share the conclusions of the
American working paper that the monetary record was impressive and the
outlook fairly sanguine. The annual rate of inflation in the OECD are~ as a
whole had been 12 per cent in the preceding 12 months, and 16 per cent m the
last three months. This was sure to encourage undemocratic forces, and strong
action had to be taken nationally and internationally to stop it. .
The progress of inflation was inevitably linked to the disintegrati~n of th_e
monetary system, and Europe and the US had to cooperate closely m mom-
toring the effects of the system of floating exchange rates. .
AB
. . . . . h d" G man intervent10n about
ntish part1c1pant agreed with t e prece mg er .
the inflationary results of budgetary deficits and excess money su?ply: But ifwdc
1
. d . 1 . the w1dcnmg sprea
ooked m turn behind those effects, we foun a socia cause· : . d
. h h" h t regarded as pnvdcge .
of a revolt by the underprivileged agamst t ose it er 0
. . s'· .
d
· t push 1nflat1on. · inc<
Wages were being made to rise too fast, pro ucmg a cos - 1 . .
. though conccrtcc 111tcr-
social structures varied from country to country, '. c 1 . l r K
. . . fl . licy wnttcn ior t ic ,
national action was impossible. An anti-m at10n po
could unfortunately not be applied to Nigeria. . thcr front:
I
. . b a:- f however on ano
nternat10nal cooperat10n could e euec ive, R.'. pcctations in
. b . . . . . h Third World. 1s111g ex .
m com attmg imported inflation m t e h t clccl to flow
. . stment t ere en
the less-developed countries meant that new mve cl h per application
· · · ff: rmers an t e pro
to mdustry, not agriculture. The trammg 0
a h It tllat food rxport-
f
. . . 1 t d with t e resu
o collective techmques were bemg neg ec e ' . A multiplicity of
. . . . · ly net importers.
mg countries were becommg mcreasmg
45
I
organizations were dealing with in\'cstmcnr projccr.s in the LOO, ~ut lhe_i:
efforts appeared fragmented. Then· was ;w ruormous fidd to be cul~n~c<lin
coordinating these projects to assun- that they were bcucr placed within the
whole economic framework of the hos! country.
This subject led the speaker to obsnn- dial rhr \\'csr's interaction with rhe
Third World would present problems for yrars to come. The differences be·
tween socialism and pri\·ate enterprise could be said to be essentially difference-;
in stages of historical ernlution. Industrialization had been started in the \\'esr
by private individuals. In the Third World, the lead had come from goHrn·
ments, not only because they commanded the financial resources, but also
because they saw in industrialization the fulfillment of a national purpose.
It was only natural, then, that the Third World should feel a greater ideolo-
gical kinship with countries which were public-sector oriented, such as the
Soviet Union, than with the private-sector oriented nations of the West. Wr
had to keep this in mind, and to try all the same to display understanding and
sympathy to the people of the Third World.
An American participant found the preceding speaker too ready to dismiss
the possibility of international cooperation on domestic inflation caused by
social pressures. While it would admittedly be difficult for some international
organization to tell member states how to handle their social budgets, could
one not envisage an undertaking of true international statesmanship, ha\'ing as
its aim a sense ofcommon burden-sharing, even of"austerity"?
An International speaker agreed that excessive demand was a primary
cause of inflation, but referred to the difficulty of managing national budgets
with increased social transfers. While we should not move away from the
market economy and the fundamental concept ofgrowth, we needed to develop
a multiplicity of objectives of economic policy. Our citizens were becoming as
much interested in the qualitative aspects of growth as the quantitative mea-
sures, and governments had to adapt themselves to these new demands. To
manage our market economy in a more sophisticated way, new governmental
structures would be required.
An American participant felt that it would be a great mistake to put too
much stock in traditional remedies, such as monetary and budgetary restraints,
as a cure for inflation. A principal cause of this "most reactionary force in the
world", as the speaker described inflation, had been the cost-push effect of the
increased price of raw materials - led by oil, but including food fertilizers
. ' '
mmerals and timber. OPEC had demonstrated the potential for economic
and political extortion that existed in dealing with these commodities.
The developed world had no set of rules to deal with problems of short
supply, the attention of such organizations as GATT having been directed
rowar~freer ace~to mark:ts. All industrialized nations now had an importa~t
stake m developmg mululatcrally a code go\·erning access to scarce raw
materials. Rules should be spelled out co\·ering the rights of exporting and
importing countries; the range of acceptable export controls; strategies for
developing international rcscr\"cs and for expanding supplies; and sanc-
tions for countries which imposed export controls unilaterally and for blatant
political reasons.
It would not be easy to dc\"clop such rules, and account would have to be
taken of the economic and moral claims of the de\·eloping nations for a proper
return on their products. But if we failed to establish some program along
these lines and to cooperate in implementing it, then we could expect to face
many more "OPECs" and increasing disarray among the democracies.
Another American intervention dealt with the particular crisis in food and
feed grains. This was related to the uncontrolled growth in the world's popu-
lation, which could not be significantly restrained before the year 2000, by
which time there would be six billion people. After that, we would perhaps
have a few generations with the population under more reasonable control.
It was not likely that the Americans would again be a source of big grain
surpluses. They would produce only their share of rather small buffer ~tocks.
The less-developed countries which could do so would have to grow th.eir own
food. As there were finite limits to the amount of available farmland m those
countries, they would need to adopt more efficient agricultu~al policies, w~th
the help of research stations and investments from the agri-busmess commumty
in the developed world. .
A
. · t ry over these vanous
s the nauons of the West worked to attain some mas e . .
. b nd disappomtments.
economic problems there were bound to e reverses a . . 1
S
' . b lting social and pohtica
everal participants expressed apprehension a out resu . 1
. . arned of the particu ar
reactions. The author of the German workmg paper w . h" of
d
. ationalism m t is era
angers of relapsing into autarky and economic ~
growing interdependence and scarcity of raw matenals. . . t controls
A D
. f devaluations, impor ,
utch speaker feared a cham o currency " irng" of the
d
1
11 ding to an unrave i
re uced trade and rising unemployment, a ea ,
fabric of the national states, reminiscent of the
1
93° s. f h maller nations
An f h
ecial plight o t e s '
Austrian participant spoke o t e sp . d tary disintegration
h
. h nom1c an mone
w o were usually the hardest hit w en eco f the multinational
1 d t "b h . hb " 1· . s The phenomenon o . . .
e o eggar-t y-ne1g or po icie · h 1 of rnamtaming
d
. .ty between t e goa
companies had produced a new ispari f · g this at the national
h
. h d the means o assunn .
ig prosperity and employment an . d"ffi lt to regulate their
level. Governments were :finding it increasingly i cu
economic instruments. 47
A Frenchman wa~ /ward r11 plr·.uJ rlr.11, i11 ri1r rruubltd rimts ahead, scape·
goats should II(}! br madr· of ~prci.tl r11ririn, lw rlir~· muJrj_narionaJ companies,
politicians and diplom;tts, or iudi\ id11.d co1111rnn. Ir waJ muraktn,forcxample,
to lav the blame for tht' di~an.1y iu rhr tim·i~11 rxd1.111~r rnarkcrJ ar rhedoorof
the ~ultinationals. Tltt'ir tn·a~11rrn 11.uJ ,irnpJ~· bcru acring as prudent cor-
porate managers. :\ n:proad1 mighr propn/y lw ;addrn.5<"~ ro_ rht go\·~ents
of parent companr countries - notably rhc t ·s - for ;1 f;aXH}: m~~1smg_the
activities of its .\f:'\Cs, but nothing w;as to be gainrd hr making life 1mposs1ble
for international industrv.
Politicians and dip/on;ats, in turn, had cornp;1rarfrrlr litrlc room for ma·
neuver. Currency fluctuations usually rdlrc:trd rhr rrsulrs offundamenral nation·
al policies, and were thus not easily controllrd.
The leaders of all \\"estcrn countries, inc:luding France, recognized the fact
of our interdependence. It was pointless to di\·idr ourseh-es into camps of
optimists and pessimists. \\"hat was needed were the qualities of directness,
frankness, and a certain toughness in approac:hinf{ our common problems.
This intervention found an echo in the statemrnct ofa Swiss participant, which
dealt with the advatages of a free international flow of capital and labor.
Multinational companies would not function at their optimum effectiveness
until their workers were served by truly multinational trade unions. Progress
in this field was slow because of the reluctance of national unions to give up
their role.
The speaker hoped for a reversal of the trend to place direct and indirect
obstacles in the way of transnational investment. International political inte-
gration might be far away, but the diversity of worldwide economic relations
would build up a valuable solidarity of its own which would not easily be
destroyed.
Perhaps the ideal to be emulated was the international scientific community,
for whose members national frontiers scarcely existed. A French speaker de-
scribed, for example, the cooperative effort of European physicists in establish-
ing CERN. Behind this project was a broad vision, supported by a generous
financial endowment but unhindered by governmental pressures, which had
brought into being a complex of laboratories on a level equal to the US
facilities and superior to those in the Soviet Union.
An American participant spoke ofthe long shadow cast by another generation
of physicists and engineers, at the turn of the century. It was not until very
recently that we had perceived the enormous impact of the discoveries they
had made during the decade 1895-1905. Their work had liberated man from
this planet, both literally and figuratively. But it had also served to confront us
and future generations with decisions for which mankind had no useful
experience or precedents.
Intellectual and material forces had been unleashed which were strong
enough to rend the world apart, or at least to warp national purposes and
policies. True independence was no longer possible for any nation.
.rt was essential, the speaker said, that we seek to pool the knowledge and
wJSdom of the Western world. The burden was now especially heavy on the
leaders of the Atlantic community to educate their peoples as to these facts;
to avoid temptations to submit to domestic pressures for short-term relief; and
to cooperate with one another on the development and conservation or our
natural resources.
Another American speaker, alluding to the weakening of European and
Atlantic solidarity in the face of changed perceptions of the Soviet threat,
suggested that the current economic crisis - inflation, payments deficits, the
rising cost of energy, food and raw materials - could serve as a new unifying
force, a rallying point for the Atlantic community and Japan. Such a notion
had underlain Secretary Kissinger's initiative in organizing the Washington
conference on the energy crisis. It was disappointing that no real impetus
toward cooperation had yet emerged, but hopefully there would be a useful
follow-up.
. An economic dialogue of that sort should perhaps eventually.be expanded. to
mclude oil-producing nations and the less-developed eo~ntr~cs. But the
111
-
dustrial powers of the non-Communist world had special mtercsts among
themselves, and until they came to some agreement they could not haw a
very effective dialogue with the rest of the world.
*
* *
. . · pl' ( Petroleum industry
V. Energy developments: political and monetary zm zca wns. · . . .
. 11 an Atn('ncan p;1rt1n-
developments during the past year were summanzcc )y . . . 1 . 1 .
b
lctcly poltt1C1:t.I'( 111 t H
pant. International oil operations had ecome comp . . .
. in rn·1nv 1mport111g coun-
producing countries, he said, and were becommg
5
.
0
' ' .. 1 . 1·111ch '"
. · tl I cornpan1<·s 1o\\ 1
tries. Producing countries were mstructmg
1
c
01
. 1 . · 1·1· .. 1 ~t 111
c..-
d· ort for t 11·ir po 1 11
•
1
· ·
produce and where to ship, and deman mg supp . . liic·t·1011 with"ut
. h ( of cutting pto<
Increased prices had given them t e op wn · · .1rnnTr it "1itnl
1
. b 1 free to break agreements \\ I .
osmg revenues, and they now e t . . 1
- . 11ricr "'!"'' ,ilrnt
· tc concess10ns or .1
them. Kuwait had proposed to expropna ··
to only six days' production. . .. tint ~ui1i1lir~ would
. . . t y had any ass11r.11H c •
No 011 company or 1mportmg coun r
VI
· . t 1 t· "t\"tt·l·iblr ~" our ("ould prudr11rh Ul\ nt in lhe future of oil
continue o D • • • · • •
refining or transpor1atio11; prr'ir11t i1n nt111r11h "rrf'" fKtftl made mainly on
the momentum of past dn·i,iou~ ..111d dul 1101 r.ikr u1ro .;accounl future supply
availabilitv or terms. . . .
The oil. companil's would 110 lo11~rr hr .1hlr r_o oacr ol.t tnlermedian~, as
their producing afliliatrs h;1d lwnm1r mrrrl\" rhr uurrumrnls of the policy of
the producing countrirs. Thr 11rxr 'ilrp ''"ulcf hr for OPEC IO make further
inroads on oil company profits. .
As oil importers engaged in rhr r;u-r for mpplin, prnttralJ~ themse!ves
before the producrrs, respec-t for thr !>;111c-tif\· of .1i:rrc-mrnfs WU dasappeanng.
Producers could he exprctrd to takr full .1ch-.m1.1i:r of brO;Jdfy-phrasedforce
majeure and price escalation d;1usrs in oil cnntr.1C"IJ1. .
The attendant financial prohlrms coulcl nnt IH" r.lJl.il~· 5e>h-nl. Even assummg
a drop in the rate ofgrowth of rnrr~Y nmmmption from _r,.6 pc-r cent (1968-72)
to 3.3. per cent (1972-80), the OPE\. rnuntrirs woulcf !&fill rtteive roughly
$800 billion in payments brtwrrn now ;111cf 1~1 •al ~a harttl), and would
accumulate at kast S300 billion of this for irnntnirnl. Th«" \\'estem banking
system would thus acquire an unsound clqX'ndrncr on a handful of national
depositors. Inflation would not rdir\T thr fin.lnci.11 impacf. u crude oil prices
were indexed. Aiming to rnwr thr innrasrcl oil import hiU h)· boosting exports
would simply transfer the problrm to other rountrirs.
The potential impact of this situation on thr incl11s1rialiud world was enor-
mous, and the speaker recommendrd thr urgrnt formafion of a non-political
group from various oil importing countrirs lo grt a virw of th«' O\'l'rall picture:
what price level was bearable; what paymrnt arrangrm«"n~ wt'l'C desirable;
what were proper guidelint"s for hilatrral oil clrals and hart«"n; and what
program of coordinatt'd support might I><' rstahlishrd for fh«" rconomic devel-
opment ofthe producing countries.
These experts should try to agree on a rrport which could thrn be submitted
to the ~olitical authorities, with the aim of agrering on an approach to the
producmg countries in the spirit that "we're all in this togeth<-r... (In the end,
?nly the West could assure the regimes of those countrirs of protection against
mternal upheavals and external threats from the l'SSR.)
The ~peak.er was not optimistic that the political ";11 would be mustered to
take th~s umted approach. But he was convinced of the futility of a purely
economic response to a situation that was essentially political.
A ~orw.egian p~rticipant lent strong support to th«" conclusions of the
p~ecedmg mtervention. Organized cooperation among the consuming coun-
tries was essential before the resumption of bargaining with OPEC. This
speaker also endorsed the concept of "Project Independence", which had the
50
two-fold aim of conserving energy and developing new sources of it. That
project had been proposed for the US, but it could be adopted as well by
other countries.
.ADu~~~ part.icipant spoke of the dangers of consuming countries' "going
bilateral m their efforts to secure adequate oil supplies. France's agreement to
pay far above the market price had been a major cause of her forced with-
drawal from the European currency "snake".
The importance of conservation programs was emphasized by a Canadian
as well as an International participant, who reckoned that it was far cheaper
to save energy than to increase production of it. Public opinion had to IH'
educated about this, he said. An American estimated that the US might have
the capaciry to be self-sufficient by Ig8o, but it was probable that even at thr
end ofthe century his country would be only 85 per cent independent.
A British participant spoke optimistically about the contribution which
North Sea oil would make to the UK's energy self-sufficiency, with the attrn-
dant benefit for her balance of payments position. It would not solve all of
Britain's problems by any means, but it would make some of them very much
easier by I980.
An Italian speaker thought this sounded like the talk of a sick .man w~io
thought he had found "the elixir oflong life". Might not the economic promise
of North Sea oil prove as illusory as Khrushchev's "virgin lands". of Russia?
An· American participant agreed that conservation was essential, but hr
said it was not the answer to the problems of this decade. The US would be
dependent on oil imports - which would increase. ab~olutely, althoug_h not
relatively -until well into the 198o's. Assuming massive mvestn:ients and ,t ~<'.ng
enough time frame, private industry could develop a more rehable and di\ cr-
sified pattern of energy sources. . I
Th
. ·11 . t . the oil industry at tic un-
e speaker referred to the dlSl us10nmen m .
. . t t provide any guidance.
w1llmgness of the US Federal government to ac or
0
· ' . . 1 .
P
. . . . . .
1
c: t to do even the caswst 10 i ·
oht1c1zat10n had made it 1mposs1b e 1or governmen . 1 · 1·
. t ·1 compames to w iom t us
emergency allocation of supplies. The pnva e
01
·· .
. kb c: th . efforts While those com-
task had fallen had received only bnc ats ior eir '. c. -1 • f. 1I c
. fi the persistent 1.u ur< 0 1
panies hoped to be able to make up 1Il some way or · : ' · . c.l1
·rly wcll
· "bl cooperat10n w.ts 1
'
government to act, the range of their possi e
limited by the antitrust laws. 1 · " to clo with thc
Ab
. . . 11 nts was the one iavm,..,
ig issue av01ded by a governme PEC t' s The oil industr~·
. d 'th the 0 na ion..
pnces and volumes to be agree Wl . 1 • te of S 1no hillion a
. fi OPEC countries at t 1c ra .
was now makmg payment to our Tl. . before adjustment for
l
' ymcnts ( usw.is 'J'
year, or roughly four times ast years pa . · Id b pplicd r<"trnactivcly. !
h b k
· which wou ea
t e participation and buy- ac prices, jl
At least two-thirds of the $100 billion would be accumulated in reserves not
spent currently. The Euromarket could recycl~ this money for the short run,
but an indefinite transfer of sums of that magmtude was hard to contemplate.
Other interventions dealt with the possible repercussions in world financial
markets ofthis huge accumulation of "petrodollars". A British speaker obsen-ed
that the Euromarket had so far absorbed these increased funds with relath·e
efficiency, but as the volume grew there would be a risk of declining credit
standards and an unhealthy reliance on a few dominant depositors. This might
in turn threaten the continued availability of funds and the system of funding
long-term credits with six-month roll-overs. Even if the market mechanism man-
aged to work, which was not at all certain, the massive transfer of purchasing
power to the Arab countries would constitute a geniune revolution, likely to
touch the living standards of all of us.
This view was shared by a Swiss participant, who alluded particularly to the
social impact of a reduced standard of living in the industrialized countries
after 20 years of steady, un interrupted economic growth. Our finance ministers
had to take care to share out the sacrifices so that the least fortunate among us
would not be victimized.
An American speaker drew less alarming conclusions about the monetary
outlook. He believed that it was totally within the capacity of the market,
backed by the central banks, to recycle the increased flow of funds through
their swap networks.
As to the magnitude of those funds, there had been projections in the
$20-30 billion-a-year range, which was very far from the $ 1oo billion figure
mentioned in a previous intervention, and would result in quite a different
picture if true.
Creditworthiness might be a problem for a few less-developed countries, but
there we:e strong positive elements in the balance sheets ofJapan and Atlantic
commumty borrowers.
As for the transfer of real resources to oil-producing countries this would
only occur if demand were to grow there, in which case goods ~nd services
~ould be purchased from the industrialized, oil-importing countries resulting
m a tendency toward equilibrium. '
b Another ~merican P.a~ticii:'ant could not help feeling pessimistic about the
hroader social and. i:>~htical implications of the oil price crisis. It could well
ave such a destab1hzmg effect o ·
n our economies that some of our weak gov-
;~nemreesnutlst1"- adn"dleven. the EC structure itself - would find it hard to withstand
ng is ocat10ns.
52
b
•
• •
Jl ~A.,.,;ctlll rtlalloni . .\n .\111ni1 .111 p.nti1ip.u1t o\isnn·d that it
had always been accepted th.•t prn~rn.\ i11 Lun>jw.u1 i11t1·1.!;ratiri11 would pose
some problems for the l"S. ;\\thou~h tlw rxio;tn1n· •.t t\w l.(: w1>ulcl \iy and large
grtatly benefit the l"S rconnmY, thrrr \\1>1ild \,.. ,1i, irt-tnm 1·co11omic clisad-
1-antagcs. Mort0ver, dralin~ ,,·ith ;\ c1>.ilitio11 trvin~ t" 1w\i;t\T like a goYcrn-
mentwould pl'O\·e awkward. l-"in;•\IV, ;• F.ur"pc with its 11w11 ick11tity was bound
occasionally to disa~lTt' with thr l ·S. Thrs1· prolikm~ \\Tff nmv being com-
pounded by the ~crll.<1iYdY pnson;i\ stvk "f current .\mrrican diplomacy,
which was apt to lead to hi\Oltrril\i.;m in spirit. not _iuq in appearance.
But the US behavior did not rxplain or justifv the nationalistic reflexes of
Europe, as seen for t"Xampk chiriniz: thr recent oil cmhargo crisis. The speaker
found little evidt'nC<' of !\tatrsmanship in tlw current conduct of European
affairs.Anti·Amt"ricanism would trncl to fr,1gment Europe, not unify it; Amer-
ica did not constitutr a \Tr;.· prrsuasin· common enemy. .'.\/either were "special
relationships" with the l"S an~· substitute for Eurnpran unity, though, as we
could not re-creatr th<' working partner~hip of \\oriel War II. (Another
American and a British participant \rnt support to that point.)
To help mend rdations, the speaker suggested that the US move away from
personalized to institutionali7.ed diplomacy, and show that it was n~t so ~reoc­
cupied with China and Russia that it would nrglcct the Atlantic alliance.
He hoped in tum that Europe, including Britain, would take heart from w~~t
it had already achieved in the way of integration, and would revive the spirit
of partnership with America. . . · h d
A h
. . l l N. ·on administration a
not er Amencan speaker pomtcd out t 1at t
1
e ix . h b
had to cope with many major problem areas that had not been deal_t :V~t . Y
h
· ·t h d pursued initiatives
t e two previous administrations. In several cases, i a d d ·
h
. d had succee e m
w ich had been previously suggested by Europeans, an ,, .c
d
. , , . . d b "frozen 1or many
isengaging the US from positions in which it ha een . . 1 g-
. E ) S tary Kissinger' a on
years, (e.g., Vietnam, Russia, the l\hddle ast · ecre 1 d "th Europe
di
. . . h d . t uth consu te wi
stan ng fnend of European mtegration, a _in r If his diplomacy
more effectively on these matters than had his predecessors." ,,
h d . h db "+aute de mieux .
a appeared personalized at times, this a een J' h rrent style of US
S
. l ,. l y about t e cu '
ome participants nonetheless stil ie t uneas S retary Kissinger s
d
. . ay from ec
iplomacy. Without wishing to detract ll1 any w h parant US trend
h
. d d whether t e ap · d
ac 1evements a German speaker won ere h th r i"t was designe
' · " or w e e ·
toward bilateralism was really "jaute de mzeux ' . glect" by America,
f "benign ne
to divide Europe on certain issues. After years
0
53
E b ml.nu the ohicct of ··malign attr11tio11"? :\s there was
were the uropeans eco ,,., J . . I
I It tl."e to the European-L'S relat10nsl11p, though, '"'·r had to earn
no rea a erna • . . . . . . .
to live with different perceptions, to restore tracl1t1onal d1plc.>m
1
atH pr
1
ac~1~,es m
I f " · · kry and gadgetry" and to avoid "paralvs1s >y ana ys1s .
p ace o g1mm1c . ' . . · h
Another German participant concurred wtth the Judg~1r11t tha.t t ere ~as
a risk in too great a personalization of tlw conduct o.f forr~gn ~rlauons, ~art1c­
ularly today when there was no policy conscn~us, either 111 I·.urope or m. the
US establishment. Relations were further cornphcatecl hy the l01ck of Amencan
understanding of the so-called "European identity" rptestion, ;md by Europe's
ignorance about the complex L"S decision-making pro<-ess. There were never-
theless many subjects in which the two continents had an enormous common
interest.
In the. view of a French speakn, transatlantic cooperation had to be based
on long-term goals and benefits, and not short-term conven.ience. It ~ou~d
help us get out of our present impasse if wr would drop exceS..'il\T formalism m
our relations.
An International part1C1pant went a step furthn. claiming that what was
needed more than organized, formal cooperation hrtwern E.urop<" and Amer-
ica was an improved multilateral framework.
A British speaker could not understand the anxirty somr felt ahout the US
"selling the Europeans down the rin-r, or doing a deal mTr thrir heads". He
thought that Europe should be grateful for Secretary Kis..o;ingrr's diplomacy
("riding two horses at once"), and should try to show grratcr trust toward
American attitudes in general. A compatriot srnmdrcl this suggrstion.
Nevertheless, the speaker added, there had !wen occasion!! recently when the
Americans' impatience and bad temper with their European allies had been
both distasteful and unwise. One had witnessed, figuratinly, ;1 sort ofgrabbing
ofcoat lapels, and it would be a pity if the Atlantic dialogue were to continue in
that spirit.
A Turkish participant was sorry to see among some EuroJl<'ans a strain of
hostility to everything "American'', and an obsession with ll<'ing purely
"European". This was not a constructive or rf'alistic attitude. It made more
s:nse to ap~roach every question dispassionately, on its mrrits, in the practical
hght of ones best interests.
_An American speaker thought that the formulation of l"S Atlantic policy
might profit from greater introspection. \\'ere the Americans acting in such a
~ay as to ~nhib_it European unity, either by intemperate language ~r by insist-
mg_ on ~emg. 1~ on the ground floor of the EC's decision-making process,
which might m itself encourage fragmentation? If the l"S wished to foster a
truly separate European ft · h · ·
en I y, it oug t to take the positt\T step of warning
54
the UK that there was no future for the old "special relationship" and that
in the US view, British withdrawal would be bound to wreck the EC. '
On the military side, it was important that the drawing down of US troop
levels not be done in the form of a confrontation, but only after serious negotia-
tions with Europe, so that it could be done in a sensible fashion. It might inclcccl
be claimed that a continued large US military presence was serving to inhibit
European unity, as it suggested to some the perpetuation of a form of American
hegemony.
An Italian, on the other hand, said that to many peopk the American
military presence was equated principally with 30 years of peace in Europe.
In the opinion of a Dane, most Europeans did not want to be forced to make
a choice between the US and the EC (or, more accurately, France). It would
be most distressing to see the EC used as a means of confrontation with the l'.S.
At the same time, the Americans had to realize that the Nine were still a wry
new group, who needed to be able to discuss things "within the family".
Granted the importance of the transatlantic relationship, was the "two
pillar" concept still realistic? Many felt that it was not, principally lwcausc-
it implied an equality of two political entities. An Amrrican participant
thought that for the US to try to act as if a united Europr existed ga\T it tlw
worst of both worlds: rivalry and opposition without unity or support.
A Frenchman said that, as the prospect of Europe speaking with one miff
seemed as distant as ever it was a waste of time to wait for the day whrn one
could have a symmetric~l two-party dialogue. It was more sensible for ~hr
nations concerned with a given problem (e.g., trade relations or the ~rdiictHm
of US troop levels in Europe) to meet in whatever numbers wen- suttahlr for
the occasion.
An American speaker felt that the "two pillar" notion. had. ncHr lirrn
consonant with the global network of multilateral. rclat1<.rn~lups .'"·'
1
"'.'·
required. The density of that network among the 111clustnahzccl ''.
111111
rn'
. t t rwill"I"'' thrir rclat111nsh1p,
put a special responsibility on their governmen s
0
• • .... .
~ d kn·l incl of r;ithrr
well. This would call for consultation at a more pro mm • • 1 . 1.
. . II ·1·1 t f- t in t11rn h;11 imp 11.1·
different kinds than we had had traditiona Y·
1
a .ic
'
tions for the way governments were organized. . . 1 . 1 I I
. A · rrht1011s wnT 1111\'
1
'
1
r\ 1n
As this participant saw it, European- mcncan '
1
k 1 . 1· tlir fr imr·
. Th fi . the irca"C0\\11 o •
by two difficulties in particular. c trst w.is . 11· I in" thr 1r.1n<·
d I
. med we wcrr cst.1 i is i ..
work within which we ha ear icr assu . ·I ....1 •1
. 11f 1hr 1nnlilrm•
. . · d th chan~111g <
1
•
11
•
11
'
atlantlc relat1onsh1p. The sccon was c · · · ·I . li~tinction lirtwrrn
f;
· · · I d"fficult to draw a < c.ir '
acmg us. It was mcreasmg Y 1
11 1 drfu1rd "mpl\ .1•
d
. 1· I few problrms co11 ' w
omestic and foreign po icy, anc I · . 1 ··rs wrrr lw-• 11111r mnrr
. h 't field Ot wr co1111 '1
Atlantic ones, except m t e sccun Y 1
•
involved. "1 ·1
Had cnlargcmrnt of the LC takc11 pbcr while the broader international
framework (including Bretto11 \\"oods had hc·cn in place, and aho before
the more fluid relationship between the· supcrpowt"rs had deveJopcd, then
European consolidation would ha \"C ben1 easier to accomplish. As ir had
turned out, many of the earlier rules and assumptions were bcin~ challenged,
and many of the most urgent questions, esprcially in the econonuc field, were
not ones that could be solw·d simply 011 an Atlantic basis - much less on a
European basis.
The "two pillar" concept was particularlr inappropriate when it came to
dealing with such topics as defense, natural resources and th<' monetarysystem,
according to a British intervention.
An American participant thought that his compatriots tended to conceire
of their interests in idealistic terms and to look always for a sense of purpose
in their undertakings. Secretary Kissinger's call for a new Atlantic Charter
had been concerned with purpose and direction, and with the overarching
values of the European-American relationship. l'nfortunatdy, this spirit had
been lost, as the European response, formulated by civil servants, had focused
on procedural and juridical issues. For the l'S, all debates about consultati\'e
mechanisms were secondary.
The alleged "personalization" ofAmerican diplomatic effort did not in any
case imply an emphasis on bilateralism. The US had been willing to deal with
Europe multilaterally through the Davignon committee, but the Europeans
had shown their reluctance to accept this.
US support for European integration was undiminished, but Americans
now asked "To what purpose?" Public opinion would no longer endorse
simply the abstract notion of European unity, "mindless or non-idealistic".
Americans looked for a form of European unity that would serve the purpose
of structuring international relations in a way that provided for efficient
means ofdealing with our numerous problems. The US could not be expected
to support a concept ofEuropean unity that would be counterposed to Atlantic
purposes and the Atlantic association.
Other participants counseled against building roofs without houses, so to
speak. One American speaker observed that, in all of our countries, there was
a subtle temptation to hope that we could somehow escape into international
solutions for problems we had failed to solve at home.
Another American suggested that, instead of concentrating so much of our
attention on international relationships, we should try "to see what could be
done to strengthen the social and economic insides ofour various countries".
To be sure, we should try to save the EC, but this was hardly the moment to
attempt to relaunch it. Cooperation should be sought in those areas most likely
to be immediately rewarding, such as defense and energy. Otherwise we should
be modest and practical, "sticking to the construction of tools, not c~thedrals".
*
* *
Th.inking back over the discussion, a British participant could not avoid a
certam sense of unreality about parts of it. Had the meeting not sometimes
neglected t? put the really important questions in their proper perspective?
A labonous examination, for instance, of the implications of one or two
empty chairs at the European table seemed oddly inappropriate at a time when
we were on the brink of a total revolution in the economic and financial
relations of the world.
Similarly, a debate between Capetians and Carolignians, or Tories and
Labour, did not seem terribly relevant to the question of what Abu Dhabi was
going to do with its accumulation of$15 billion in two years - or Saudi Arabia
with its $80 billion.
The speaker wondered what a wiartian visitor to Megevc might have made
ofall this.
An American participant was struck by the way in which the discussion had
often tended toward a detailed description of developments rather than a
purposeful analysis of possible solutions.
Many speakers, for example, had deplored the absence of political support
for accelerated European integration, but had found no cause to hope for a
change. Perhaps a projection of what the world might be like in 1985 if present
trends continued would add some impetus to the drive for European unity. The
speaker suggested that the Bilderberg group could play a useful role in spon-
soring such a study during the year ahead.
*
* *
Before closing the meeting, H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands conveyed
his appreciation on behalf of all the participants for the generous and thought-
ful hospitality of the French hosts and their associates who had planned the
meeting. The hotel staff deserved a special word of praise for thei: excellent
service. His Royal Highness also thanked the authors of the workmg papers,
the interpreters and the secretariat for their collaboration.
. . · d f 11 · attendance for the
A French part1c1pant expressed the grat1tu e o a m
· · · "d db Th p · hai·rman of the conference.
bnlhant gmdance prov1 e y e nnce as c
* * 57
*
