NOT FOR QUOTATION
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
"BADEN
CONFERENCE
27-29 April 1979
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS 5
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
I. THE PRESENT INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
AND ITS CONSEQUENCES FOR WORLD COOPERATION
British Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
American Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
A. The Bretton Woods System and the Role of the Dollar . . . . . . 31
B. Exchange Rates: Fixed or Floating?......................... 32
C. "Stateless Currency" and the Euromarkets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
D. The European Monetary System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
E. What Future for the I.M.F.? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
F. Multilateral Cooperation and Harmonization.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
G. Monetary Implications of the Oil Situation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
II. THE IMPLICATIONS OF INSTABILITY IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AND AFRI<;:A FOR THE WESTERN WORLD
French Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
American Working Paper(/) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
American Working Paper(II) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
A. The Iranian Revolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
B. The Arab-Israeli Conflict ........................... :. ·~·... 78
C. Turkey: Again the Sick Man . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
D. The Oil Imbroglio. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
E. Islam, the Third World, and the West . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
F. Security Considerations .................. , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
G. The Republic of South Africa and Namibia .................. 102
H. Rhodesia-Zimbabwe ........................................ 104
I. Economic Considerations ................................... 107
III. OTHER CURRENT ISSUES BEARING ON EUROPEAN-AMERICAN
RELATIONS
A. Relations with the Communist Powers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109
B. "The German Question" . .. .. . .. .. . .. .. .. . .. . .. .. .. . . .. .. . . 111
C. The Austrian Example ..................................... 112
D. Transatlantic Moods and Attitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
CLOSING REMARKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... 115
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
LORD HOME OF THE HIRSEL, K.T.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
WILLIAM P. BUNDY
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ANDROSCH, HANNES
APFALTER, HERIBERT
AvoN, THE EARL OF
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARATTIERI, VITTORIO
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BERTRAM, CHRISTOPH
BEULLAC, CHRISTIAN
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
BREUEL, BIRGIT
BROESIGKE, TASSILO
BROWN, L. DEAN
CARRAS, COSTA
CHAFEE, JOHN H.
CHRISTOPHERSEN, HENNING
CtTTADINI CESI, IL MARCHESE
CONSTANCIO, VITOR M. R.
DALLINGER, ALFRED
DUISENBERG, WILLEM F.
ELIOT, THEODORE L., JR
ESAMBERT, BERNARD
FINNEY, PAUL B.
FISCHER, HEINZ
FoLTZ, WILLIAM J.
FREDERICKS, WAYNE J.
GERBER, FRITZ
GETZ WOLD, KNUT
HALBERSTADT, VICTOR
HARTMAN, ARTHUR A.
HAUSSMANN, HELMUT
HEINZ, HENRY J., II
HERRHAUSEN, ALFRED
IGLER, HANS
ITALY
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
UNITED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
INTERNATIONAL
FRANCE
TURKEY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
AUSTRIA
U.S.A.
GREECE
U.S.A.
DENMARK
ITALY
PORTUGAL
AUSTRIA
NETHERLANDS
U.S.A.
FRANCE
U.S.A.
AUSTRIA
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
SwiTZERLAND
NoRWAY
NETHERLANDS
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
AUSTRIA
5
i
,,
I
I
f
t
JANSSEN, DANIEL E.
JORDAN VERNON E., JR.
KIND, CHRISTIAN
KOHNSTAMM, MAX
KREISKY, BRUNO
LAMBERT, BARON
LANC, ERWIN
LEIBENFROST, FRANZ J.
LENNEP, JHR. EMILE VAN
LEVY, WALTER J.
LEWIS, BERNARD
LEWIS, FLORA
LUNDVALL, D. BJORN H.
LuNs, JosEPH M.A.H.
MACDONALD, DONALD S.
MACMILLAN, MAURICE
McGIFFERT, DAviD E.
MONOD, M. JEROME
MONTBRIA'L, THIERRY DE
NELISSEN, ROELOF J.
NEUFELD, EDWARD P.
NEWSOM, DAVID D.
Nli)RLUND, NIELS
PAHR, WILLIBALD
PITTI-FERRANDI, ROBERT
PORTISCH, HUGO
PRINZHORN, THOMAS
RASTOUL, JACQUES
ROCKEFELLER, DAV!D
RoHWEDDER, DETLEV
ROLL OF lPSDEN, LORD
ROMERO-MAURA, JOAQL:IN
ROOSA, ROBERT V.
SAVORY, ROGER M.
SE!LLIERE, ERNEST A.
SHACKLETON, LORD
SHEINKMAN, JACOB
SILVESTRI, STEFANO
SIMONET, HENRI F.
SoMMER, THEO
STEEL, SIR DAVID
STEEN, REJULF
STEINER, LUDWIG
TAUS, JOSEF
TAYLOR, ARTHUR R.
THORN, GASTON
6
BELGIUM
U.S.A.
SWITZERLAND
INTERNATIONAL
AUSTRIA
BELGIUM
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
INTERNATIONAL
U.S.A.
UN !TED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
SWEDEN
INTERNATIONAL
CANADA
UNITED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
FRANCE
FRANCE
NETHERLANDS
CANADA
U.S.A.
DENMARK
AUSTRIA
FRANCE
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
CANADA
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
SPAIN
U.S.A.
CANADA
FRANCE
UNITED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
ITALY
BELGIUM
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
NoRWAY
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
U.S.A.
LUXEMBOL:RG
TIDEMAND, OTTO G.
TREICHL, HEINRICH
TUFARELLI, NICOLA
ULLSTEN, 0LA
UMBRICHT, VICTOR H.
VRANITZKY, FRANZ
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
WILLIAMS, FRANKLIN H.
WILLIAMS, JOSEPH H.
WoHLIN, LARS
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO
YPERSELE DE STRIHOU, J.A.CQUES
OBSERVERS:
SCHOSER, FRANZ
SCHWARZENBERG, ERBPRINZ KARL
ZIMMER-LEHMANN, GEORGE
IN ATTENDANCE:
CORDT, HERBERT
GETCHELL, CHARLES
HE!NE-0ELDERN, THOMAS
VAN
NORWAY
AUSTRIA
ITALY
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
AUSTRIA
SWEDEN
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
SWEDEN
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
BElGIUM
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
AL:STRIA
U.S.A.
AUSTRIA
7
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-seventh Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Clubhotel Schloss
Weikersdorf, Baden, Austria, on 27, 28 and 29 ApH( 1979 under the
chairmanship of Lord Home of the Hirsel, K.T.
There were 95 participants, drawn from a variety of fields: government and
politics, diplomacy, industry, trade unions, shipping, banking, journalism, the
law, education, and institutes specialized in international affairs. They came
from 16 Western European countries, the United States, Canada and various
international organizations.
In accordance with the rule adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke
in a purely personal capacity, without in any way committing the government
or organization to which they belonged. To enable participants to speak
frankly, the discussions were confidential with no reporters being admitted.
The agenda was as follows:
I. The present international monetary situation and its consequences for
world economic cooperation;
II. The implications of instability in the Middle East and Africa for the
Western world.
In addition to the above formal agenda, a half day's discussion was devoted
to current worldwide problems.
In opening the meeting, the Chairman, Lord Home, read the text of a
telegram of good wishes which he had sent to the President of the Federal
Republic of Austria on behalf of all the Bilderberg participants.
9
I. THE PRESENT INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SITUATION
AND ITS CONSEQUENCES FOR WORLD ECONOMIC COOPERATION
Two working papers, one by a British participant, the other by an American,
provided the basis for discussion of this topic. Texts of the two papers, as well
as introductory remarks by their authors, follow.
British Working Paper:
"A VIEW FROM LONDON"
This is not the first time that we have discussed monetary problems at our
meetings. Only last year, at Princeton, according to the Report of the meeting:
a British participant said that, while the alliance might be fairly
strong militarily and politically, a look at our financial situation
would lead the proverbial Martian to doubt the existence of any
alliance at aiL The single most lamentable demonstration of our
failure to cooperate had been in our uncoordinated response to the
oil price increase. The speaker did not favor confrontation, but some
kind of unified reaction had been essentiaL One measure of our
monetary chaos had been the ten-fold expansion of the Eurocur-
rency market over the last eight years, from $60 billion to an
estimated $660 billion. (This "international short loan fund", as it
had been called, had stood at only $1 billion in 1930!) The resolution
of this monetary disorder was the single most important problem
facing the alliance in the speaker's opinion. He was backed by
Belgian and Swiss interventions, which referrdd to the unstabilizing
effect on trade and investment of monetary instability.
Important developments have taken place in the twelve months that have
passed, notably the November policy declarations by the U.S. administration
(and at least some measures which followed) and the inauguration of the
European Monetary System a month or so ago. But one would, in my view,
have to be excessively optimistic to believe that the situation had fundamen-
tally improved. Indeed, as I shall argue, in some respects there are a number of
unfavorable tendencies to be set against the more reassuring developments
which we have witnessed in the last few months.
It is increasingly being said nowadays, particularly in the intimate
freemasonry of central banks, that there has been a considerable amount of
"convergence" on the international economic and monetary scene, particularly
among the advanced industrialized countries. I agree that there has been some
degree of convergence of views and that the sad experiences through which we
II
have passed, both nationally and internationally, have left a mark on opinion.
There has been much less sharp difference of view at least among policy
makers and national authorities. I take a number of problems to illustrate this
point.
I. Exchange rates. The breakdown of the Bretton Woods system and the
failure of subsequent attempts to reintroduce some order, be it on a worldwide
basis - the system of Smithsonian parities - or a European regional basis -
the snake - led to a situation of generalized floating of exchange rates with
frequent, though hardly systematic and only imperfectly coordinated, interven-
tion in exchange markets by the monetary authorities. This interventiondid not
succeed in avoiding very large and very disturbing fluctuations in exchange
rates. At first, the adoption of generalized floating led some people to try to
make a virtue of necessity and to regard a floating rate regime as- potentially
at least - capable of providing an adequate (perhaps even superior) interna-
tional monetary nexus. This is, of course, a view which has consistently been
held by some schools of economic theorists, often associated with extreme free
market and monetarist ideas, and I do not propose to argue with that view
here. What is, I believe, significant is that the failure over a period of years to
find a replacement for Bretton Woods had led even some, shall I say, practical
men to flirt with the floating rate doctrine. It is an important major part of the
process of convergence of views that this trend has been sharply reversed.
Experience with floating in actuality (which practical men, as distinct from
ideologues, have always recognized could not, in the world as we know it, be
otherwise than "managed"), has shown the dangers of a floating rate system to
be very considerable.
I quote two central bankers. Mr. Richardson said recently that changes in
exchange rates tend to make a weaker and less rapid contribution to the
adjustment than was at one time thought. Furthermore, the slow and weak
response of trade flows to exchange rate changes has been accompanied by
quicker and stronger price and cost effects, thus further delaying the adjust-
ment process. And, finally, in practice exchange rate fluctuations have had
asymmetrical effects: countries with depreciating currencies were forced sooner
or later to deflate, while countries with appreciating currencies were under-
standably reluctant to respond with expansionary measures. Mr. Hoffmeyer
has spoken in similar terms. He has pointed out that the impact of exchange
rate changes on prices of goods and services may be different from their impact
on the relative attractiveness of national and foreign assets, i.e., on portfolio
compositions, thus making the classic adjustment process slower and more
difficult. He has also drawn attention to the fact that there has been a dramatic
increase in intervention amounting in the 18 months to last September alone to
$50 billion; and that, nevertheless, there was no diminution in exchange rate
fluctuations as a result.
So there has been a fairly widespread return to the simple view of ordinary
businessmen that a system of stable parities is an essential ingredient of a
12
reasonable economic order, provided, of course, that it is accompanied t
only by the provisi~n that rates may be altered from time to time to retl~~t
fundamental economic change, but also by the institution of support faciliti t
abl . . d'ffi . es o
en e currencies In 1 Iculty to be sustained during the period during wh· h
the~ adjust to ~h~ new situation by generally accepted policies. In short, ~~e
bas~c c.hara~tenstics of the system instituted at Bretton Woods are still (or
aganr) considered to be the most appropriate.
2. One important consequence of the generally shared doubt about the 1
of excha t · " ro e
. ~ge r~ e. movements m 1acilitating adjustment has related to its
:unct~on m brmging .about "convergence" in regard to the avoidance of
mflat~onru:y (or deflatwnary) waves spreading throughout the system.
!hiS bnngs me to another topic, one on which opinion appears now m
umted 1 · .n · H · · ore
'.name Yrn;,atwn. · ere agam, experience has been an effective teacher.
There ts now no doubt anywhere on the following propositions:
a. for a ~um~er ~f reasons, including probably some deep-seated social
o~e~, mflatwn .Is always latent in many, if not most, advanced indus-
tnaltzed countnes.
b. the:e is a cons~derable probability of inflation being spread across
naoo~al bo~ndanes; and exchange rate fluctuations so far from coun-
teracting th1s tende~cy can "overshoot the mark" and aggravate it.
c. ~he o!d, somewhat lighthearted, theory that there is a trade-off between
mflatwn and unemployment and that it is better to five with a bit of the
former rather t?a~ suffer a lot of the latter has not been proved in
pra~tlce. Ev~n rf It were theoretically correct, it could not serve as a
basis fo.r pohcy u~less one could find means of confining inflationary
tendencies to relatively modest dimensions. No one has yet found a safe
method of dosage of fiscal or monetary measures (or indeed other
me~ures such as income and price policies) that could be relied upon to
achteve such a result. Inflation has an unfortunate propensity to get out
of hand...;tnd. can then only be restrained - if at all - by measures of
such ~ drastrc nature that they invariably lead to that ugly situation well
descnbed by the ugly word "stagflation". For let me say at once that the
dose of deflation. is equally difficult to measure on an apothecary's scale.
3. On ano:her subject t~ere has been a certain convergence of opinion
though h:re differences of view, or at least lack of complete clarity, are still
present, 1f ~nly because we are directly in the area of practical policy. I refer
to the question of the reserve currency and particularly to the role of the dollar
I shall revert to this. At this stage let me say - though with some caution _:
~hat the Nov~mber yolicy statements of the U.S. Administration mark an
Important turnmg pomt. For long- far too long- the authorities in the U.S.
were s~;pecte~ of being ?~voted, openly or secretly, to the doctrine of •'benign
neglec~ , that rs of remammg essentially unconcerned about the position of the
dollar m exchange markets and, indeed, of the course of the U.S. balance of
payments. Let me say at once that I do not share the view that the so-called
dollar .problem is exclusively a problem for the U.S. authorities. Nevertheless
an atotude - real or suspected - of unconcern on the part of authorities
lJ
whose national currency had evolved into the reserve cu~rency was, at t~e
very least, a major factor making for uncertainty, confusiOn and dissent m
international policy-making on monetary matters. It helped to preserve ~he
view held in some quarters (and which had been a powerful source of fnc~wn
in regard to sterling when that currency still had a sec?ndary reserve function)
that a country somehow derives a benefit from havmg a re~erve currency,
since it is thereby able to "force other countries" to go on lendmg It money_. It
follows that a conviction that the U.S. is prepared to make an approp~tate
contribution to a general solution of the international monetary problem will at
least politically and psychologically be helpful. . .
4. Another factor on which opinion seems to be ~learer ~nd more umfied IS
the role of private financial markets in relation to mternatwnal money flov.:s
and the stability of the monetary system. I will have more t~ say. on th1s
subject presently. What is noteworthy at this point is that both the po:ttlve and
the potentially negative aspects of what private markets have be~n dot~g m the
last five years are now better understood. Five ~ears ago thts subJeCt wa~
touched upon at our Megeve meeting and I quote thrs passag~ fro~ the Report.
Other interventions dealt with the posstble repercussions m world
financial markets of this huge accumulation of "petrodollars". A
British speaker observed that the Eurom~rket had so far absorbed
these increased funds with relative effictency, but as the volume
grew there would be the risk of declining credit st~nda~ds and an
unhealthy reliance on a few dominant depositors. Thts mtght m turn
threaten the continued availability of funds and the syste_m of
funding long-term credits with six-month roll-overs. Even 1f t_he
market mechanism managed to work, which was not at all certa~n,
the massive transfer of purchasing power to the Arab cou~tr~es
would constitute a genuine revolution, likely to touch the hvmg
standards of all of us. .
The fears then expressed may now seem to have been ~xaggerated smce
these markets, both capital and money markets, ~ave contmued to perform
remarkably well, a point which cannot be emphastzed enough. N_~vertheless,
concern remains and there is now much greater and wider recogmt10n b?th of
possible dangers as well as of the limits of what can _be done. In ~~rttcula~;
there is a fairly general acceptance of the fact that_ the s1mple cry f?r . c?ntrol
of that market is neither easy to fulfill nor certam to be beneficial If 1t were
capable of fulfillment.
5. Final\v, there is now a more general concern about the _ef~ects on the
developing .:Vorld of international monetary instability and th~ mdire_ct _conse-
quences on the industrialized countries themselves. In particular, It IS now
recognized that official aid and loan flows would have be~n c~mpl~tely
inadequate but for the far greater contribution made by fun~s _raised m p~tvate
markets quite apart from the fact that the ability of industnahzed countnes t.o
' · · · If tl hanced by their
assist the less-developed wtth a1d and loans was ttse grea Y en . .
ability to have recourse to private international markets to sustam thetr o-:vn
balances of payments. To illustrate the extent to which developing countnes
14
have had to rely on private markets, the following figures may be quoted from
the World Bank's 1978 World Development Report. In 1970 the outstanding
debt of the developing countries was divided as follows: private $17.3 billion,
official $13.7 billion - already showing a preponderance of recourse to private
markets. By 1975 the proportions had moved considerably further: private debt
was now $90.6 billion and official $25.7 billion. The World Bank estimates that
this t~mdency will continue. By 1985 private debt is estimated to be $385 billion
and official debt $110 billion.
II
The first thing to be said about this list of points on which opinion seems to
have converged to a substantial degree is that convergence of views on the
nature of the problem does not necessarily carry with it agreement on what are
the desirable objectives of policy; and even where such agreement exists or is
approached, there is by no means common ground on the practical steps to be
taken.
Still, so far so good. What I think it has meant is that since our last meeting
the search for new solutions has been greatly intensified. The IMF has shown
some signs of a new vitality. Inadequate though the steps taken, additional to
the traditional (and conditional) support for member countries in balance of
payment difficulties, may be, such innovations as the Witteveen Facility and
the active discussions inside the Interim Committee must be given some credit,
particularly when one bears in mind the painfully slow operation of this
cumbersome machinery in which the many conflicting interests of individual
countries or groups of countries have full sway.
But it must be recognized that a really worldwide solution within the ambit
of the IMF is still a long way off; and this must be ascribed primarily to the
unresolved question of the role of the dollar as well as to the inherent difficulty
of devising an international system that answers to the criteria for a truly
effective one. ldraw again on Erik Hoffmeyer in this regard. To sum up and
paraphrase him, he sets out the following three characteristics of an ideal
monetary system. First, world financing (which includes not only available
official credits, but the far larger private capital and banking markets) should
be available, but should not be so easy to obtain as to remove pressures on
countries via the balance of payments to accomplish any necessary adjustment
process. Second, exchange rate move~ents should support the need for, and
help to achieve, necessary adjustments, but should not be so powerful that
they result in pressures for restriction in deficit countries and for inflation in
surplus countries. And, finally, both exchange rate and reserve movements
should bring some pressure to bear on domestic macroeconomic policies, but
not to such an extent as to generate inflationary or deflationary impulses.
Merely to enumerate these desiderata is to show how difficult it is to achieve
agreement on practical steps towards the institution of a system that would
contain these characteristics, particularly when one recalls on the one hand the
extremely wide movements in payments imbalances, reserve developments,
15
exchange rate fluctuations, and on the other, the wide divergencies in intlation
rates and the ups and downs of domestic policies in all our countries in the five
years since the effects of the oil price revolution began to be felt.
III
It is not surprising, therefore, that attention should have been turned to the
possibility of bringing some order into the present chaotic monetary situation,
at least on a regional scale. Hence the revived impetus towards European
Monetary Union. A careful study of Roy Jenkins' Monnet lecture on 27
October 1977, in which he took the initiative to re-launch the search for greater
monetary integration within the European Community, shows this clearly. Of
course, his major arguments in favor of this development are drawn from
factors inherent within the accepted framework of the search for economic and,
eventually, political integration. But some influence is also reserved for the
disappointing absence of progress on a world scale. "The benefits of a
European currency, as a joint and alternative pillar of the world monetary
system," said Mr. Jenkins, "would be great and made still more necessary by
the current problems of the dollar with its possible destabilizing effects. By
such a development the Community would be relieved of many short-term
balance of payments preoccupations." And he went on to outline in detail the
characteristics of such a European system and the advantages which it would
confer. To this 1 shall revert when considering the most recent developments
and prospects.
But before going further I must just recall what has happened on this point
since Roy Jenkins' speech - not to describe in detail the various ups and
downs or sudden turns in the negotiations, but some of the major elements in
the process by which an EMS, incomplete though it still is, was established.
Looking at the matter from London, it is perhaps appropriate to look first at
the absence from the system of an important member of the Community, the
United Kingdom. A good deal of speculation has been generated by the British
Government's decision to be a member, but, in respect of the intervention
mechanism an inactive member, of the EMS; and not many commentators have
been content to accept the official explanation. One part, it is fair to suppose,
of the reason for the British decision lies in the lingering doubt about the
wisdom of membership as such which is to be found in both the major political
parties, but particularly in the present governing party. This inevitably means
that any major forward moves in the Community which can be represented as
further important derogations from national sovereignty and particularly as
substantial restrictions of autonomy in economic policy, are meticulously
scrutinized in some quarters and thus oblige the government to treat them as
politically ultrasensitive. When such proposals coincide, as they may do, with
serious dissatisfaction on other matters (in this instance the make-up of the
Community's budget and the operation of the Common Agricultural Policy) it is
not surprising, even if it may be regarded as regrettable, that the British
Government should have sought improvements in these other regards and in
16
the area of tr.ansfer of resources as a condition for taking a more fa bl
· f · b h' · . vora e
vtew o mem ers tp tn the EMS. However unedifying such behavior
appear to the starry-eyed, it should be pointed out that it is, and has for a ~~~
ttme .been, standard Community negotiating procedure. But there are other
and, tf I may so call them. more "respectable" reasons for hesitation To
f h · . . . some
o t ese, particularly the relation between a monetary mechanism a d
· h · · n eco-
n~m!c armomzatwn on the one hand, and the relation between a regional and
a worldwtde monetary s.ystem on the other, which go the heart of the question
of whether the EMS. wtll succeed, I will return presently.
. On .a more techn~cal level, the U.K.'s hesitation is shared by others,
mcludmg.some prominent members of the system. In the first place, there is
the questron whether the mtervention system is likely to be more lasting th
the old snak~ and whet~er it is .in itself well founded. A complete answer~~
thts questiOn ts not posstble at th1s ~oment. For some time before the adoption
of the sys~em an~ the sh~rt time smce, the member currencies have, through
the coordmated mterventlon of their member central banks bee k ·
bl b
.
1
. . . , n ept tn
reasona e sta t tty wtthm what have become the agreed intervention 1· ·
Wh ·
1
· tmlts.
. at ts ~ot c ear ts wh.ether this can be expected to continue when major
dtvergenctes occur and, m parttcular, when the relative stability of the dollar
over t~e last f~w weeks were to give way to renewed fluctuation.
The mt~rvent10n system itself is highly complicated. As a result of a political
compromt~e two systems (whic~ are based on rather different analytical
const~eratwns) have been combmed. The intervention rates are based on
permttted m.ovements of .plus or minus 2\4 per cent to each other member
cur~ency. (wllh. an exceptiOnal 6 per cent for the Italian lira), thus forming a
panty g~td which operates. much. as the original snake and which has always
been c~tlctzed by countnes wtth weaker, or more likely to be weaker,
currenctes as puttmg a disproportionate burden of adjustment on them. To
counter thts cntictsm an additional mechanism, a so-called early warning
system, has been created.
Thi~ is' Opt!rated by so-called divergence indicators for each currency
established by a. complicated formula and expressed as a percentage departure,
~ot fron;, tts panty t~ each other currency, but from its own central rate in the
basket or cocktail of the ECU (the European Currency Unit). This unit is
based on certain "weights" assigned to each currency, e.g., the D-mark 33
percent. and so on. When the indicator is reached, the government concerned
ts suppo~ed to co~sult with its partners and to take action by intervention,
changes m domestic monetary policy, devaluation or revaluation of its central
ra.te, or other economic measures. Not only is it not at all clear how all this
wtll work 1~ pra~ttce - the computer will play an important part - but how
the rate hmlts wtll be related to each other. It is, for example, amusing to note
that the recent relauve strength of sterling might conceivably have pushed it-
were 1t part of the system - beyond the upper early warning limit with
somewhat paradoxical results. '
. Another, and p~rhaps even more fundamental question is the way in which
disturbances comtng from outstde - essentially from the dollar - will affect
17
the individual member currencies. The British hesitation arises from the fear
that the terms-of-trade effects, for example, of a further depreciation of the
dollar might be very different for the stronger currencies in the EMS as against
the weaker, given the different structures of the member countries' exports and
imports and their cost and price responsiveness. This is a point one also finds
frequently mentioned in other countries, for example in French industrial
circles. Related to these concerns about the external consequences are also
some fears that the implications for ability to control domestic monetary policy
might be adverse.
IV
At this point one can widen the discussion and ask in more general terms
what the prospects for the EMS are, or put it in another way: "What are the
conditions for its success?" And to this question is allied another one: "On
what conditions will it make a contribution to the development of a new and
better-functioning international monetary system?" Leaving aside the compli-
cated problems of the technical aspects of the dual intervention criteria and the
equally difficult problems of effectively acting in accordance with them and
also leaving aside the all-important nexus between the intra-Community
monetary movements and those coming - autonomously or at one remove -
from the outside world, the answer to the first of these questions turns very
much on the issue whether the underlying economic developments of the
member countries can be expected to be sufficiently close to each other in
direction and timing to make the exchange rate regime a reasonably stable one.
This question was at the heart of much of the argument between the members
before agreement on the EMS was reached and proved one of the main
stumbling blocks to U.K. membership. For, whether conceived in its most
abstract form, or whether related to one major specific issue already referred to
such as the terms-of-trade effect of outside disturbances, the question of the
relation between monetary and general economic unification is a fundamental
one.
It can be argued that those who want monetary union first are putting the
cart before the horse and are doomed to suffer the same sort of disappointment
that was caused by the failure of the snake. On the other hand, it can be said
that those who want to wait to put the coping stone of monetary union on an
already achieved economic union are condemned to wait until the Greek
Kalends. Or, put more simply, the question resolves itself into one relating to
the power - in practice - of institutional arrangements in the monetary
sphere producing enough discipline among members in regard to consequential
economic policy measures. If one gives an affirmative answer, then one can
expect the EMS to become a powerful engine for forcing a higher degree of
general economic unification.
Mr. Jenkins, not unnaturally, takes a positive view on this issue. In his
seminal lecture he lists four desiderata on the general economic front. These
are important enough to be worth quoting in extenso:
18
"There has to be confidence in steady and more uniform economic
policies favoring investment and expansion;
there has to be a strengthening of demand with a wide geographical
base; .
if inflation is to continue, it must be at a lower and more even rate
than Europe has known in recent years;
we have to ensure that spasmodic, local economic difficulties will
not be magnified by exchange rates and capital movements into
general crises of confidence."
He goes on t? say that "these four requirements may seem obvious enough.
The challenge ts how to change radically and for the better the institutional
weak_nesses that. have b~~n hindering our ability to restore high employment in
condtttons of pnce stabthty and a sound external payments position. 1 believe
that monetary union can open perspectives of this kind."
In support of this view, those responsible in the Commission for these
matters have rejected the view that the EMS, even in its present attenuated
form, is no more than the snake writ large. They have pointed to the dual
intervention ~echanism ~ith, in particular.' its early warning system. They
have emphastzed the obltgatwn on countnes to consult when the indicator
lights up and, more generally, to the continuous close consultation at a number
of levels, inside the Community. This is described as something quite different
f~om the IMF struct~re .w?ic~, generally speaking, requires a country in
difficulties to take the tntttat1ve tn seekmg assistance and thereby expose itself
to investigation by the Fund and eventual imposition by the Fund of economic
policy conditions. The Community system. it is argued, is less abrupt, puts the
initiative both in the individual country and in the center and is, therefore, less
"political': and sensiti_ve. In shor:, it is said that it is- or will be- something
closer to an 001bryonrc Commumty Central Monetary Authority, rather of the
kind Keynes would have had the IMF be but for American resistance. As it
dev~lops fully into that sort of institution, the EMS, it is argued, will provide a
shtmng example and teach the world by its precept how to reform the wider
monetary system.
Is this a pipe dream, or is it a fairly realistic assessment of what the EMS
can become? It is impossible to be entirely confident about one's answer,
though experience to-date in other areas is not wholly encouraging. That
mechanisms and institutional obligations, arrangements and relationships can
~xercise a powerful influence on policies not directly and immediately
mvolved, cannot be denied. Governments, particularly weak governments,
have been known to welcome the pressure of outside commitments to force
upon them policies which are politically highly sensitive. The traditional
pre-1914 monetary system itself provides such an example; and it can be
argued that the Bretton Woods system did so too, and that it did, after all,
serve the world extremely well for nearly a quarter of a century.
!9
But it is not clear whether these are proper analogies. Not only are the
underlying circumstances different- one has to think of the preponderance in
the 19th century of Britain, which virtually managed the "rules of the game" of
the gold standard, or the many auxiliary mechanisms such as the Marshall Plan
allied to the preponderance of the U.S. in the postwar period - but more
generally, history does not give a clear-cut verdict as to the effective primacy
of monetary mechanisms over economic fundamentals or vice versa. Indeed,
the history of some of the postwar mechanisms, such as the Marshall Plan and
the early OEEC or the short-lived International Materials Conference at the
time of the Korean War, seem to suggest that an underlying political will in the
face of recognized common problems and accepted common objectives is an
essential precondition for the success of institutions.
v
When I mentioned at an earlier point the convergence of opinion and of
official points of view, I left open the question of how far this had been
accompanied by a real convergence of policies and of their implementation. In
this regard, one can discern a few bright spots. In the official sector, as I have
said, a greater coordination of exchange rate management has resulted in a
degree of stability of the European currencies even before the formal institution
of the EMS. The turn-round of attitudes in the U.S. last November has been
followed by some action; and in particular the cooperation between the
American authorities and the Bundesbank and the Swiss National Bank in
regard to foreign currency-denominated bonds is a welcome sign of transatlan-
tic cooperation.
However, in a larger sense the picture is still very disturbing. Some of the
fundamental economic factors, not only in the member countries but also in the
outside world, particularly in the U.S., have shown unfavorable or at best,
uncertain, developments in recent months. The outlook for growth is very
patchy and uneven. In a number of countries, unemployment is still high and
showing no sign of declining significantly; indeed, in some there is a tendency
for it to rise. I have already referred to the private financial markets, and to the
doubts which, despite their continued active functioning, must necessarily
surround their future, particularly in view of the heavy recourse to them of
less-developed countries and the almost "cutthroat" type of competition
between banks that seems to be developing. In many countries macroeconomic
management has co.me up against considerable difficulties, particularly in
regard to the effective use of fiscal and monetary measures to produce growth
without inflation. Relations between the industrialized and developing coun-
tries, both in regard to trade and finance, are still uncertain; and the ·
effectiveness of new devices such as the Common Fund has yet to be tested.
The future of raw material prices is uncertain, and of oil prices highly
precarious. The position of the dollar - to which I shall refer again in a
moment remains also insecure.
Above all, there is renewed concern about the future course of inflation.
Only a short time ago it appeared that the convergence of opinion of which I
20
I
I
l
I
f
I
'
I
I
I
!
have spoken was accompanied at least by some convergence of inflation rates,
a convergence of the high inflation countries towards the lower ones.
Unfortunately, one cannot be at all certain about the continuation of this
tendency now. Indeed, in some instances an unfavorable development seems to
be taking place. This is particularly so in the. U.S., where the 1978 rate of 7.7
per cent is already being exceeded, on an annualized basis, during the first few
m9nths of 1979. In the U.K., too, the rate is now nudging double figures and is
ex~e7ted b~ most observers to be above IO per cent by the end of this year.
Th1s IS particularly unfortunate after the substantial improvement that had been
recorded in the preceding 18 months. Similar tendencies are at work in France
and Italy; and even in Japan and Germany, as well as Switzerland, Holland and
Belgium, the year 1979 has started badly. The on! y comforting factor is that the
January figure was generally unfavorable, largely due to an exceptional rise in
s~asonal foods, as~ result of worldwide poor weather as well as of OPEC price
nses. However, thiS last factor may still continue to exert an upward pressure
on price levels.
VI
The two related questions to which I referred remain open. The first is
whether the EMS can succeed in the absence of any real convergence of
economic policies and developments, and, a fortiori, whether it can still
contribute towards bringing such convergence about. The other question is
whether it can withstand shocks originating from the outside, i.e., the dollar,
and whether it can therefore succeed as a regional monetary union in the
absence of progress in the monetary sphere on a worldwide basis.
. I. find it difficult to give an answer to the first question. I have already
Indicated that I do not underestimate the power of institutions to produce
gradual but irreversible developments outside the sphere for which they were
specifically created - developments which are necessary in order to guarantee
the survival <5f the institution itself. But there is no doubt that the task is in this
instance a very formidable one. Real success of the EMS will, in my view,
depend not only, or not so much, on whether the technical processes of the
exchange rate mechanism work smoothly, but whether the far more difficult
decisions of an economic-political character by the member countries will be
taken as the need for them arises. These gcl the heart of sovereignty and are,
therefore, in my view of a different order of magnitude from anything that has
so far been attempted in the Community. As one who has always been in favor
of European union, I naturally hope that the answer will be an affirmative one;
but l cannot deny that this is far from certain, and, indeed, that experience to
date must lead one to have considerable doubt about it.
The second question is also a basic one. If one takes the view, as I do, first,
that the dollar problem, so called, is not an exclusively domestic American one
(it is worth recalling that the far smaller and much more manageable problem
of the sterling balances was not domestic either), then a broad solution of the
dollar problem would seem to be an integral part of the requirements for setting
21
up an effective international monetary system; and, second, that this, given the
inevitable strains and. stresses to which the EMS will be subjected by
fluctuations in the dollar. must also be a precondition for the survival of the
EMS.
Insofar as an international monetary system also requires a substantial
convergence of economic policies and developments, it may be argued that this
would be even more difficult to achieve on a worldwide level than on a
European one. I am not at all sure that this is correct. In any event, even if
true, it does not alter the necessity of finding a solution. I therefore conclude
that, while one must hope and work for the perfection of the EMS, (including
the adherence to it of the U.K.), and for much greater harmonization of
economic policies in the Community, it is also vital that, concurrently, progress
is made on the establishment of an effective international monetary system.
* *
*
In his introductory remarks, the author said that recent happenings had been
far from reassuring. For example, M. Couve de Murville had made some rather
unpleasant observations about handing over part of the French gold reserves in
exchange for European Currency Units. And when the Belgian franc had
dipped below the EMS indicator level, the monetary authorities of the
European Community had managed to find a pretext for avoiding the
prescribed action.
If the pound sterling had been not only a component in the calculation of the
indicators, but actually part of the intervention mechanism, one could not help
speculating about what might have happened. It would almo~t certainly have
"gone through the ceiling," with paradoxical results for the British economy
and monetary policy.
As this subject invariably broadened out, one could regard international
monetary affairs and trade arrangements as a seamless garment, and the author
suggested focussing the discussion on these questions:
( l) Was there indeed now a convergence of views that stable but adjustable
exchange parities were a desirable objective - not simply in the abstract, but
as an aim to work toward?
(2) If so, what were the consequential economic relationships (with regard
to capital movements, interest rates, coordination of anti-inflation measu.r~s,
etc.) which would make the maintenance of a system of stable panties
reasonably achievable? Contrariwise, how much would a pre-existing system of
stable parities help to induce - not to say force - countries into closer
coordination of their economic policies? ·
(3) One could then go on to consider such questions as the capital and
money markets, public and private, and their recycling of "petrodollars;"
alternative methods of central bank intervention; the role of the dollar as the
existing reserve currency; the Eurocurrency market; the future of the EMS; the
22
possible use of the substitution accounts; and the chances of moving from the
present system - via some kind of bipolar system combining the EMS and the
dollar - to a new form of reserve currency managed by the IMF.
Finally, despite what rea(jers might have thought, the author assured them
that there had been no collusion between himself and the author of the
American paper, although the two appeared to share many concerns and
conclusions.
* *
American Working Paper:
"THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM:
IMPLICATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC COOPERATION"
The past three decades have not only seen the greatest physical development
of the world economy in all recorded time, they have also compressed within
these years three strikingly different patterns of performance by the interna-
tional monetary system. These three phases, within a broad framework
nominally monitored by the International Monetary Fund, might be described
through American lenses as: (!) dollar hegemony, 1948 to 1958; (2) dollar
improvisation, 1958 to 1973; and (3) dollar neglect, 1973 to 1978. The same
three periods might in IMF terms be called those of (!) pre-par values, (2)
established par values, and (3) no par values.
The threshhold into a fourth phase has just been crossed, and I hesitatingly
suggest that the corresponding captions for the years ahead might be, in U.S.
terms, "dollar amalgamation into a multicurrency system," and in IMF terms,
years o.f "r!!anaged exchange rate relationships." I am rather arbitrarily going
to be discussing what has happened, and what may happen, largely in a context
of the more developed countries, though nonetheless knowing, of course, that
the Jess-developed countries (or LDCs), of all varieties, will have a further
powerful impact of their own on the future shape of everything we will
consider here.
As a starting premise for analyzing the fourth phase which the world's
monetary system is just entering, I postulate that the world has outgrown the
capacity of any one currency to serve alone as the international medium of
exchange and standard of value through which all other currencies and
countries could be linked together. In my view, if the monetary system of 1979
and beyond is to retain the resiliency but improve upon the instability of the
floating currency experience of 1973 to 1978, concerted effort must be directed
both toward a scaling back of the dollar's role to the less comprehensive scope
that it may still usefully serve, and also toward filling the remaining void with
something else.
23
The choice in filling that void will, in the broadest terms, ultimately have to
lie between either a multipolar system of several key currencies, including the
dollar, or a gradual merging of the dollar into one unified multinational system.
Whether through mere drift or by design, the system as now poised can move
either toward arrangements in which two or three or four more currencies
separately accept increasing shares of what has been the dollar's international
currency function, or toward more extended use of the SDR as a common unit
of international account and settlement. The first embodies all the risks of
instability inherent when the relative attractions of one key currency or another
rise or fall, and holders tumble out of one into another. The second poses all
the fundamental problems of reliance upon a multinational organization, not
least among them the degree of surrendered sovereignty involved when
individual nation states give up, in effect, some part of their power to control
their own coinage.
Whichever the course, the implications for international cooperation must be
profound, both for making the actual mechanics of the monetary arrangements
themselves work well, and for developing the degree of underlying harmoniza-
tion among national economic policies that such arrangements will require.
Perhaps some clues as to the prospects can be turned up by taking a cursory
look at where we have been.
The first phase, the dollar hegemony of 1948-58, contained one overriding
lesson: world trade and development thrive when there is universal confidence
in one common currency; when the credit and capital facilities identified with
that currency are amply but not loosely available across the world; and when
other countries aim to establish economic conditions at home which will
support the objective of fixing and maintaining a par value for their own
currencies in relation to the "marker" currency a currency which central
banks willingly hold as a reserve asset and which their nationals use as a
principal vehicle for conducting international transactions. Whether or not that
optimal state, with its presumption of reasonably uniform, or harmonized,
economic development among nations, can ever be attained, or indeed whether
approximations of it are the most desired objective, remains a fundamental
question. It does imply, though perhaps not inherently, the virtual domination
of one country in the monetary and economic affairs of the rest of the world.
The second phase began in 1958, when a number of leading countries
reached the stage of formally establishing par values for their currencies in
terms of dollars, and accepting the obligations of the IMF's Article VIII to
keep their own currencies convertible into dollars within a narrow range
around a par that could be changed only if a "fundamental disequilibrium"
occurred. Once each country had established that interconvertibility between
its own currency and the universal common denominator, the dollar, the
determination of what it bought ·from or sold to the rest of the world was
supposed to be the direct result of the relation between its costs, prices, and
incomes and those outside. This linkage to the universal currency, coupled
with adherence to IMF norms, was to assure a sort of one-world reflection of
the real supply and demand for anything capable of moving across national
24
frontiers, with the GATT established alongside to guard against non-currency
barriers.
The story of these fifteen years, from 1958 to 1973, became instead a
succession of paradoxes. For one, the system initially succeeded too well. It
released onto a world scale the managerial and productive capacities of the
most advanced countries, precipitating not only-unprecedentedly rapid but also
unusually varied patterns of real economic expansion among countries of all
stage's' 'or development. Those variations in pace and complexity made the
maintenance of fixed par values among the expanding countries almost
impossible for very long. The period was consequently peppered with a series
of one-shot adjustments of par, almost always as devaluations in terms of the
U.S. dollar by the countries running behind in the race.
The second paradox concerned the dollar itself. For the same processes of
worldwide growth that were nourished by an orderly monetary system hinged
to the dollar were, at the same time, eroding the dollar's own position. The
devaluations were preceded, indeed usually triggered, by a loss of reserves _
an outflow of dollars from the devaluing countries that usually flowed onward
to countries with large export surplusses who retained the dollars in burgeoning
reserves. Yet if the position of the reserve-losing countries were to be
improved, and their growth promoted, within the context of a world in which
the dimensions of real production and real trade everywhere were ballooning,
additional reserves had to be created somewhere to finance these mounting
country deficits. The cumulative need was much larger than the total of usable
funds available either to the IMF or to other international institutions. As a
result, and quite in conformity with the implied obligation that the country
providing an international currency should also serve as a residual lender, the
U.S. capital markets and banking system had begun gearing up even in the late
1950's to meet most of that need. U.S. dollar liabilities grew; the reserves of
many leading countries mushroomed: and the strength of the dollar in the eyes
of those with the largest external holdings gradually came into question.
The third paradox was that efforts to shore up the dollar by applying the
conventional criteria for balance of payments adjustment to the U.S. only led
to the creation of an extraterritorial supply of dollars. The needs that a growing
world had developed for an international currency would not be denied. By
1973, there were more "stateless dollars" abroad than there were dollar
liabilities on the books of American banks at home (and thereafter through 1978
the net total grew at a rate four times as rapid as the 6 per cent growth of the
U.S. money supply).
A fourth, and more hopeful, paradox of the 1958 to 1973 period was,
however, that the array of improvisations developed through those years left a
heritage in organizational arrangements, in techniques, and in sheer understand-
ing of the processes, that may now be finding some use as elements of the
emerging new monetary order.
There is no space here for more than a list of the varied improvisations
produced by the restless spirit of questioning, experimentation and exploration
that characterized official efforts during these years. As seen from the U.S.
25
they were of three kinds: (1) unilateral action to "defend" the dollar; (2)
bilateral arrangements with a number of other leading countries to buttress the
dollar against new strains; and (3) multinational efforts to reinforce the dollar's
capacity to serve as the primary reserve asset and transactions currency of the
JMF "Bretton Woods" system.
Unilateral U.S. actions included a number of measures aimed at reconciling
the need for external dollar strength with the need for reasonable growth and
price stability, such as: a succession of major Presidential balance of payments
programs to conserve Government's own expenditure of dollars abroad; an
"operation twist" on interest rates to encourage both short-term capital
inflows, and domestic investment; funding of the entire Government deficit
until the Vietnam escalation of July 1965 outside the banks and from long-term
savings, helping to maintain in those years a I to 2 per cent inflation rate;
several modest promotive changes in tax rates applicable to foreign holders of
dollars; and various controls over capital flows, ranging from the Interest
Equalization Tax of 1963-74 to specific limitations on borrowing by U.S.
companies for operations abroad. Not all of these, happily, need have
relevance today, but their use did reflect a genuine intention by the American
authorities during these years to respond to the battery of criticisms leveled at
U.S. policies as the dollar - on which so many depended for so much -
seemed to be losing strength under the weight of the burdens placed on it.
The bilateral arrangements began with an acceleration of debt repayments by
countries that had borrowed during the Marshall Plan years or earlier. The
resulting reflow of dollars was supplemented on a modest scale by payments in
the borrower's currency, as the U.S. began to put small holdings of leading
foreign currencies into its own reserves. These foreign currency holdings would
provide a possible base for occasional intervention by the U.S. in the foreign
exchange markets to provide temporary, technical support for the dollar on
the basis of consultation with the officials responsible for the other currency.
The logical next step, once the U.S. had begun the acquisition of foreign
currencies, was the initiation of currency swap facilities between the U.S.
Treasury or the Federal Reserve and the official financial institutions of other
leading countries. As these swaps came to be used - more often initially to
assist other currencies rather than the dollar - the potential for an informal
sort of "directorate" for coordinating currency stabilizing efforts became
apparent, pointing toward one possible route through which the U.S. could
share participation with others in guiding the dollar's performance in the
international system. That progress was taken a step further when the U.S.
began to issue to foreign monetary authorities bonds that were denominated in
their currencies - at times when some U.S. uses of the currencies obtaihed
through swap drawings could not readily be reversed, nor the swaps repaid,
within a conventional one-year period.
The multinational actions included various forms of group participation in
transactions to buttress the par value dollar. system. From November 1961 to
March 1968 a gold pool of leading countries attempted to keep the free market
price for gold close enough to the dollar's own official gold price to preserve
26
I
i
I
~
il
that element of confidence in the system. Late in 1961, the so-called Group of
Ten was forme? to prov~de a supplemental source of strong currencies to the
I~F, to be available at times when IMF drawings by one or more of the group
might. threaten to exhaust the Fund's usable resources. Earlier in 1961
Workmg Party Three was formed within the new OECD (wh'ch · '
. • • • _ _ 1 was JUst
emergmg from Its mcubatlon as the OEEC) in order to prov1
·de a · 1
"~ · · b
1
specm
empt.l4~1s on a.ance of payments adjustment problems among the leadin
mdustnal countnes. g
By 1963, it was becoming clear that the focus on current adjustment was not
enough, and that a special study of the current performance of the international
monet.ary system as a_ whole was also needed. To do that, the Group of Ten
esta~!Jshed a consultat1v~ group of ministerial deputies whose critical analytical
probmg he~ped lead by 1967 to a broad-scale review on the part of the entire
IMF. An? It was from the resulting negotiations that the decision came in 1968
to estabhsh ~ new, truly multinational reserve asset, the SDR.
The gestat10~ perio? of the SDR had brought representatives of the entire
IMF membership, actmg through the Executive Directors and their ministers
to se~ .the need for a further comprehensive analysis of the criteria and
modahttes.that a par value system implied for adjustment of economic flows
among natiOns. Th.e IMF Executive Directors undertook such a study in 1969
and 1970, but thetr report was only completed in time to be overtaken by
event~. Succ~sstve reports on posstble reforms within the par value framework
w~r~ Issued m 1972 and 1974. But the unsustainability of the old system as
ongmall.y conceived had already been strikingly demonstrated by the u.s.
suspensiOn of the old gold parity _in 1971, and the eventual outright abandon-
ment ?f ~he par value system m the spring of 1973. Differences among
cou.ntnes m pace of development and in the composition of foreign trade and
captt~ movements had become too great, and too varied, and at times too
volattl~, to be kept fenced in by a Bretton Woods form of par value
commitment..
In March !973; the third period began, that of "dollar neglect" and .. 0
1 " B h'l . n par
va ues. ut w I e U.S. policy then continued until the beginning of 1978 to
rely .on "m~rket forces" to push exchange rates wherever active trade, or
genu.me ca~Hal movements, or precautionary or speculative shifts of currency
holdmgs mtght send them, other leading countries realized by June 1973 that
some degree of management of their exc;hange rates was inevitable if the new
system were ~ot to sha~e itself apart in intermittent violent gyrations. Most of
the other h~ad1ng countnes, as they accepted the inevitability of giving up par
values. ~hich could no longer be sustained (particularly if hinged to a
deprectat.mg d?llar!, also realized that they then ran the risk of creating a
vacuum m whtch mstability and inflation would flourish.
Ove: the next five years, the cumulative total of official interventions, on
both s1des o: the ma.rket, exceeded $200 billion in dollar equivalents. Since the
U.~. b.egan mtervemng more explicitly to avert "disorderly" conditions at the
begmmng of 1978, and then more importantly to check a runaway decline of
the dollar as of November I, 1978, another $50 billion (in approximate gross
27
equivalents) has been used. However, this is ?ot .the place to d~~ail that
fascinating record. What matters for our discusston IS that the exp.ettence. of
these five or six years of "managed floating" have ~r~ated ~ ~ew /m~e~a~:~
for international cooperation. Apart from that, surpnsmgly htt e 0
w a ll
been basic in the original objectives of the Bretto? ~oods system has .actua Y
changed. The substance of the emerging system sttllmvolves a compelhng need
for:
official action to assure an orderly interchangeability among
currencies; .
identification of the elements in a country's ?~n ~cono~lc
performance that strengthen or wea.k:n the parttctpatton of Its
own currency in that interchangeab1ltty;
appropriate corrective action by each country to :allow up the
identification of its own strengths or weaknesses,
maintaining a capability within the system to ex~and the supply
of internationally usable reserves and currenctes to promote
economic interdependence and growth: and finally: .
'II d lendt'ng by the IMF and other mternattonal
surve1 ance an . .
bodies to bring the force of common internation.al .mterest.s mto
the process, and thereby to avert either constnctmg strams or
inflationary excesses for the system as a whole.
What is still missing is an effective capability for contr?llin.g the global
growth of liquidity in the monetary system, through multmatJ.onal means •
without impairing the capacity of the system to serve the va~ted needs of
diverging national economic performance, .and V.:i~hout accentuatmg the poten-
tialities for combative rivalry or chrome mstab!lJty. . . .
The fourth phase, /979 and beyond, brings .with it oppottumttes to U:?v:~~~~
that direction. I described this phase earlier, and hopefully' ~~ d d
amalgamation into a multicurrency system" under condJtJons
11
°f malnage
· · " h 1 · t an aspect of do ar ama gama-
exchange rate relatwnsh1ps. A a tmg star on . . .
tion is just beginning as the IMF Executive Directors start seno~s exammatto~
of the proposed "substitution account," through whtch offictal h;t~ers ~
dollars might be able to convert them into SDR's. A .fram:wor ~ t
1
e
manaoing of exchange rates was initiated when the IMF rattfied ItS new rttc e
,. · d E Monetary
IV in 1978. By an interesting coincidence, the long awalte . uropean C
. . · · d at creating for the ommon
System is commencmg at thts same ttme, atme . h 't
Market countries themselves a truncated facsimile of the old :ystem-:- w~. \ s
own central pool of reserves (including gold), but with a floatmg relatlldons. tp
0
f
· d' 't f the wor pnce o
the dollar. And to add liveliness to the 1mme tate 51 ua ton, h h
. . d · ding shock waves throug t e
basic energy, oil, IS lurchmg upwar agam, sen. tries
balance of payments and reserve positions of VIrtually aU coun · h
What are the implications to be derived from the first three phases, as t e
world begins fashioning the system of the future?. Without s~ac; ;os:r~~=d~~
own judgments syllogistically from the record wh!c~ I ~av~ JUS to e onder·
briefly, I suggest these are at least seven sets of lmphcatiOns P ·
28
(I) The move from par values to floating has increased, not decreased, the
need for monetary cooperation among the leading countries. Exchange rates
must be managed; and management, if it is not to become chaotic conflict,
means cooperation -not only in agreeing on the rules of the game, but also in
the day-to-day play under those rules.
(2) Monetary cooperation will be futile if it does not extend into the
harrn9nization of economic policies among these same countries (aiming not for
identity nor for similarity but for compatibility). There should be iterative
action and reaction between monetary efforts and the performance of the
"real" economy- each conditioning the other, successively, as steps toward
cooperation on one side help nudge along cooperation on the other.
(3) The emergence of the EMS, as the EEC continues coping with the real
problems of trade relations among its members, is a symbolic demonstration of
the inexorable force toward an approximation, within whatever framework
seems possible, of those basic objectives (as distinct from the superficial forms)
of the old Bretton Woods system which I have just mentioned.
(4) The route back toward that essence of Bretton Woods for the world
economy may take many forms, including a variety of regional patterns ranging
from the formally organized arrangements of the European Community to the
purely informal or eclectic evolution of ad hoc attachments such as comprise
the so-called "dollar bloc" of the Western hemisphere. Experiment and
experience will test the scope for meaningful intervention in the foreign
exchange markets, including the readiness of other leading countries to support
the use of their currencies for that intervention. Meanwhile progress will
continue toward defining in practice the way in which "flexibly stable"
exchange rate relationships can help maintain the "balance of payments
discipline" that is so essential if the economies of nation states are to fit into
viable relations with each other.
(5) During the process, each opening that occurs for moving toward greater
reliance upon the IMF should be used aggressively. Just as the period of
hegemon{fOi"--ne currency has passed forever, the period for its replacement
with a universal, multinational reserve asset is far ahead; but the course of
change should be kept clearly in view as being en route from the one-currency
extreme to the ultimate multicurrency objective. The opportunity for action
now is in developing the terms and conditions under which a substitution
account can absorb (and offer a useful alternative for) ?ny dollars now restively
held in the official reserves of other countries. The negotiations over those
terms, and eventual use of the substitution account, offer the most promising
means for determining in practice the appropriate limits for dollar holdings in
the monetary reserves of others.
(6) Even if a substitution account can become operational, there will still be
great potentialities for liquidity creation through additional supplies of dollars in
the private sector, in that stateless area nowlargely outside official reach. This
area is being illuminated by the studies of the BIS, and eventually means may
be found for the monetary authorities of other countries, with those of the
U.S., to effect some global limits on the growth of this liquidity. Should that
29
occur care will still be needed to assure that the urge for more liquidity does
not si~ply break through any dollar restr~int by turning to increased creation
of some other leading currency. .
(7) Whatever the forms of monetary cooperation that may evolve, there Will
be no substitute over the years ahead for continuing and increasingly close
collaboration among the leading industrial countries - including mutual
criticism as well as mutual support- within and outside the IMF. But because
the period of evolution toward an IMF hegemony will stretch far into the
future, there will be continuing interim need for relying on the emergence of
one, or two, or three other leading currencies alongside the dollar to do the
world's work. If the inherent risks of instability in a multipolar system are to
be averted, collaboration at all levels of national responsibility (including the
highest) will be essential for establishing and maintaining the conditions for
monetary and economic compatibility among the leading countries. Perhaps the
era of summitry will also have to be a long one.
* *
*
In introducing his paper, the American author emphasized the relation~hip
between (a) the harmonization of economic policies among the principal
countries, and (b) the achievement of a regime of stable exchange rates.
Progress on either one was likely to encourage and facilitate progress on t~e
other. But we should not aim to give one priority over the other, or to lean.
10
only one direction. Rather, it was a matter of a series of suc~ess~ve
approximations nudging us along alternately toward more policy harmomzatwn
and greater exchange rate stability.
With respect to the two major areas of new experimentation:
(1) The EMS, by the very nature of its operation, held the potential f~r
greater disarray and disjunction between the U.S. currency and econormc
performance on the one side, and that of Europe on the other. The E~S
arrangements contemplated - as had the snake - that, short of the limit~,
intervention by the participating countries would still be conducted entirely
10
dollars. This suggested the need for close transatlantic collaboration among the
monetary authorities. Over time, the EMS should lessen Europe's depende~ce
on the dollar, and reduce the risk of the dollar's being whipsawed by changmg
conditions in countries where the economic performance of the U.S. was not at
issue in any way. .
(2) If the substitution account could be negotiated, it would provide a~
important way of relieving the burden of an excessive dollar overhang. But. It
would relate only to excessive holdings ("if any") on the part of official
institutions, and would do nothing directly to take care of the enormous
volume of dollars in the "stateless market." That vast supply was already
beyond the control of any monetary authority, and was growing in volume fo~r
times as fast as the supply of domestically created dollars within the U.S. This
30
was a problem that unfortunately remained beyond the reach of any direct
impact ·from a substitution account.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
.A. The f!retton Woods System and the Role of the Dollar. Discussion of
th1s ~genda 1tem was led off by an American participant, who observed that, in
our mterdepe?dent w?rld, tr~de, prosperity and growth all depended on the
smooth workmg of mternatwnal monetary relations. The Bretton Woods
system had been developed with that in mind, and its fixed. exchange rate
arrangements, which had operated so successfully for nearly a quarter of a
century, had broken down only because disparate inflation rates from country
to c?~ntry had put unbearable strains on the adjustment process. Several other
participants endorsed this view about the disruptive effects of inflation.
. A P~rt~g~ese speaker, on the other hand, contended that excess interna-
tw~al hqmdity -a problem never solved since the early 1960's - had been a
maJOr c~u~e o: the collapse of the old system. There had been a deep-rooted
~on~r~dict10n m the Bretton Woods arrangements between the creation of
h~mdity_ through the dollar and the need for confidence in the system. This had
g1ven ~1se to the possibility of one-way speculation, which in the end
det~rmmed the collapse of the system and the inevitability of the managed float
<-:vh1ch had not been a :ictory for its advocates, or even a matter of choice, but
s1m_p~y the result of Circumstances, notably national differences in economic
pohc1_es a~d P_~rfo:mance). The continued absence of any overall control had
permitted mternat10nal liquidity to double from 1970 to 1973, and to double
again from 1973 to 1977.
~ very different diagnosis was made by a Dutchman, who had ·hoped to
denve some comfort from the working papers, but had been left as pessimistic
as ever._ He paraphrased the thesis of the American author as follows: "The
dol~ar d1d well for 25 years, but the world has grown too big for it; so let's try
to !~elude a couple of other currencies in the system. This will of course
reqmre greater cooperation among the countries in this 'gang', but maybe we
can get along that way for another 25 years, and in the meantime try to
strengthen the IMF."
The b~sis of the Bretton Woods system, the speaker said, had been the
undertaking by the participating nations to abide by the agreed rules of the
?arne. The system had worked for as long as it did, not because of confidence
m the dollar, but because of confidence that nations were willing, in order to
promote the orderly development of their interrelated economies, to adhere to
the rules and thereby keep exchange rates stable. The system had come to an
31
end when the U.S. refused to do so; it was, so to speak, American
insubordination against this self-imposed discipline that had blown up Bretton
Woods. Since then, until November 1978, the dollar's exchange rate had been
treated by the U.S. with "benign neglect" (which some Europeans viewed as
"malign," with an effect on confidence in American leadership that an
International speaker called "impossible to overestimate"). It was ironic, just
as the Americans had finally decided to give up this neglect and to engage
actively in managing the external value of their currency, that the Europeans
had decided to take care of the problem themselves through establishment of
the EMS.
A Norwegian speaker agreed with the American author's conclusion that the
overextended dollar, which had performed well in its heyday, could not
continue its historical role. Yet no other country seemed eager to sponsor a
reserve currency; in fact any sign of that developing was usually met with
strong counter-measures. This suggested that the role of reserve currency did
not have the advantages that were often implied, and that there were indeed
many negative aspects.
Even after 1971-73, the dollar still had served as the most important reserve
currency, partly because there was no alternative. The good record of growth
in the U.S. had been one of the most important elements in the world economy
in recent years, and one shuddered to think what the global effect of slower
U.S. growth might have been. Europeans wished to see a stronger dollar, and
they were encouraged by signs that America was at last developing a
comprehensive energy policy. Other speakers agreed that the dollar would
carry the burden of principal reserve asset for a long time to come, even
though the trend was toward multicurrency reserves.
B. Exchange Rates: Fixed or Floating? An International participant re-
viewed the predictions - made by many experts when we had moved from
fixed to floating rates - that this would open up a better monetary world. It
would lead, they had said, to much less intervention in the exchange markets,
with an attendant saving of reserves; to smoother changes in exchange rates,
which would be decided in the marketplace and not by politicians; to the end
of the exchange crises we had seen in the 1960's; and to a resolution of the
external effects of countries' "doing their own thing" in their national policies
toward inflation and growth, relieving them of the negative implications of
balance of payments constraints.
Our experience under floating rates had not borne out these forecasts. We
had seen about the same level of intervention; more volatile rate changes, both
nominal and real; increased inflationary expectations, with adverse effecCs on
inflation and growth; recurrent exchange crises; and a demonstration that
countries could not in fact pursue their own policies with impunity.
The speaker drew these lessons from the disappointing performance of the
floating rate system:
(1) The high rate of inflation prevailing during this period had been a
negative factor. The higher the general inflation rate, the more divergencies in
32
inflation rates developed, with an unsettling effect on the exchange markets.
(2)· The increased volume and volatility of capital movements had hampered
the smoothness of exchange rate changes.
(3) It had been wrong to assume that, under floating rates, a nation could
independently choose its economic objectives so long as its balance of
payments was properly arranged and its exchange rate changed according to
developments. This notion ignored the complex dynamic relationship between
(a) exchange rates and their impact on prices,· and (b) flows of trade. The
transl!)ission of price effects between countries had been greatly reduced while
the transmission of demand effects had been hardly affected.
(4) Divergencies in economic performance among countries had aggravated
the situation by increasing inflation and making it harder to achieve sustainable
economic growth. The prospect of continued divergencies was worrisome.
Whether we stayed with a generalized float or moved to an adjustable parity
system of fixed rates, the speaker thought that the most important priority was
to move economic policy-making away from the purely national basis, where it
had been these past few years, back into an international setting. Our
objectives regarding growth, employment and inflation had to be seen in the
context of an interdependent system.
An Austrian participant said that the post-Bretton Woods system had neither
succeeded in stabilizing the balance of payments disequilibria nor in containing
global inflation. The floating rate system had not improved stability, and it had
become increasingly difficult to calculate the costs and risks of international -
and even domestic business transactions. Moreover, the present monetary
system had an unfavorable influence on the structure of our economies, in that
only the large companies were able to tap the international capital markets,
from which smaller firms were excluded. Flexible exchange rates also fostered
huge capital movements, which developed a momentum of their own and
intensified the instability. All of this might lead to policies of renationalization
of the world economy, with the drawbacks which that entailed. The speaker
therefore endorsed the conclusion of the British author that a system of stable
parities was .an essential ingredient of a reasonable economic order. That was
why the dollarstabilization plan and the new EMS were so important.
A Portuguese participant said that he also favored stable exchange rates, but
that there was a lot of wishful thinking about the possibility of getting back to
them, and some superficial criticism of~how the managed float had worked so
far. Without solving the problems of excess international liquidity and the
divergence in performance and policies among countries, it would be hard to
avoid a system of flexible exchange rates. However, that system had worked
fairly well so far; there were negative aspects, to be sure, but major exchange
crises had been avoided, and a decrease in inflation rates had not been made
more difficult or impossible. In the medium term, variations in exchange rates
had been more or less equal to the differential in inflation rates, although in the
short run there had been fluctuations which had overshot the inflation rate
differences. One could also say that the contribution of exchange rates to
better balance of payments adjustments had not been significant, and that the
33
effect on internal prices had been bigger than expected.
A Greek speaker commented that the unavailability of forward exchange
cover - for, say, seven or eight years - under the present system was having
a negative effect on manufacturing and trade. This in turn affected the process
of the creation of wealth, on which currency issue was founded. Nevertheless,
the speaker agreed with those who could not see a return to absolute. fixed
rates, partly because of the volume of free international money. The best one
could hope for was something like the crawling peg, which might offer traders
and industrialists a workable combination of stability and flexibility.
A Canadian speaker professed an "addiction" to floating rates. He drew the
analogy of a canoe in a rapid river, where the steersman could do little to
check the general momentum and could only try to smooth out the passage.
Under a fixed rate system, the river became a series of cataracts which could
do damage to the canoe, its passengers, and others as well. As awkward as
floating rates were with their occasional overcompensation - they had at
least provided an effective mechanism for bringing about necessary adjust-
ments. Perhaps a compromise could be found, he said, between the managed
float and a flexible fixed parity system.
A compatriot said that he would be reluctant to support a move back to a
Bretton Woods-type system of fixed rates until fundamental conditions were
right; otherwise we might have to go through another period of serious
disruptions. The disparity in current annual inflation rates - l3 per cent in the.
U.S. vs. two per cent in Austria, for instance- showed how far we were from
that element of common experience that would be compatible with the
maintenance of fixed rates. In the meantime, we would have to make the float
work, and the speaker saw grounds for optimism. The floating rate system, it
was true, had not solved the problems created by excessive domestic monetary
expansion, budget deficits, and oil price increases. 11ut it had - in a period
beset by those problems - kept trade and payments flowing in a way that
might not have been possible under the Bretton Woods system.
The speaker did not believe that setting up institutions of relatively fixed
rates would, in itself, give the needed impetus to individual countries to adopt
domestic policies that would sustain such a system, i.e., by controlling
inflation. There was little historical evidence to nourish such a hope.
A British participant, carrying forward the analogy of the canoe, said that
"when the stream flowed back uphill" it had a distorting effect on the market,
and undermined rational business decision-making. The instability of exchange
rates in whatever direction they moved could be most destructive to
investment plans. A Norwegian speaker agreed that the price of this instability
on the exchanges was very high.
The author of the American working paper intervened to say that the
preceding Canadian speakers were "too sensitive about their key role as
representatives of the floating rate school" if they had read into either of the
working papers the conclusion that we ought to go back to the mechanical
features of the Bretton Woods system. What the authors had meant to
emphasize was a return to its principles. The overlay of arrangements that had
34
emerged u.nder Bretton Woods had been sim~ly the result of a certain period ir
the evolutiOn of a monetary system, translatmg a reflection of those p · ·
1
· k b . . nnc1p e1
mto wor a le form. The pnnc1ples were still valid but we had 1 d h
. · · • earne t a1
they coul?.not be achieved merely through the imposition of a monetary tool
The Bnttsh author ~dded that he had not meant to suggest that we would
have b~en better off m recent years with fixed parities and Bretton Woods
-mechamsms. What he had meant was that we should not make a virtu f th'
· 1 · h . e o IS
necess1 ty, ~ evatm? t e floatmg rate expedient to the rank of a desirable
permanent mternauonal monetary system. No one would deny that t bl
t ffi d .. 'h I . a sa e
sys em ~ IXe panties, Wit a I Its accompanying paraphernalia, would be a
good thmg .for world trade and political cohesion - if we could get it.
An ~mencan spea~er c~ntended that there was not much difference between
(a) a fixed rate system w1th consider~bly more flexibility than that envisaged
?Y Bret~on Woods, and (b) _a flexible .rate system allowing for enough
mterventwn t0 moderate excessive fluctuatiOns. So perhaps in the end it would
not matter greatly which alternative we chose, so long as we somehow got
back closer to Bretton Woods.
If that were true, said an Austrian participant, then the basic question was
not fixed vs. flexible rates, but rather: How much autonomy in economic
matter~ could a nation state surrender, or How much transfer of national
sovereignty :vas needed to make the international monetary system work? Both
~f the ~orkmg papers _had alluded to this delicate question in speaking of
derogatiOns from national sovereignty" and "substantial restrictions of
autonomy in economic policy."
A Frenchman observe? ~hat many of the participants had been speaking of
the monetary system as If It were something more than a tool, which was not
so. A good tool could make the job easier, but it would not change or even
conceal fundamental truths (les verites profondes). And the truth here was that
no country could live forever beyond its means, or the product of its work. If
exchange r.ates were flexible, then variations in them had to operate to bring
the revenues_ ~f each country to the level of the effort it made to support its
stand~r~ o~ IIVI.ng. If rates were fixed, then each country had to subject itself to
the discipline tmphed by the fixed parities.
~hether rates were fixed or flexible, every nation had to make the necessary
adjustments. On~'s American friends might be shocked to hear this, but as long
as the U.S· contmued to have large balance of payments deficits it would add
to the mas~ of dollars in which the world was awash. This w~ a disturbing
element which was bound to hamper any exchange policy - fixed or floating.
It was essential, the speaker concluded, (a) to stop the growth of this floating
mass of money, and (b) to try to find a way of tying it down securely.
C. "Stateless Currency" and the Euromarkets. Another Frenchman
de~lored the existence of billions of dollars outside of any national control.
Thts had created enormous liquidity, for which a solution had to be found.
International and. U.S. speakers found it puzzling that control of the money
supply at the natwnal level should be deemed "indispensable," while control
35
of this vast international liquidity was considered unimportant - at least by
some participants. Did not something need to be done about the mass of
"stateless currency," as Professor Triffin was warning?
One American reply to this question was that the evolution of the
Eurocurrency markets had been one of the most constructive developments on
the international monetary scene during the past couple of decades. The fact
that these markets were not regulated had given the banking system the
flexibility to use the "stateless currencies" most beneficially for economic
development and for the recycling of petrodollars. We needed less, not more,
regulation in the market place, and it was to be hoped that the Eurocurrency
market would be left free to function effectively without regulation.
The author of the American working paper asked rhetorically whether the
same sort of argument had not been defended by U.S. bankers prior to the
establishment of the Federal Reserve System. But he went on to say that the
current international monetary problem - and its solution - was not so
simple. How indeed could a world economy function with a literally .uncon-
trolled source of international money? This was the problem that bedevilled all
our efforts.
We would unfortunately have to pass through a long transition period, but it
was heartening to see that a degree of self-limiting control was emerging f~om
the judgments and practices of the mqjor banks themselves. Broadly speakmg,
the credit-creation relationship between the dollars liquid in the U.S. and the
dollar liabilities on the books of foreign banking institutions was tending to fall
into a pattern of about 2~ to I. It was hard to imagine, thoug~, that any s~ch
kind of reserve ratio would be imposed, since few banks reqmred such ratios
even to Iimi t their domestic expansion. But voluntary self-restraint was
appearing, as international bankers had to take into account the potential
withdrawal of deposits.
The author of the British working paper contended that we had got through
the recent years of turmoil thanks not to the floating rate system and its
management by the monetary authorities but to the international financial
markets. They admittedly carried great dangers, but the Eurocurrency and
Eurobond markets had kept the worst from happening to both industrialized
and underdeveloped countries in a time of great difficulty for their balance of
payments. . . . . .
On the subject of international investment financmg, a Brltlsh participant
alluded to the fact that $90 billion of such debt was now being carried by
private lenders (as opposed to public institutions). This enor~ous i~debte?ne~s
was persuading bankers to intervene in what might be called mdustnal pobcy m
the international field in an alarming way. It was this trend which, according to
the speaker, had led the U.S. - "rather hesitantly and disastrously" - to
advocate setting up a buffer stock of copper. This had presumably been done
under pressure from those providing the financing. He called this a dangerous
proposal which would not work. (A Dutchman agreed: "Why would they
succeed with copper when they failed with gold?") The Briton went on to
express his concern about UNCTAD's Manila "shopping list," and how far we
36
wer~ from agreeing on rules for the Common Fund. We could not achieve
stab1b ty by purely monetary means, and, unless some commodity agreements
came into being, all the talk about various forms of international monetary
management would be in vain.
D. The European Monetary System. A Danish speaker who had p t' ·
d
• h · ar ICI-
pate .- !Q t e establishment of the EMS outlined some of its salient features:
(1) It had been created ?s a necessary mechanism to protect cooperation
a~ong the European coun~nes, who had always been vulnerable to monetary
d1stur~ances from the outs1de world. It was an initiative to bring some kind of
order mto the present chaotic monetary system.
(2~ It aimed to a~hieve essentially stable exchange rates between important
tradmg partners, wh1ch would enhance opportunities for economic growth
(3) It would in effect provide strong support for the U.S. dollar by dam :
th_e flow of "hot money." (One could not avoid comparing the current situa~:~~
w1th that of the late 1920's, when enormous increases in international liquid"t
had produced disastro_us consequences for the world economy.)
1
y
. (4) It had a special European Community aspect: it was not just an
mstrument for greater monetary stability, but could also be seen as a tool to
promote a conver~enc.e of the economic performance of the member countries
and better har~omzation of thei~ polici~s. It could be a significant step toward
greater eco~onuc and monetary Integration and toward progress in other fields
of cooperation. Stable exchange rates were a sine qua non for the success of
the ~ommo.n Agricul~ural P.olicy.. -:r:hey were also a precondition for more
e~c1e~t r~g1onal and mdustnal pohc1es, and a safeguard against protectionism
VIa art1fic1al currency depreciations.
If the industriali~ed countries were to fulfill the obligations they had placed
~pon one another In the arduous multilateral trade negotiations just concluded
m Geneva, the Europeans would have to establish a more stable monetary
system. Spe.cific transitional measures would help strengthen the economies of
the less prosperous me~bers of the EEC, but it was essential that the U.K.
event~all~ be a fully actl~e participant in the EMS. This new system was only
a beg1~nmg, ~nd one m1ght hope that it would one day come to embrace
countnes outside the Community.
The speaker mentioned four ways in which the EMS was distinguishable
from the "snake":
(I) It ~as a European Community arrangement, and Community decisions
were required to alter the exchange parities.
(2) !ts objective with the European Currency Unit (ECU) was to create a
new kmd of reserve asset, not in competition with the dollar but as a
supplement to it.
(3) It was very strongly linked to European agricultural prices.
(4) Its monetary fund, for intervention on foreign exchange markets, was a
resource that could only be used by Community decision.
W<:uld s~ch decisions in fact be taken as the need arose? That was the
question rrused by an Austrian. The ultimate success of the EMS would depend
37
on the resolve of the member states to take those hard political and ec?nomic
decisions. Memories of the interwar depression yea.rs, when mon~ta~y disorder
had destroyed trade and employment, would certamly be a mot:vatm~ factor.
The psychological element in the EMS was al~~ em~h~sized m other
ks A Dutchman_ who was skeptical about political will m the monetary
remar . . . h d h
sphere _ said that the EMS would work only if the countnes ad ere to t e
disciplinary rules of the game (whi~h had n~t yet been agreed ~pon, apru:t from
some technical devices governing mterventwn). Messrs. Schmidt and G~scar~,
two former finance ministers, had both concluded that "they had to do 1t their
own way." It was imperative that the political momentum. generated .by the
EMS agreement be maintained, and used to ?evel?p machme?. to bnng the
European economies in line with one another (mflatwn•. productiVIty mcreases,
etc.). If the EMS failed, it would amount to a big step backward. An
International speaker agreed, predicting that the breakdown of the EMS would
be read as a "profound signal of a lack of political will for European
cooperation."
1
. ·
1
·11
A Belgian saw great promise in EMS, if there were enough po Jtica WI to
maintain it. Especially within a Community most of whose trade -:vas now
internal, greater monetary stability was vital, and to return to fixed but
adjustable parities was an immense achievement. Some lessons of the snake,
though should not be forgotten: smaller and more frequent adjustments were
preferable to larger ones made after Ion~ interva~s and upheavals:. ~hat would
reduce the incentive for hedging operations, which were destabihzmg.
In the long run, fuller European economic union might be necessary to
maintain monetary union. Nevertheless one should proceed toward that long
and difficult undertaking by monetary steps. If the EMS succeeded, not only
would European integration have been advanced, but the way would ~ave been
shown for countries in regional blocs - based on Bretton W?ods hne: - to
"float Jess painfully and dramatically" among one another, while prepanng the
way for tomorrow's world system. . ..
In the shorter run said this speaker and others, we would be m a transitional
period of multicurre~cy reserves - a multipolar system with a widened ECU,
it was hoped, as one of the poles.
Two French interventions dealt with the EMS. One expressed the. hope that
it would lead eventually to a "parallel evolution" of. the c.urrenc1e~ of ~he
several member countries, if it could withstand the pen! of divergen~ mflat1~n
rates. The other began with the point that the EMS was based on Wide pubhc
agreement about the need to build a new international monetary system by
commencing at the European level without further dei~Y:
Whatever the uncertainties, politicians, experts and cJtJzens seemed ~o feel
that the EMS was a realistic experiment that should be undertaken, With t~e
necessary safeguards and with national responsibility re~aining para~ount m
the final analysis, as always with monetary matters. If disagreeable thmgs had
been said in the French National Assembly about what had been labelled-
perhaps improperly - "the transfer of gold fro~ the Bank of Franc.e. t? .the
European Monetary Fund," this had been done w1th the purpose of cntlCIZmg,
38
not the EMS, but the procedure used by the French government, which had
not relied on due legislative deliberation and approval. Even in monetary
discussions, the speaker said, political interpretations were sometimes as
important as the economic aspects. An issue at the forefront of current French
politics was how best to associate the institutions of the nation-state to the
definition and application of concrete policies at the European level, when such
policies, were necessary and urgent.
An'"Austrian participant felt that some of the skepticism about the EMS and
other developments had been couched in "very elegant language." He quoted
Talleyrand's observation that "we must use language to hide our thoughts."
He then raised these blunt questions;
( l) Might not the strength of the EMS-ECU mean additional weakness for
the dollar? Americans did' not like to hear this, but as a European one had to
point out that the weak dollar was reducing enormously the profitability of
many export industries in European hard-currency countries. This was bound
to lead to reduced investment, unemployment and increased government
intervention, which was certainly in contrast to the American belief in free
enterprise.
(2) Would the EMS be able to cope with the erratic capital movements that
its success would create or enforce?
(3) Would the EMS, with its early warning system, offer a certain
contradiction to the consequences of the existing system of wide interest rate
differentials? Would it not frankly encourage currency speculation within the
EMS?
E. What Future for the l.M.F.? While the EMS was thus off to a good
start, and the dollar was expected to retain much of its role for some time to
come, Europe and the U.S. should be careful not to turn their backs on the
LM.F., a Dutch speaker warned. That might be tempting, but could have very
adverse results politically.
A Frenchma11_.was guardedly optimistic about new signs of vitality in the
I.M.F., and an American foresaw a bigger role for Special Drawing Rights
concurrently with the trend toward multicurrency reserves. The proposed
Substitution Account offered a promising means of stimulating the use of
SDR's, he said. Somewhere down the road, the I.M.F. might ultimately turn
into something comparable to a world central bank.
The significance of the Substitution Account was also appreciated by a
Portuguese participant, who saw an enhanced SDR as a substitute for existing
forms of liquidity, of which there was a great excess. (Since it was not just
official liquidity that counted, but the liquidity in private hands as well, some
control over the international money markets was overdue.)
The author of the American working paper thought it would be important to
find a consensus that it would be desirable, over the next generation, for the
I.M.F. - however imperfect and inadequately staffed - to develop a closer
resemblance to an international central bank. That role, as he saw it, would not
be to destroy freedom of- or impair the adjustment of- exchange rates, but
to put some limit on international liquidity creation.
39
A strong dissent was registered by a Canadian who had participated in
meetings of the Interim Committee. He said that his view was not. based on
national pique nor on personal judgments of the I.M.F. staff. It was stmply that
it was a bureaucracy politically responsible to no one. In the long .r~n,
international organizations were effective only when founded ~n political
consent, and one should hesitate to endow the I.M.F. staff wtth broader
responsibilities withour prior political agreement about how currency changes
should be managed. (A comparison with the EMS was instructive: there the
adjustment mechanism would be controlled by the decision of member
governments themselves, not by a bureaucratic staff.)
A Turkish participant thought that, in any case, the future effectivene~s of
the I.M.F. would be much improved if we could all manage our natiOnal
economies more ably. But he could not help feeling pessimistic about this, as
no one had yet devised a model to show sensible and acceptable priorities in
that field. An American agreed that there was no substitute for the sound
management of domestic economies. Until we achieved that, techniques of
international monetary arrangements would never be entirely effective. Never-
theless he held some hope that a strong I.M.F. mi.ght one. day serve to. co~tr~l
domestic inflationary problems and to encourage mternatlonal economic disci·
pline.
F. Multilateral Cooperation and Harmonization. One theme recurred in a
number of interventions. As one Austrian put it: a monetary system could not
function without close international cooperation; cooperation was futile if it did
not extend to harmonization of economic policies among countries; but
harmonization was difficult to achieve in the face of divergent stages of
development.
A Norwegian speaker saw a fundamental need for the coordination of
national economic policies. Our trouble in getting it was not due to our not
wanting the same things (low rates of inflation, high rates of employment and
growth), but to differences in priorities. He was encouraged, however, by
recent developments: the more expansive steps taken by Germany and Japan,
which went beyond what they probably considered ideal; U.S. measures
including credit, interest rate and foreign exchange policy; the remarkable
stability of the exchange markets during the preceding six months, despite Iran
and the oil price increase; the launchihg of the EMS; and the repayment of
swaps. The borrowing by American authorities in foreign markets had been
especially noteworthy - politically and psychologically - inasmuch as the
U.S. must have been naturally reluctant to resort to that device for the first
time.
Improved day-to-day cooperation among central banks was also mentioned,
particularly the coordination of large exchange operations. (An Austrian
speaker, however, was moved to compare central bankers in general with the
chorus in a Greek tragedy, "lamenting without seemingly acting." But, he
complained, they were usually among the main actors, and the suppliers of the
market which they liked to criticize so heavily.)
40
An International participant was worried that divergencies ·in economic
performance, which had been so marked since 1973, would continue. This was
the sort of problem that could be dealt with through the traditional forms of
multilateral cooperation, but a new effort of political will would be required.
Just as individual decisions within the nation had to be taken in light of an
overall economic policy, so the individual policies of nations had to be put into
a general context of international cooperation. h was not enough to announce
thatev;ery country ought to have the same low inflation tate; specific policies
had to be coordinated to achieve that objective.
A Canadian speaker argued that it was not an absence of political will that
explained our monetary disorder. It was hard to think of another international
institutional arrangement of the past half century that had been supported by as
much political will as t!;te system of exchange rates: first, in Bretton Woods
with its single-minded objective of exchange rate stability; and second, in the
marshalling and channelling over the last three decades of billions of dollars
and other currencies to rescue members of the community of nations. This
represented a record of political will which stood almost unparalleled in the
history of international cooperation. It looked therefore as if it would be easy
to enlist the necessary political will if a system were proposed that appeared to
have a chance of success.
The absence of adequate harmonization of policies was due to the fact that
ministers of finance were not getting clear signals from their experts and
officials as to what constituted appropriate policy. So long as there were
fundamental differences in the perception of problems, harmonization of
policies would only exist at the highest level of generality. The speaker
concluded by saying that our efforts toward international monetary cooperation
had to start with a campaign to control inflation.
Several other interventions stressed the importance of arresting inflation.
One American described it as "the most disruptive economic force in the world
today." A Greek participant said that people in most countries were more
concerned atmut inflation than anything else. Under those circumstances,
perhaps the will could be found not just in the political superstructure, but
throughout society - to accept the discipline of common economic policies.
But how well, he wondered, would that political will stand up to the first major
downturn, with its widespread unemployment and pressure to reflate?
A French speaker feared that rates of inflation would remain widely
divergent, with perhaps even bigger gaps between European and non-European
rates. The consequent adjustments ("devaluations in disguise") unfortunately
no longer had the corrective character of devaluations under the old system,
which meant that efforts toward parallel European economic regimes were less
of a motivating force for the countries of the EEC.
Finally, an American participant confessed that he would be extremely
worried if it appeared that the solution to our monetary problems depended on
a convergence of the economic systems or policies of our various countries,
"because it's just not on." He was even more worried when he considered
41
these expert proposals for convergence of policies against the background of ·
the hurricane that was brewing for us out of the latest OPEC price decisions.
G. Monetary Implications of the Oil Situation. The stupendous increase in
our energy costs since I f:J73 was inextricably bound up with our monetary
problems. The foregoing speaker presented an analysis of this subject which is
summarized in section II below. In addition, other participants alluded to
monetary complications related to the oil crisis.
An Austrian speaker observed that the recent OPEC price increases and the
formal beginning of the EMS were in fact closely related. The oil price increase
held a threat of both inflation and deflation. One had to differentiate between
"homemade inflation," on the one hand, and, on the other, price increases
stemming from changes in the terms of trade, which indicated a different
distribution of real income. It might be painful to realize that the oil price
increase of 1974 had not been inflationary per se, in the narrow sense of the
word. Rather, it had been deflationary, as income had been shifted from oil
consuming to oil producing countries.
The recent and prospective price increases should have brought home to our
citizens a deeper understanding of the energy problem. If we did not soon
come to a more efficient and comprehensive energy policy, our energy
consumption problems might be solved simply by deflation and unemployment.
According to a Turkish participant, the crude oil price increases had caused
a short-run effect in favor of the producing countries, but little change for them
in the long run. The terms of trade still favored the industrialized world. One
could not yet describe the economies of the oil-producing countries as
"healthy," because they lacked much in the way of basic institutions and
infrastructure. Because crude oil was priced in U.S. dollars - the exchange
value of which had steadily declined under America's "benign neglect" - a
British speaker contended that the real price of oil had not in fact increased
since 1973.
An Austrian partiCipant said that he had listened nostalgically for some
reference to the gold standard, but in vain. An American observed that this
would not have been the case a decade or two ago. The fact that gold was now
usually mentioned only as a commodity, or as a historical reference point,
indicated that it was not a major factor any longer as a reserve asset in the
monetary system.
In summing up, the American working paper author emphasized especially
the need to control both the U.S. domestic inflation and the balance of
payments deficit. One message which he had heard from a number of
participants was "discipline begins at home."
The British author concluded by remarking that there were two levels on
which one could think about these matters: the practical and the theoretical.
Putting aside the theories, one could say that on the practical level we had
"muddled through" so far, but that some severe shocks lay ahead. In the same
way that the relative peace of the 19th and early 20th centuries had rested on
42
the power of the British Navy and the "Old Lady of Threadneedle," so we had
all depended since World War II largely on the power of the U.S. dollar. Alas,
that phase would soon be over (if it was not already), and we would have to
look for something entirely new. To find it would be the great task of the next
decade - if indeed we had that long.
*
* *
43
II. THE IMPLICATIONS OF INSTABILITY IN THE MIDDLE EAST
AND AFRICA FOR THE WESTERN WORLD
Groundwork for discussion of this subject consisted of the following three
working papers - one by a French author and two by Americans.
French Working Paper:
1. Instability in the Middle East and Africa
Instability in the Middle East and Africa is not a new phenomenon. The
evolution of the Israel-Arab conflict since October 1973, the quintupling of the
price of oil, the weakening and subsequent fall of the imperial regime in Iran,
on the one hand, and the growing isolation of Rhodesia and South Africa
combined with open, large-scale Soviet involvement in Africa since 1974, on
the other, have changed the nature of the problem over the last five years.
As regards the Middle East, a preliminary comment is called for: the almost
exclusive attention given by "Westerners" to the Israeli-Arab conflict accounts
in part for the failure to forestall and react to OPEC's seizure of power in
October 1973, and perhaps also for the fall of the Shah, in whom exaggerated
hopes had been placed. The first lesson of these events, therefore, is perhaps
the importance of taking a broader, less distorted view of the Middle East.
Revolutions can always be explained afterwards. The causes of the Iranian
revolt are now perfectly clear: a modernization drive that went against the
grain and created injustices that were exacerbated by the wealth derived from
oil; a sick, increasingly isolated monarch, incapable of stemming the universal
corruption or controlling the Savak; and a combination of a resurgence of
Shiism (as happens periodically, the last time being in 1963) and of Com-
munism (Tudeh party) among the oilfield workers and even In the army. In
conditions such as these, a belated, bungled "liberalization" merely weakened
the regime and facilitated its overthrow. With the Shah, a myth collapsed -
that of the Iranian army, of which nothing remains but a mass of useless
equipment.
So far, nothing has been settled. Irrespective of the charisma of the
78-year-old ayatollah, power is still there for the taking. The government does
not govern. Certain provinces are threatening to secede (Kurdistan, Arabistan).
The Koran is not an adequate basis for a new order. The political vacuum
created by the Shah's departure will not be filled very soon.
For this political vacuum, the West is partly to blame - a West which
refused to consider playing any other card than the Shah's until it was forced
to abandon him to his fate. This dropping of the Shah by those who had
hitherto supported him unconditionally is also liable to have certain repercus-
sions, by affecting the attitudes towards the West of those who feel threatened
and do not wish to suffer the same fate.
In Africa, destabilization has quickened its pace since 1974. It is true that
during the sixties, the USSR began to pursue a systematic policy of making its
44
presence felt on the African continent, and in doing so, found itself competing
with China. But it was from 1974 onwards, with the revolution in Portugal and
the fall of Haile Selassie, that Soviet policy expanded in scope. It was from
that year onwards that allies Df the USSR, and above all of course, Cuban
soldiers, began to intervene. Soviet policy in Africa seeks first and foremost to
exploit - here as elsewhere - all the weaknesses and errors of the West by
encouraging "liberation" movements, an elastic form of intervention, wherever
poS"Sibie. In Southern Africa, the USSR is pursuing the simple, rewarding
policy of systematically throwing oil on the flames. In two places, she appears
to be trying to set up peoples' republics on a durable basis: in Angola and
Ethiopia. In other parts of Africa, more particularly the Maghreb and West
Africa, she dis plays considerable circumspection.
Although geopolitics are often treated with scepticism, Soviet intentions in
Ethiopia can be understood more readily if one thinks in terms of the Indian
Ocean rather than Africa. Ethiopia, the Horn of Africa, South Yemen,
Afghanistan - for some obs.!rvers the encirclement policy is obvious. Iran
might soon join the collection, but that of course is far from certain.
In any event, while it is plain that in both the Middle East and Africa, the
imbalances are essentially due to local causes, power politics are an aggravat-
ing factor. It is quite common in Africa, for example, to encounter situations
characterized by some of the following features: frontier disputes, tribal
warfare, a split between an Islamic "North" and animist or Christian "South",
and an unpopular, corrupt regime. The case of Chad is typical. All the above
factors are at work, coupled with external interference (Libya, France) and
economic ulterior motives (uranium). The case of Zaire is fairly simple: a revolt
in one province, and opposition to the rule and conduct of a head of state who
is otherwise astute and courageous.
Sometimes, small-scale, well-conducted operations (such as the French
intervention in Kolwezi in 1978) are sufficient to prevent the imbalance from
getting any worse. But a large-scale incursion by a new participant (in Angola
and Ethiopia)--changes the whole nature of the problem.
2. The consequences of the Iranian crisis
(a) The direct economic consequences of the Iranian crisis fall into two
groups. In the first place, the virtually complete failure to fulfill existing
contracts and the non-existence of new contracts will have a detrimental effect
on overall demand in the Western countries, creating, through the "Keynesian
multiplier effect", deflationary pressures which are difficult to gauge at
present. And in the second place, the restrictions on oil output in Iran, which
have not been fully offset by the other producing countries, have resulted in a
price increase far higher than that decided upon by OPEC in December 1978;
as in 1973, this rise will have deflationary and inflationary effects which will be
aggravated by some countries' need to correct their balance of payments. As a
result, the worldwide recession will receive a new lease of life and may well
follow the scenario I described in my report to the Club of Rome on energy,
i.e., energy regulation through inflation and unemployment.
45
In the medium term, the prospects are even more alarming. For one thing,
certain producing countries - not necessarily belonging to OPEC (such as
Mexico) ~ may be tempted to limit their output in order to damp down the
risk of social unrest caused by a sudden influx of new wealth, while at the
same time preserving their oil assets. This temptation existed before the fall of
the Shah; it is certainly much stronger today. For another, and despite a
certain amount of controversy over the past two years, it would seem that the
COMECON countries are bound to become net importers of oil within the next
few years. Already, the Soviet Union is increasingly behaving towards its
satellites in the same way that OPEC does towards its customers, thereby
putting them in an awkward situation. These energy shortages in the East
European countries are an additional reason for the Soviet Union to seek
closer relations with Iran. A major shift in the oil exports of these countries
should not be ruled out.
(b) In terms of the regional balance, the fall of the imperial regime
introduces two destabilizing factors which, from the standpoint of the Arab
countries, operate in opposing directions.
- First, as regards the Israeli-Arab conflict, the hard-liners will be
strengthened by the support of Iran. More particularly, the PLO has been to
some extent freed from control by Saudi Arabia, since it now has two major
sources of finance. The Palestinians are the main winners in all this. Now that
they are more confident of support, they may among other things, restart the
fighting in southern Lebanon. With Khomeini on one side and Qaddafi on the
other, a resumption of international terrorism cannot be ruled out.
- Second, some countries in the region are justified in fearing Iranian-type
revolutions. Islam appears to be strong enough to cause or sustain revolutions.
For example, the internal situation in Iraq, with 55 per cent of Shiites, 20 per
cent of Kurds and an active Communist party, well entrenched among the
Kurds and the oil workers, has certain analogies with Iran. It is true that the
Baath rulers of Iraq, being better informed and more clearsighted than the
Westerners, realized long ago the significance of events in Iran and appear to
have set their house in order over the past two years (by curbing the Kurds
and the Communists). The attitude of Iraq and Syria in the conflict between the
two Yemens is also revealing evidence of the concerns of these two countries,
both of which are close to the Soviet Union. The recent rapprochement
between Iran and Syria, which have hitherto been divided by personal
differences, is also a major consequence of the Iranian affair. In more general
terms, this development and the Israeli-Egyptian treaty are important factors in
the renewal of the Islamic alliance.
There are also certain signs which suggest that the Saudi government is not
as stable as the West would often like to believe. Is this surprising in a country
where the bulk of the working population, from the oil workers to the President
of the Central Bank, is composed of foreigners?
There is some doubt about Turkey as well. Of course the Turkish
government is completely different from the Shah's dictatorship, and the
majority of the population are Sunnite. But deep down, have Ataturk's reforms
46
been any bet~er assim.ila~ed than those of Reza Shah? In any event, the U.S.
was well adv1sed to lift 1ts embargo on military aid to Turkey, and the West
would do well to consider giving economic aid.
In Afghanistan, the curr~nt counterrevolution, aided by China, is certainly
connecte_d With the events m Iran. From the Western point of view, this is the
mos_t satls~ac~ory outcome of these events. It remains to be seen whether the
Soy1e.ts w1ll mtervene on a large scale to crush it.
History demonst_rates th~ impo_rtance of t:ansnational relations, especially in
the case o~ re_volutwns. It IS possible that th1s self-propagating tendency is even
stronger WI thin Islam than elsewhere. The prospect of an explosion throughout
the whole Mid_dle East, involving th~ elimi~ati~n of Sadat, refusal of the treaty,
a fresh war w1th Israel and a drastic cut m 011 supplies cannot be completely
ruled out. '
(c) It is m?re_ ~ifficult_ to ass~ss the e:fects of the Iranian crisis in strategic
terms. One thing 1s certam: the 1dea, denved from the "Nixon doctrine" that
Iran would act as the policeman of the Persian Gulf, is now obsolete. H;s the
Soviet Union's envelopment policy, referred to earlier, any chance of success?
Are our supply routes across the Indian Ocean threatened? These questions
were being asked even before the fall of the Shah, and must be considered
agai?st the backgr_ound of overall S_oviet strategy. As regards the strictly
Iran1an aspect, the important questiOn IS the nature of the relations between the
Iranian revolution and the Soviet Union, both now and in the future. It is still
an open question.
In the immediate future, the East-West strategic balance has been affected
by the withdrawal of the American military advisers and their equipment. Even
though the disappearance of the listening posts is offset by satellites and
arrangements with Turkey, this is true only to some extent. The Soviet gain
here is obvious.
3. The_ African quagmire
While the--stakes in the Middle East are relatively easy to define, the
opposite is true of Africa. In 1973, Mao Tse-tung explained to a Western visitor
that the Soviet Union would intervene in Africa for five reasons: it is an empty
continent (some 300 million inhabitants); its resources are largely untapped and
even unexplored; it has no well-established ideology; control of three sea
routes (the Suez Canal, the Indian Ocean and the Cape of Good Hope) is
tempting; and lastly, said Mao, the post-Vietnam trauma in the U.S. might
foster the illusion that the field was clear. And it is true that the U.S. does not
seem to be convinced that it has any role to play in Africa. The interventionist
policy advocated by Henry Kissinger has been discarded. For Mr. Young's
brand of non-intervention policy (do not give the Russians and Cubans any
opportunity to criticize or intervene, iet them get drawn in, cut the grass under
their feet by supporting the nationalist movements) is obviously more to the
Americans' taste.
Moreover, U.S. policy towards Africa is framed in an atmosphere dominated
by a feeling of guilt towards the Negroes and a "fixation" on the apartheid
47
question. The other Western countries are often less concerned with overall
strategy than with preserving narrowly defined economic interests (for exam-
ple, those of Great Britain in the Republic of South Africa, and the close
attention being paid by Western Germany to Namibia, which is unquestionably
one of the richest countries in the continent).
The case of France is often singled out because of its military position (in a
recent article*, James Goldsborough began by making a comparison between
the 15,000 French and 34,000 Cuban soldiers in Africa - his figures). But the
interests of France in Africa, strictly defined, relate to its overseas territories
(Mayotte, La Reunion ...), the protection of its nationals, and the discharge of
its commitments towards the countries with which it has concluded defense or
cooperation treaties.
In broader terms, should one take seriously Lenin's famous phrase that "the
master of Africa is the master of Europe"? Is Africa to Europe what Latin
America is to the U.S.? What exactly is the relevance nowadays of arguments
about the control of sea routes?
In actual fact, Europe's economic dependence on Africa today is not very
great, even where raw materials are concerned. Africa does not present any
immediate danger comparable, for example, to an interruption in our oil
supplies. It is presumably the lack of any feeling of urgency that accounts for
the West's failure to react. It follows that the Soviets have some prospects of
succeeding in establishing themselves, by pursuing power politics in the most
traditional sense of the term. The consequences of destabilization in Africa are
not apparent to the Westerners for the obvious reason that they do not know
what they want. Hence the need for a far more searching analysis of their
long-term economic and strategic interests.
Two questions are particularly urgent. While it is true that the terrain in
Africa is constantly shifting and therefore only very flexible strategies have any
hope of success, is that a reason for remaining inactive if a power - in this
case the Soviet Union, with or without Cuba- intervenes on a large scale, as
in Eth,iopia? The likelihood that it will get bogged down is of course
considerable, but are we entitled to rule out the possibility of success, i.e., the
creation of a stable satellite? Should we not then take the line that detente is
indivisible and act accordingly, or should we play the Soviet game by agreeing
to disconnect East-West relations from North-South relations, meaning in
practice the East-West-South triangle?
The second question: is not the "Andrew Young strategy" in Southern
Africa extremely dangerous? In the immediate future, it may seem plausible by
reducing Soviet influence over the liberation movements. But is it not
aggravating the risk of a bloodbath in South Africa? The moral arguments in
this case are largely unconvincing. Apartheid is certainly an intolerable regime
from the standpoint of Western civilization, but no more so than many other
*James 0. Goldsborough: "Dateline Paris: Africa's Policeman", Foreign Policy, No. 33, Winter
1978-1979.
48
regimes in many parts of the world. Nor should it be forgotten that, after all,
the "White tribe'' of South Africa also belongs to Africa. If we take up a moral
stance, we· must also try to put ourselves in their place. In any event, would
their elimination be in the interests of the West?
All these problems are posed in the form of questions, because the first step
towards clear thinking is to raise the right issues.
The Western countries must coordinate their policies in Africa. This does not
mean that they should work out a "common strategy", which would obviously
be quite beyond them in view of the diversity of their interests and outlooks.
But a joint approach is essential.
On one point, at least, there should be a consensus. The destabilization of
Africa is the logical outcome of decolonization. The Western countries, far
more than the Socialist countries, are the natural economic partners of the
African countries. The search for a new world economic order, towards which
we have been groping since 1974, is a political as well as an economic
imperative. We must make it progress without waiting for circumstances to
force our hand, and we must try at the same time to give it an African regional
component.
* *
*
After summarizing the main points in his paper, the author made some
general observations about Middle Eastern and African developments. He felt,
first of all, that the fall of the Shah had not been inevitable, and could well
have been avoided. We were just at the beginning, not the end, of the Iranian
revolution, and it would probably be several years before a new stable regime
could be established. One heard a variety of opinions about the strategic
conseqQI;!nces of the Iranian crisis, but if, as some argued, nothing had
changed, inert what had been the use of all that valuable U.S. surveillance
equipment based in Iran?
In Africa, our problems had intensified dramatically since 1974, as the
process of decolonization drew to a close. The marked asymmetry between
Russian and Western attitudes toward Africa derived from the fact that the
Soviets seemed to know what they wanted :to achieve on that continent,
whereas we did not. For one thing, we had made no systematic analysis of how
dependent we really were on African raw materials. (One rough figure one
heard quoted was about 12 per cent.) For another thing, we were being
imprudent, not to say irresponsible, not to envisage what our response should
be if the Soviets succeeded in creating a permanent implantation in Africa.
(Some, such as Senator Edward Kennedy, seemed to think this was not a big
worry, as the Africans had a way of eventually rejecting foreigners.)
In any case, we could not hope to shape a better African policy without first
having a clearer notion of what our interests there were, both in the short and
the long run.
49
American Working Paper (l):
"IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WEST OF INSTABILITY
IN THE MIDDLE EAST"
In the past 30 years, Western interests in the area stretching from the
Mediterranean to Afghanistan and Pakistan, hereafter referred to as western
Asia, have been more or less constant. They have involved three considera-
tions: oil, the Soviet Union and Israel.
With respect to oil, the West has been interested in obtaining a reliable
supply at reasonable prices. With respect to the Soviet Union, the West has
been interested in avoiding a confrontation which could lead to nuclear war
while at the same time denying a strategic advantage in the area to the Soviets
and maintaining its own strategic advantages in terms of transit rights, both on
the sea and in the air, and intelligence facilities. With respect to Israel, the
West has felt a moral imperative to support the existence of Israel while at the
same time sustaining good relations with Israel's Arab neighbors.
While being clear-eyed in perceiving its interests in the region, the West has
been less clear-eyed in perceiving how those interests are regarded by the
people of the region or how conditions in the region affect Western interests.
As a result, the West has not always been as flexible as it might have been in
adapting policies to protect its interests, for it has not always understood the
shifting nature of the sands on which its interests and policies have been based.
Thfs paper will therefore concentrate first on the conditions in the region. What
is striking about these conditions is how little they have changed. Most of the
features of the western Asian political, social and economic scene which
existed 30 years ago exist in much the same measure today. Change has not
been as drastic as it might sometimes seem to have been.
Instability
Instability itself is hardly a new phenomenon in western Asia. Its causes lie
deeply imbedded in history and in the political and social fabric woven by that
history.
Among the sources of instability is ethnic tension. Kurds in Turkey, Iran and
Iraq. Baluchis in Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan. Pushtuns in Afghanistan and
Pakistan. Turk.ic peoples in northern Iran and Afghanistan. Arabs in south-
western Iran. South Asians seeking jobs in oil-rich OPEC countries. Palesti-
nians in the Arabian peninsula. Egyptians in Iraq. All of these groups represent
minorities in the countries in which they live. Most of them have grievances
against the dominant ethnic groups. Many of them seek autonomy for
themselves. Most of them are targets of discrimination in political, economic
and social terms. Many of them are more industrious and hence are seen as
threats by the dominant groups. It is not surprising that so much of the
instability of the area is caused by these ethnic tensions.
50
Similarly much. of the instability in western Asia stems from religious
tension. Some of this tension, notably in Lebanon, arises from Moslem-
Christian conflicts. There are also pockets of other non-Moslem peoples in the
area, such as the Zoroastrians and Bahais in Iran, who, like ethnic minorities,
are often targets of repression. But the major areas of religious tension are
between Moslems and Jews in Palestine and between the two major Islamic
sects, Slirlni and Shi'a, in many of the countries of the region. The
Moslem-Jewish conflict is at least as old as Zionism, and tensions often leading
to conflict between Sunni and Shi'a have existed since the split in Islam shortly
after the Prophet's death in the seventh century A.D. This paper will not
attempt to deal in any depth with the Arab-Israeli problem. It is perceived by
many of those directly involved as not only a religious but also an ethnic
dispute. As for Sunni vs. Shi'a, their conflict plays a major role in the internal
politics of a number of the countries of western Asia, notably Iran, Iraq and
Afghanistan.
Longstanding political disputes between nations also give rise to instability.
Aside from the Arab-Israeli dispute, these include the Afghan-Pakistani dispute
over their border, the conflict between the two Yemens, Iraqi-Kuwaiti hostility
and problems only recently and possibly only temporarily put to rest between
Iran and Iraq.
Other important causes of instability in the region arise from economic
factors. Despite spectacular riches pouring into some of the OPEC countries,
both within those countries and in the non-oil countries, poverty and
subsistence living remain the way of life for the vast majority of the people.
Low rates of literacy, high infant mortality, poor nutrition and inadequate
housing are the norm in most countries. For example, infant mortality in Egypt
is over 100 per 1,000 births, as compared with a U.S. figure of 15. Life
expectancy in the region is seldom much over 50 years as compared with over
70 in the West. And in some of the countries of the region these conditions are
steadily worsening...as a result of rapidly increasing population, bringing
pressures on already limited amounts of arable land and forcing migration to
already crowded cities. Iran's population grew 17 per cent from 1970 to 1976,
Egypt's 16.5 per cent, and Iraq's almost 30 per cent. Rapidly increasing
populations have meant that the average age of populations has been declining,
causing new pressures on already inadequate educational facilities and on
already limited job markets. Those young people who do receive an education
find meaningful employment difficult to obtain when they finish their educa-
tion. Governments have created vast make-work bureaucracies where little is
accomplished. ,
Some of these economic tensions are described in the West as the results of
"modernization". To some extent they do derive from the desire of peoples
and governments to modernize along Western lines, to bring modern industries
and social services to their countries. In many instances, this desire has led to
major mistakes in economic decisions which have compounded existing
economic dislocations. Emphasis on capital-intensive projects rather than on
agriculture or on labor-intensive industry is one example. Another is the
51
tendency in most countries of the region to fail to give adequate incentives to
private sector development. But the root causes of economic difficulties are ~ot
the efforts at modernization but the inability to cope with rural poverty, With
its urban counterpart and with population growth. In political terms, frustrated
youth and the increasing gap between rich and poor are major sources of
instability.
In the region itself, "modernization" has often a different meaning than
industrialization and improved social services. To many of the region's
inhabitants, modernization means the introduction of Western attitudes and
mores which threaten their traditional values. Western attitudes toward
women, toward liquor and toward other matters have been introduced and
appear to the traditionalist majority as fundamental threats. The majority,
which is poor, also notes that it is generally the rich in their societies who are
attracted to Western ways. Tensions derived from economic disparities,
therefore feed on tensions arising from "modernization".
Yet an~ther enduring cause of instability in the area is the fact that virtually
all of the governments are authoritarian. Some have more ideological trappings
than others. The military plays a critical political role in virtually all countries
of the region. In some countries, there are more efficient methods than in
others for the presenting and redress of grievances. But the bulk of the
population in almost every country has little or no say in governmental
decisions. Opposition is represeed. Basic political and legal rights are seldom
observed.
There is ample historical evidence, which need not be recounted here, to
support the view that authoritarian regimes are by their very nature unstable.
Where there exists no generally accepted system for succession to power and
where there are no established mechanisms for popular participation in
government or for the protection of human rights, people deprived of political
choices or rights store up grievances and in due course turn to violent means to
redress them. If one major or colonel can seize power today, another is
tempted to do so tomorrow. Authoritarian regimes also more often than not use
corruption as a means to win loyalty and hence weaken their moral base in the
population as a whole. On top of all the other ethnic, religious, social and
economic tensions of the region, the existence of authoritarian governments
reinforces the tendencies toward instability.
Soviet ambitions
Another condition of the western Asian region which has been present since
Tsarist Russia penetrated the Caucasus and Central Asia in the nineteenth
century has been Russian or Soviet imperialism. In its pre-1917 form, this was
a form of imperialism familiar to the West: an acquiring of colonial areas to
build the economic and political power and prestige of imperial Russia. Turkey,
Iran and Afghanistan all lost territory as Russia expanded southward, and
many Islamic peoples whose cultural ties were to their fellow Moslems and not
to Christian Russia were absorbed in the Russian Empire.
52
Flying new ideological banners, the Bolshevik leaders of Russia in the early
1920's succeeded in reestablishing imperial sway over the Moslem peoples of
the Caucasus and Central Asia who had been part of the Tsarist Empire. And
like the Tsars, the new Russian leaders attempted to expand their borders
further to the South at the expense of Turkey, Iran and Afghanistan. These
attempts failed immediately after the Second World War in the cases of Turkey
andAran, but gained an important success with the installation of a pro-Soviet,
Marxist-Leninist regime in Afghanistan in April, 1978. The Soviets also went
beyond the traditional aggressive Russian policy in neighboring countries by
attempting to bring within the Soviet orbit other regional countries. Here again
they have seen both success and failure, but they have made some net gains,
notably in South Yemen with the installation of a pro-Soviet, Communist
regime there in June, 1978.
The Soviet government has been more adept than its Tsarist predecessor in
working to expand the Russian Empire and to increase its influence in western
Asia. The Soviets have used ideology, subversion, military and economic
assistance, cultural programs and local tensions to promote their aims. But the
difference is really one of degree; the reality confronting the West in the region
for some 150 years has been an expansionist, aggressive Russia.
Culture: religion and family
Of all the constants with which the West has to deal in this region, the most
enduring one is culture. With the exception of Israel and pockets of
non-Islamic peoples in the area, the West is dealing with a culture which is
rooted in Islam. Western ignorance and arrogance about Islam are appalling.
Whatever the reasons - and the decline of Islamic political power and the
resurgence of the West beginning with the Renaissance had a great deal to do
with shaping Western attitudes this arrogance and ignorance has blinded
many in the West to the reality that Islam is absolutely fundamental to the
daily lives and thinking of the vast majority of western Asia. Islam, unlike
Christianity as it has developed in the West, is deeply entwined with all aspects
of life - personal and public for a Moslem. Separation of church and state
is an unfamiliar concept. A call to defend Islam is a call to defend the essence
of life itself.
This is not to say that the hold of Islam has not weakened in the last few
generations. As Westernization has proceeded, the attraction of Islam has
receded somewhat, especially among the middle and upper income groups. But
Islam remains the glue that binds the diverse peoples of the region together. It
is one of the two pillars of the culture of western Asia.
The other pillar is the family. Given the instabilities, tensions and insecurities
of life, the family assumes the role of provider of stability and security for an
individual. Much of the politics and economics of western Asia can be
explained through family ties, sometimes expanded to extended family or tribal
ties.
53
In this context, it is not difficult to understand why many people in western
Asia regard threats to Islam and to the family as fundamental threats to their
way of life. These threats are usually perceived as coming from the West,
through "modernization" and secularization which appear to be basic parts of
Western culture. This cultural antipathy toward the West was stimulated by
Western colonialism which affected virtually every country of the region and
left in its wake feelings of resentment and inferiority, hurt pride and desire for
revenge. The experience with Western colonialism was reinforced and is still
being reinforced in some countries by experience with hordes of Westerners
imported in connection with economic and military assistance and commercial
contracts. In short, the West is an easy excuse and whipping boy for the ills of
the area.
The Soviet Union and its "Godless Communism" are also seen as threats to
their culture by the peoples of the region. But in countries, such as.Afghanistan
and South Yemen, where Soviet proteges have seized power, the governments
have striven to convince their peoples that Communism and Islam are
compatible. Such claims are greeted with attitudes ranging from skepticism to
outright disbelief by most Moslems of western Asia, but it remains to be seen
whether Islam can be a successful barrier against Soviet-supported Com-
munism in the absence of cures for the political, social and economic ills of the
region.
New directions
What have been summarized so far in this paper are the constants in the
western Asian scene as they affect Western interests: instability, Soviet-
Russian expansionism, and a culture rooted in Islam and the family. There
have, however, appeared in the past few years some elements in the picture
which represent a radical change from the past.
The first of these new elements is the dependence of the West, of the very
existence of the industrialized West, on the oil resources of western Asia,
meaning to all extents and purposes the oil resources of the littoral countries of
the Persian Gulf. As recently as 1950, Western Europe, Japan and the U.S.
together depended on the region for only about 8 per cent of their oil. In 1977,
the latest year for which figures are available, they depended on the region for
57 per cent of their. oil. Even this figure can be misleading because it is an
average. The figure for Italy is 83 per cent, for France 80 per cent, for the
United Kingdom 76 per cent, for Japan 72 per cent, for Germany 67 per cent
and the U.S. 46 per cent.
This situation increases the importance of the region to the West enormously'
and therefore greatly increases the leverage regional oil-producing countries
have on the West in economic and political terms. The 1973 oil embargo was a
demonstration of this fundamental change in the power equation between the
West and the oil-producing states of the region. At the same time, Western
leverage, in the form of economic and financial aid, has become less important
to an area that has spawned its own fellow-Islamic aid givers. Pressures on the
54
West _to export ~oods and services to the region and to attract OPEC capital
have mcreased literally by leaps and bounds. Oil price increases have had a
major effe_ct on Weste.rn e~onomics, greatly slowing projected rates of growth
~d ~rea~mg severe mflatw~ary_ pressures. All of this is an entirely new
s1tuat10n m the world, one whtch IS far from fully understood either in the West
o_r i_n the region. It is also a situation not likely to change soon in any
stgmficant way. Other sources of oil cannot substitute for Persian Gulf
supplies, and other sources of energy are not going to be available in sufficient
quantity for some time to come.
Another entirely new element in western Asia in recent years has been the
decli?e in Weste~ militar_y power. With the exception of the facility on Diego
Garc1a and occaswnal v1s1ts to the area of elements of the U.S. Pacific Fleet,
the West has not replaced the sizable British and smaller French military
presence which existed in the area at the end of the Second World War and
which was gradually withdrawn in the ensuing years until the final British
withdrawal from the Persian Gulf in 1971. The small American flotilla berthed
in Bahrein since shortly after the Second World War has generally consisted of
three ships, although it has occasionally, such as at the present time, been
augmented by two or three additional ships.
The ability of the West to use its own military forces to protect its interests
has therefore greatly eroded in the post-war period. The days when American
Marines might land in Lebanon as they did in 1958 or when a brigade of
American troops might participate in a military exercise in southern Iran as
happened in 1963 seem to belong to a far-distant past, although recent
American moves to bolster North Yemen may indicate a renewed willingness
by the U.S. to deploy its own military forces to protect its interests in the area.
Western military weakness, when combined with the erosion of economic
leverage resulting from its dependence on the region's oil, quite naturally is
seen in the region as a decline in Western power, influence and purpose. The
result is less heeding in the region of Western interests and new temptations for
the Soviet Uruon.
Finally, another major change in the region has been the shifting of Iran from
a pro-Western to a non-aligned position and the shifting of Afghanistan and
South Yemen from non-aligned to pro-Soviet positions. It is always possible
that these shifts will be reversed. In :'the case of Iran, the threat of Soviet
power and needed economic and military supply links with the West may well
move it back into a more aligned position unless internal instability gives an
opportunity to pro-Soviet elements to seize power. In the case of Afghanistan,
it is difficult to see how the Soviets and their proteges will be dislodged from
power; the regime's opposition is fragmented and poorly armed. In the case of
South Yemen, its distance from the USSR makes the staying power of its
pro-Soviet regime somewhat more problematic than is the case with the new
Afghan regime. Whatever happens, however, the Soviets have new oppor-
tunities for subversion in the region, and the position of the West has been
further weakened for the immediate future if not for the longer term.
55
Western options
Given the conditions that prevail in Western Asia, what options does the
West have for preserving and promoting its interests?
The first priority for the West would appear to be the lessening of its
dependence on the oil of the region. Involving as it does the development of
alternative energy supplies, this will be a lengthy process. But it seems clear
that the pursuit of alternative energy sources and alternative sources of
petroleum and of conservation measures is not being carried out with sufficient
urgency or zeal.
Secondly, the West should do what it can to assist in the settlement of
regional disputes and thus promote greater stability. First among these disputes
is the Arab-Israeli problem. Strenuous efforts will be required to keep the
Egyptian-Israeli settlement on track. These efforts will have to involve as they
have in the past the top level of the U.S. government as the only outside
power that has the full confidence of both parties. As for the other remaining
issues involving Israel and Syria, Israel and Jordan, the Palestinians and
Jerusalem, the task of mediation and negotiation will not be an easy one, to put
it mildly. But the rewards of peace must continually be held in front of all the
parties, and not just the U.S. but the West as a whole must use its influence to
keep the negotiations moving in the right direction. In particular, moderate
Arab nations that are interested in keeping the door open for negotiations, such
as Saudi Arabia and Jordan, need to receive moral and tangible support from
the West.
Other regional disputes also require Western attention. As they have been
less involved than the U.S. in the Arab-Israeli problems, Western European
governments and Japan may be better able than the U.S. to encourage regional
cooperation in the Persian Gulf. Given the past history of antagonism between
Arabs and Iranians and among Arabs, especially vis-a-vis Iraq, on the Gulf
littoral, the development or regional cooperation will not come about easily or
quickly. But it would appear to be in the Western interest to support moves in
this direction if only to erect further barriers against the extension of Soviet
influence.
Likewise, although CENTO appears dead, Turkish-Iranian-Pakistani cooper-
ation in the organization known as Regional Cooperation for Development
might still provide useful links between these three countries and deserves
Western encouragement. Given the present internal problems in all three
countries and the fact that their economies are not complementary, it is not
possible to be very optimistic about the future of the RCD. Its past has not
been brilliant But it still exists and could serve useful purposes politically as
well as economically.
Regarding the disputes between Afghanistan and Pakistan and between the
two Yemens, involving a pro-Soviet regime on one side of each dispute, it
would appear to be clearly in the West's interest to make it plain to
Afghanistan and to South Yemen that it will not countenance aggression
against their neighbors, to provide appropriate support to Pakistan and to
56
North Yemen and to counsel the Soviet Union against direct military
involvement.
Throughout the area, the West has the opportunity to support its friends with
economic and military assistance. Such assistance is of major importance in
promoting peace between Israel and E~ypt and i~ kee~in~ open. Western
relations with Syria. It is also of great Importance m ass1stmg Pakistan and
North. Xemen against the inroads of the Soviet surrogates on their borders.
western countries providing assistance should, however, be careful not to
repeat the American mistake in Iran of building up so great a presence of
western personnel that the cultural sensibilities of their hosts become aroused.
This consideration should be borne in mine not only with respect to military
and economic assistance programs in the more needy countries but also with
respect to burgeoning military and commercial ties with the oil-rich countries of
the region. Given the widespread latent antagonism toward the West in the
region, too many Westerners on the scene have been self-defeating, notably in
Iran and could be so again.
With respect to the Soviets, a number of options are available. One is to
increase the Western military presence in the area, making it clear that
Western military forces will, if necessary, act to protect vital Western interests,
such as in the oil fields. Another option is to make it plain to the Soviets in
private diplomatic exchanges, ~ut also in publ!c .when appropria~e, when
important Western interests are mvolved and to md1cate to the Soviets what
cost they will have to pay in ~verall relations with t~e ~est. if they p~rsist in
expansionist activity in the regiOn. We should recogmze m th1s connectiOn that
the Soviets have been pursuing a patient and cautious policy in the region. The
coups in Afghanistan and South Yemen cam~ about more as a .resul.t of lo~al
events than of Soviet urgings. So far the Sov1ets have been caut1ous m dealing
with the turmoil in Iran. But their actions in all of these countries, ranging from
rapid military and economic support to the new governments in Afghanistan
and South Yemen to clandestine encouragement of the left in Iran, provide
sufficient evidence of long-range Soviet intentions to cause the West to keep its
guard up.
It will be harder for the West to influence internal political events in any of
the countries of the region. While the West can encourage observance of
human rights and a lessening of corruption, the internal dynamics of the
countries of the region are sufficiently obscure to Westerners, as has been seen
in Iran, that it is extremely difficult for the West to have much influence on the
internal stability of regional nations.
There are, however, some things which can be done. One is to stay in touch
more systematically than in the past with opposition groups. If this cannot be
done overtly, it can and should be done covertly. Secondly, all Western
countries should pay more attention to the well-being of students from the area
attending educational institutions in Western countries. The experiences of
these students in the West often has led in the past to their alienation from the
West. Some of that alienation can be avoided by greater attention to the needs
of ·these students during their stay in the West.
57
Another need is for Western nations to do a better job of educating and
informing their own citizens about the conditions of the region. Certainly in the
United States, and possibly in other Western countries as well, the level of
ignorance about western Asia is abysmal, and educational institutions lack the
resources for correcting this situation. Moreover, the quality ofjournalistic
coverage of the region in the Western press is spotty at best. The West cannot
deal intelligently with its problems in western Asia without a sufficient cadre of
specialists and well-informed publics. The West needs to see the peoples of
western Asia in the mirrors of their past, not in its own.
Finally, there is a crying need for more coordination among Western
countries across the whole spectrum of their common interests in the region -
economic, oil, military, political, cultural. If there is a single conclusion that
emerges from the Bilderberg Conference's discussion of these problems, it
should be the encouragement in all fora- academic, governmental, business
and financial, journalistic, military of discussions of common Western
interests and policies in western Asia. The commonality exists beyond
question. The spirit of co.operation needs to be energized.
* *
*
In presenting his paper, the author emphasized these points:
(1) The ambivalence of the attitude of the people of western Asia toward
the West: While many of them welcomed the rise in the standard of living that
had accompanied Western-style modernization, many more viewed moderniza-
tion as a threat to their own values.
(2) The Soviets, albeit with prudent regard for their global interests, would
do what they could to subvert and control governments in the region. The
West might thus be faced one day with the challenge which the Chinese had
recently faced in Vietnam: whether to use force to protect one's vital interests.
(3) The West had to reduce its dependence on Middle East oil, by
developing some realistic alternatives as quickly as possible.
(4) Above all, we needed greater coordination of our national policies
toward the region. If we hung together - to use the old Revolutionary War
line - we could avoid the fate of hanging separately.
* *
58
American Working Paper (II):
''UNITED STATES POLICY PERSPECTIVES ON AFRICA
AND THE SOUTHERN AFRICA CONFLICTS"
In the last three years Africa has enjoyed greater prominence in U.S. foreign
inymvements than at any time since the U.S. army joined the British in fighting
Rommel's tanks in the Libyan desert. Even President Kennedy's enthusiastic
plunge into the turmoil of Congolese politics did not produce quite the
sustained attention that Washington has been paying Africa in recent years.
Africa's prominence is all the more striking by comparison to its benign neglect
during the previous decade when the Vietnam war occupied America's
attention to the third world.
This prominence has in part been forced by events in Africa and elsewhere
in the world that no administration could ignore, but the policy response has
been given shape by powerful and sometimes conflicting forces within
American society and within the Carter Administration. To understand what
American policy toward Africa, and particularly toward the conflicts of
southern "Africa, is likely to be over the next few years, it is essential to
understand the clash of policy perspectives within the executive branch of
government and their interaction with opinions and pressures from American
society as a whole. At present, policy toward Africa is caught up in a
wide-ranging debate whose terms extend well beyond the African continent.
Reflecting the fact that for most Americans, including most American foreign
policy-makers, Africa has been only a peripheral concern, and that no tradition
of political cleavage over African issues exists in American politics, the
debate's outlines have often been obscure. It has taken the form of a series of
skirmishes whose location and subject matter are determined by the events of
the moment, including the congressional legislative calendar and the increasing
momentum of the 1980 presidential campaign in which a large field of hopefuls
probe for iss-ues capable of arousing the response of key sectors of the voting
(and contributing) public.
No debate about policy toward a particular region can be separated from the
broader context of American foreign policy and America's position in the
world. A number of secular trends affect the debate, although its participants
may not consciously acknowledge their impact. Among them are:
(1) the overall decline of American political and economic power relative to
that of many other international actors, particularly the Western European
nations, the petroleum exporting nations, and on many issues the third world
as a whole. There are few major issues on which America can go it alone any
more.
(2) the Soviet Union's acquisition of the ability to project military power
sufficient to play a determining role in third world conflicts where it is not
opposed by substantial modern forces.
(3) the collapse of the cold-war consensus within the U.S. which united
liberals and conservatives in a reflexive anticommunism.
59
(4) the increasing interpenetration of domestic and foreign policy issues and
attitudes; domestic ideological position increasingly influences attitudes toward
foreign affairs.
(5) the increased role of Congress in making and executing foreign policy;
some 67 Congressional committees, many of them staffed by foreign policy
specialists, attempt to play a role in foreign policy.
(6) the rise to middle and a few senior leadership positions in the private
and especially public sector of significant numbers of black Americans,
together with an increasing awareness of black voting strength.
All of these influence discussion of policy toward Africa.
II
Within Africa, and especially southern Africa, the period from 1973 to 1976
produced fundamental changes which forced reexamination of American policy.
1973 was the first year in which a black-ruled African state passed South Africa
as America's principal trading partner, with Nigeria becoming the U.S.'s
second largest supplier of petroleum, and a source which kept pumping even as
the Arab boycott drove home to American motorists some elemental facts
about international interdependence. The Portuguese coup of April 1974 undid
a major presumption of prevailing policy, set forth in National Security Study
Memorandum 39 in 1969, that white rule in southern Africa was "here to
stay." It also brought eventually to power in Angola and Mozambique leaders
whom U.S. officials had earlier been forbidden to contact, much less to aid,
lest such contact upset the Portuguese, whose continued cooperation on leasing
the Azores base had been deemed of far greater moment than any long-term
African concern.
The 1975-76 Angolan civil war, from any perspective a policy fiasco for the
U.S., at last drove home to policy makers the simple lesson that no enterprise
undertaken openly in concert with the Republic of South Africa could have a
chance of receiving the support of black Africa, most especially in Nigeria. A
policy undertaken largely without concern for broad African support foundered
in practice even before it was rejected by the Congress, and even the 20,000
Cubans in Angola could not provoke either popular or congressional support
for direct American intervention. Finally, partly as a result of the changes on
their peripheries, but even more in response to domestic factors, the two
principal white redoubts were severely shaken. Guerrilla attacks began to do
what sanctions had never accomplished, seriously to disrupt Rhodesian social
and economic life. By the end of 1976 the cost of defense rose to $1 million a
day, and passed the level that the economy could sustain without outside help.
The upheavals that began in Soweto in June 1976 marked the public resurgence
of African nationalism in the Republic of South Africa for the first time since
the early 1960's. The revolts shattered illusions inside and outside South Africa
that the black population was prepared to acquiesce in governmental racial
policies, provoked a brusque halt in new capital flows from foreign public and
private sources, and sent the South African government into a hushed political
paralysis from which it has not yet emerged.
60
f
i
The effects of these events were felt in Washington through the distractions
of Watergate and the lingering recriminations over the Vietnam war. Henry
Kissinger, previously disdainful. of black African concerns, rebounded from his
Angolan debacle by announcing "a new era in American policy" in a Lusaka
speech on April 27, 1976. He followed this with an initiative to negotiate a
transfer of power to a black Zimbabwean regime. The attempt failed for several
reasons, among them Kissinger's inability to establish fully a relationship of
influence based either on trust or terror with the black and white African
leaders whose cooperation would be necessary to force the Smith regime and
the guerrillas to accept a compromise means of transition to black rule in
Rhodesia/Zimbabwe.
III
By the time the new Administration took office in January 1977, changes in
. America's Africa policy were clearly in process. As so commonly happens, the
advent of a new administration, with new leaders seeking to distinguish their
policies from those of their predecessors, brought explicit recognition to trends
which previously had been felt only dimly in policy formulation. Despite the
usual American penchant for proclaiming any policy change as a "bold new
departure," the substance of the new African policy has been derived
principally, albeit selectively, from past themes, but their selection has been
dominated by a different vision of the present. Two policy perspectives,
informally baptized the "regionalist" and the "globalist," have vied with each
other, differing marginally in their ideological underpinnings, but most mar-
kedly in the bureaucraftic position~ occupied by their proponents.
The regionalist perspective has dominated the Carter Administration's
African pglicy. Solidly grounded in the experience and thinking of the
Department ot'State's Bureau of African Affairs and the Mission to the United
Nations, it has been solidly supported by Secretary Vance and other senior
· Departmental officials. Key Congressional staffers and a few Congressmen
provide outside support, and on specific issues much wider executive branch
coalitions have been built. The principal propositions underlying this policy
perspective are as follows:
(l) Black nationalism is the dominent historical force on the continent and
one which is, in the long run, congruent with American ideals and interests,
however trying it may prove to be in the short run. This nationalism may take
a variety of rhetoricaland organizational forms across the continent, but the
differences are less important than the similarities. While one regrets those
cases where regimes discriminate against American businesses, one must
accept that a certain degree of economic nationalism is likely to accompany
political nationalism.
(2) Stability of a regime is more important than its degree of democracy or
its particular political form. Without stability, little else is likely to be
accomplished. When a regime is manifestly unstable, one prepares to swing
61
with the changes and establish ·good relations. with whomever the successor
may be. One avoids investing too much in any particular leader, since he may
be gone tomorrow. Also, one may pressure a leader who seriously menaces his
neighbors' stability (e.g., Nkrumah).
(3) Territorial integrity, as enshrined in the OAU Charter, is a major good.
However bizarre the old colonial borders, they should be respected. This was
the cornerstone of American policy in the Congo crisis, and the State
Department held to it despite formidable congressional and public opposition in
the Nigerian civil war. Territorial integrity is probably the one purely African
issue for which the U.S. should contemplate military intervention in some
form.
(4) Economic development is an important goal and should be supported by
public and private assistance. Development depends more on governmental
competence than on ideology, but most competent leaders will leave a major
role for private enterprise. Although there will be occasional short-term
setbacks and much obfuscatory rhetoric, most African leaders will come
eventually to concentrate on developing their country's economy, and for this
they will inevitably seek to maintain close links with the U.S. and other
Western industrialized nations.
(5) Cold war competition is not of fundamental importance in Africa. One
avoids getting drawn into competitive giving of aid just to keep up with the
Russians. "Communist subversion" is not a major threat in Africa; most
leaders know how to take care of themselves and to exploit communist nations'
assistance for their own purposes. The limiting case is the actual presence of
Soviet or Cuban forces in a country, though even in such cases one continues
dealing with the country in as routine a manner as possible.
(6) ?n international issues directly affecting Africa, one should encourage
the Afncan nations to develop their own consensus, either through the OAU or
through informal ch;.;.nnels. Patient diplomacy, however exasperating, can
usually assure that this consensus does not seriously contravene important
American goals. Unilateral action against such a consensus will probably be
counterproductive.
The regionalist policy perspective underlies the Secretary of State's July 1977
address to the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People,
still the principal statement of African policy by the Carter Administration, and
the various policy recommendations emanating from the Department of State.
These have emphasized a policy of cooperation with established black African
governments, particularly Nigeria and Tanzania; they have paid particular
attention to multilateral diplomacy and attempted to make creative use of
international organizations, like the United Nations, in which Africans have a
stron~ voice. Regionalists have argued the proposition that, in the long run,
Amencan economic power would outweigh the Soviet Union's advantage in
proviping military support. There has been great antipathy to purely military
responses to Soviet moves and a reluctance to interpret threatening events in
terms or abroader Soviet challenge or to see Soviet actions as resulting from a
carefully considered master plan of conquest. The regionalists have counselled
62
r
restraint in the face of Soviet actions in the Horn of Africa (where the Soviet
Union and Cuba, whatever else they did, .acted to defend Ethiopian territorial
integrity) and only reluctantly acceded to American participation in the
French-led rescue operations in Zaire.
Central to the regionalist approach has been the maintenance of pressure on
the white regimes in southern Africa. This approach has been able to draw on a
long histm::y ef American official condemnation of the National Party govern·
ment's racial policies, which on several occasions were more strongly ex-
pressed than comparable statements from the U.S.'s principal Western allies.
With the single exception of Washington's unilateral refusal, beginning in 1963,
to sell South Africa military equipment (a refusal partially relaxed by the Nixon
Administration), American opposition to apartheid had been more rhetorical
than real, however, and laid Itself open to the charge that the rhetoric had
served principally to salve American consciences and to head off proposals for
more effective international action. In the case of Rhodesia, American verbal
support for international sanctions provided a rhetorical precedent, whose force
had, however, been undercut in practice by Congressional legislation authoriz-
ing continued importation of chrome from the Smith regime.
The task for the new Administration was to give some substance to past
statements of noble principles. Restrictions on military and police equipment
sales to South Africa were quietly tightened, and in 1977 the U.S. strongly
supported a United Nations mandatory embargo on all arms sales. Unspecified
future deprivations were threatened by the Secretary of Stae and by Vice
President Mondale if South Africa did not take steps toward social and political
equality. Although the gap between rhetorical and other action has not
diminished, the escalation of rhetoric has clearly made a deep impression
within South Africa and probably has contributed to the American business
community's reluctance to invest further in South Africa. In the case of
Rhodesia, the Carter Administration successfully convinced Congress to repeal
the Byrd amendment_and thereby halt the importation of Rhodesian chrome.
(The victory was made somewhat easier by the development of a new refining
process which allowed lower grade South African chrome to replace Rhodesian
chrome in American stainless steel manufacturing.)
Two motives underlie the regionalist policy of increased pressure on the
white regimes. The first derives from East-West competition: to block Soviet
influence in southern Africa by interposingdhe U.S. and its Western allies as
the midwives of black nationalist regimes in Namibia and Zimbabwe. As Under
Secretary of State Newsom recently put it, "Soviet gains have come only in
those areas where because we have failed to do so - they have benefited
from identity with African objectives." The presumption is that in the absence
. of "positive action" by the West, black regimes utterly beholden to Soviet
arms and Cuban manpower will come to power, certainly in Zimbabwe and
eventually in Namibia, and that they will have no incentive to cooperate either
economically or politically with the West.
The second motive derives from North-South relations: to establish Ameri-
can bona fides with the principal black African regimes further to the north by
63
espousing their principal common political goal, the elimination of white rule in
southern Africa, which unlike many of their common economic goals the U.S.
can advance with comparatively little cost to itself. Such bona fides cannot be
established, it is argued, by concentrating narrowly on Rhodesia and Namibia
and ignoring the major case of white domination, South Africa itself. In
addition to facilitating the usual bilateral relationships, cordial relationships
with the black African states are considered important because of Africa's
voting weight in the United Nations and also in the various bodies in which the
long-term relations between industrialized and primary-producing nations are
being negotiated. Perhaps most crucially, it is felt that without the close
cooperation of neighboring states and of those farther north which exercise
influence within the OAU, no pressure to accept a peaceful compromise
solution can be brought to bear on the various liberation movements.
These motivations are basically those of realpolitik. However, for tactical
purposes of building greater support within the executive branch and within the
country as a whole, policy statements on southern Africa have usually been
couched in human rights terms. (In other parts of the continent, human rights
issues usually get in the way of regionalist policy goals and are evoked much
more rarely.)
The globalist perspective on African policy can be briefly outlined, as it
descends, with minor modifications, directly from the policy line followed by
administrations from Eisenhower through Nixon. In bureaucratic terms its
principal spokesmen within the government are in the National Security
Council, buttressed by support from some policy generalists and Soviet
specialists within the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency, and
the Department of Defense. The dominant concern of the globalists has been
the overall power relationship between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, and
from this perspective Africa is viewed principally as a tro11blesome periphery
filled with unpredictable and unreliable states. Its events should be assessed
and handled primarily from the standpoint of how they affect the central
East-West rivalry directly, or affect some major international actor or group of
actors which plays a role in the greater international balance. (No African
state, except Egypt, is in that category.) Under ordinary circumstances
American policy ought to keep its distance from most African quarrels and
most African regimes, and lend more than polite levels of support only to those
few islands of stability where the U.S. has important economic interests or
where a country might make a strategic difference in a conflict with the Soviet
Union.
Under present circumstances, the globalists are particularly concerned with
the extra-African repercussions of Soviet and Cuban successes and despair of
the regionalists' failure to take these into account. Whereas, pace Andrew
Young, no one in government seriously applauds the presence of Cuban troops
in Angola, the regionalists see mostly that these troops are helping stabilize a
shaky regime which has cooperated on economic issues with the U.S. and
played an essential role in bringing SWAPO to the Namibia bargaining table;
the globalists see the Cubans as highly visible agents and symbols of a Soviet
64
triumph. The globalists are willing to pay a price in terms of African good will
and cooperation in order to oppose_ t~e Cu~an ~resence, for even the
appearance of America's acquie~cence m 1ts contmuatwn are seen as costly to
American credibility elsewhere II'1 the world.
The globalist codeword has been "linkage," the idea tha: critical aspects of
Soviet-American relations are interrelat~d,,_and that A~enca should be p:e-
pared 'to retaliate for Soviet "misbehavior anywhere 1~ the world by .~smg
whatever pressures come most easily to hand. Thus, Sovt~t or Cuban ~nhtary
activities in southern Africa might be countered by delaymg wheat sh_tpm~nts
to Russia or by opening talks with the Chinese about arms sales. Regwnahsts
would prefer such extra-African pressures to ~ has~y cold-war ~esponse _on the
African continent that might undo all their patient dtplomacy; still, consctous of
how in the past great powers have settled bilateral quarrels on the backs of
Africans, they fear that linkage might work in reverse and :hat frustratto~s. ov~r
an Afghanistan coup or SALT negotiations might lead to tmprudent pohctes m
Africa. . . h . r t
The globalists, perhaps predictably, are less enthustasttc t_han t e :egw~a IS s
about the policy of bringing pressure to bear on South Afnc.a. Th~tr reticence
stems not, for the most part, from apy sympathy for the whtte regtmes - nor
from any conviction that reform is imminent- but from the concern that such
pressure takes domestic attention and P?litic_al resources aw~~ ~rom the_ m_o~e
pressing issues elsewhere. This concern ts remforced by sensltlvr_ty to Bntam s
greater economic involvement in South Africa and to the potential effects t~at
concerted action against South Africa might have on an ally:s economy. W1th
these interests in mind, the globalists tend to warn that con~t~ued press~re on
the Afrikaners is only likely to make things worse by dnvmg them mto a
defiant laager. . .
Elsewhere in Africa, the differences between the two pol_tcy perspectives
were evident in their views of the conflicts on the H?rn of Afnca. ~her~as the
regionalists·ha'.Le seen the issue principally as an Afncan ?roblem, m w_hrch the
issue of legitimate defense of internationally recogruzed bound~nes was
paramount, the globalists have seen it principally in _the context of Midd_le East
politics and of course U.S.-Soviet rivalry. Globalists have been parttcul~ly
sensitiv~ to pressures from the Saudi Arabians that the U.S. sh~uld do
something" to stand up to the Soviets on th~ Horn,_ and only wtth some
argument did the regionalists succeed in haltmg dehvery of arms_ to the
Somalis. The major public confrontation between the ~wo perspect1v~s .oc·
curred during the second invasion of Shaba. The globahsts stretched hmt~ed
intelligence reports to portray the invasion as an East-West. con_frontatlon
hatched in Moscow (or at least in Havana) so as to present a s1tua~on where
the U.S. and its allies would be seen as standing firm agamst Sovret-backed
aggression. The regionalists challenged this inte~pretation and argued th~t the
origins of the conflict- and ultimately the solutiOn - had t? be sought m the
distrubed internal politics of Zaire and Angola. T~e pol!c~ that emerged
blended both perspectives; the U.S. provided essential log1sttcal support for
French and Belgian armed intervention to secure the area, then fostered a
65
reconciliation between. the leaders of Zaire and Angola which may, conceiva-
bly, prevent yet a third invasion.
On the periphery of the policy debate are two policy perspectives which are
perhaps most noteworthy for their absence from the center of the bureaucratic
battle, The "economists" (in State, and of course Treasury and Commerce)
have been themselves split between long-run and short-run interests, and
between black American and white African clients. They have mostly set limits
to policy considerations, e.g,, that anything undertaken should not be too
costly to the U.S. or to the British and should not seriously disrupt American
business practices or profits. So far the Administration's policy toward South
Mrica has avoided what could be a major confrontation with economic
interests by putting only the mildest of pressures on business to adhere to
nondiscriminatory employment practices in their South African operations and
by arguing at the highest level that enlightened capitalism is the greatest hope
for peaceful change in that troubled land.
Those concerned with military power per se have likewise not been a major
factor in African policy debates, though they are disturbed by developments in
the Horn of Africa, which they, too, see as a Middle Eastern issue rather than
an African one. They are particularly concerned about the establishment of
Soviet bases capable of strangling sea lanes of communication in the Red Sea
and Persian Gulf areas, but do not judge that the Soviet presence in Ethiopia or
Aden yet constitutes such a threat. Soviet use of Angola for southern Atlantic
surveillance is viewed as a major nuisance, but not significantly greater than
their similar use of bases in Guinea, now restricted. Despite ritual pronounce-
ments of retired American admirals on South African tours, the Defense
Department does not view defense of the Cape Sea route as a major strategic
issue - certainly not one that would require assuming the political liabilities of
close cooperation with South Africa. On southern African issues the military
and the globalists have a tenuous alliance at best. However much they may
share one another's concerns about the Soviet presence, the military is not
anxiously looking for a chance to intervene, certainly not in a situation where
racially integrated American ground troops might be calle·d upon to defend
whites on a black continent.
IV
For all the occasional sharpness of the confrontations over Mrican policy,
much unites the two perspectives and many issues cut across bureaucratic
coalitions. In contrast to the 1960's, concern with fighting communist ideology
- and the attendant McCarthyite emotions and John Foster Dulles rhetoric -
is conspicuous by its absence. The issue under discussion is how to deal with
Soviet-backed aggression, not "subversion" or the imposition of socialist
economic systems. This is a power debate, not a theological one, and no group
is impugning the other's motives. Virtually all parties agree that the top priority
in southern Africa is to bring about a transition to black rule without provoking
extreme bloodshed. They argue over means, timing, and cost, not ends.
66
Behind the immediate circumstances of an:r: ~olicy argu~ent, the two
· t' d'f£er most in their appreciation of the time factor. The
dommant perspec 1ves 1 . . f · a]' t
lobalists will accept the longer term anti-Soviet log1c o ~ost region IS
g r but argue that present crises must be confronted directly and t?e
~~~f[~ and their surrogates stopped now lest the U:S..face a long So~Iet
· Af · hich will undercut Amei:ican prestJge m other, more VItal
presence m nca w h h d" ·a of
f th ld Globalists similarly emphasize t e s ort-term Imensi n
P5lf.t5.
0
th: :~~piy of strategic minerals from Mrica; regionalists stress the
~suo~~:nce of taking political risks now to assure that the W~st doe.s not
1
p hi h '11 trol access to these same mmerals m the
alienate those groups w c WI con
fu~~e~ny particular policy confrontation, deba:e b~tw~en the twbo poli.cy
. . 1 d b how the SituatiOn IS defined y semor
perspectives IS hkely to be sett e I y If it is defined in terms of African
policy makers and the country at arg~. vanta e· if extra-African
~~c~~~e~~!~~s~s:~:r;~g~~:~~~tnf,e;~~~~~.~=li~::ht~::r!~er~~fe!~:t7~~·s~: ~~~:
situations are defined may becomebconsiide~b~e:efulptransition in Namibia is
on and the hard issues remain to e so ve : Jl I d d Zaire may well
far from assured; in Rhodesia it seems VIrftua Y ~xthco~t e Capitalist develop-
fr 'th' a d tempt adventurers rom WI ·
collapse om WI m n . bl ms in Atlanta, Georgia; it
ment may perhaps have helped resolve racial pro e - in Johannesburg. Any
· unJ1
'kely to have such an effect - at least not soon h
IS 8 · support from more t an a
highly visible long-term policy. ~f the akU. . r~q~Iri~s to survive long enough to
handful of specialists and deciSion m ers I I ,. . . . search of an issue
. 1 1 · any American po ItiCian m
produce results, particu ar Y since . . · lis _ can find at least
- or a president in search of support m the opi~Iotnt~~ Soviets somewhere in
short-term comfort by appearing to stand up ag~ms . . rna have considere-
the world. In such a problematic situation, pubhc ~pmCion y . the electoral
. th . . . reflected m ongress, m
able impact on pohcy' as at opmwn ISd h h direct impact on the most
campaign~ which have just started, an t roug
senior decis!on"makers themselves.
v
. . public opinion on Africa is
The most important thing to note about A~encaln al' ce J·s·sue for most
. . I f . Ati . remams a ow s len
that there is fairly htt e o It. nca · "What are the
. I k . I t 1978 asked Amencans,
Americans. A nanonal P? I ta ~n 10
a e . the U.S. today?" Only four
two or three biggest foreign pohcy problems facmg sed to 20 per cent
per cent spontaneously mentioned any .Afric~n issu:~i~~:rp:~ils some 20-25 per
who mentioned the Middle East. Consistent y on n Afn'can issues
. h ·n·on whatsoever on '
cent of the Amencan people ave no opi 1 h' k that South Africa has
and some 10 per cent are hopelessly confused (e.~.,£t m t' nd low salience
· · · f l'ttle 10 orma wn a •
a black government). In such a si~atiO? ? 1 . the aid of some basic
Americans classically form .their opmwns WI~~ted opinion leaders, and by
stereotyped images, by followmg the lead of resp .
. . dr ti other pohcy contexts.
reference to general pnnc1ples awn rom
67
The root images of black Africa that most Americans carry in their heads
still contain racial stereotypes of backwardness. The vulgarity of this racism
has been attenuated, however, by the heightened status of blacks in American
society, and by Americans' increasing contacts with Africa and Africans.
Whatever the Peace Corps may have done for (or to) African countries, it at
least increased the number of Americans who through their own or their
children's experience came to think of Africans as real people facing real
problems. Archaic racial images are most strongly evoked by southern African
contexts, but they take a somewhat sophisticated form. The basic assumption
that "the whites are like us" is expressed most often in terms of appreciation
of the whites as the creators of a high technology society. When southern
African blacks are presented as participants in the high technology tradition,
they make a more positive impact on ordinary Americans' rrejudices.
At present, there is no one in the U.S. who stands as a generally respected
opinion leader on African issues. Andrew Young is generally perceived as the
chief public spokesman on African issues, but his interventions - however
accurate and however effective in other contexts - have too often been
counterproductive to his credibility at home to allow him to shape opinion.
Only the President of the United States could massively affect American
opinion by himself, and at present he has neither the personal standing nor, it
would seem, the inclination to spend his political resources to do so. Thus, the
most powerful constituents of American opinion on African issues are a set of
general principles, drawn from personal experience and from other policy
contexts, which are likely to prove contradictory guides to policy when applied
to Africa.
The first of these is the concern with human rights as seen, with respect to
southern Africa in particular, through an idealized image of America's own
success in advancing its black community's civil rights. When Americans are
asked a question which provokes a human rights stimulus, they line up behind
their moral principles in African policy. For example, a November 1977 poll
asked if people thought the U.S. should bring pressure on the South African
government to grant the blacks "more freedom and political participation"; by
46 per cent to 26 per cent, they endorsed such pressure and significant
majorities endorsed various specific actions including (42 per cent to 33 per
cent) preventing new American business investment in South Africa, something
the Carter Administration has never proposed. This same concern with human
rights would have made it politically perilous for the U.S. to have supported
the Mengistu regime in Ethiopia in 1977, even had it been possible, and may
marginally affect policy toward Zaire.
A second principle is anti-Soviet and particularly anti-Cuban action, and rhis
may cut across the first. For example, when Americans are asked in the
abstract about selling arms to South Africa, two-thirds of them oppose it. If
they are told that the arms are to be used against Soviet and Cuban
intervention, one-third approve, one-third disapprove, and one-third cannot
make up their minds. Popular concern with the Soviet and Cuban presence in
Africa seems likely to have been augmented by the events in Iran, however
68
remote the logical connection may be. Like government decision-makers
however, ordinary Americans are anti-Soviet rather than anticommunist. Th~
strident South African propag3;nda depicting the white regime as a bastion
against international communism· appeals only to those already disposed to
support Pretoria's cause.
The third principle has come to be known as the "Lessons of Vietnam." The
immediate application to Africa is the message, "Don't get drawn in and
bogged down in the jungle.'' It is an anti-interventionist principle which also
militates against foreign aid, as both a waste of money and potential enticement
to greater involvement. By more than a ten-to-one margin (and blacks nearly as
strongly as whites) Americans agree with the statement: "The U.S. does not
have the right to tell South Africa how it should run its country any more than
South Africans have a right to tell us how to run our country." The idea that
American troops might be sent to Africa, for qny purpose, is opposed
overwhelmingly, though one has to question the permanence and strength of
this attitude if a direct Soviet threat is posited. From the available evidence
and experience, one may venture the conclusion that logistical support for
some clearly limited operation to save the lives of Western European or
American nationals (the three conditions that applied in the case of the May
1978 invasion of Shaba) is about as much as the American public would
support. Absent a direct Soviet (not merely Cuban) presence, Congress and the
public would staunchly object to providing military assistance, even confined to
the provision of arms, in support of any southern African state or group, black
or white, no matter what its ideological coloration. (As Angola showed
conclusively, no substantial assistance effort could be kept covert or free from
immediate political debate.)
The fourth principle is intense antipathy to "terrorism" and "instability,"
two code words which have become increasingly prominent and which link
attitudes toward Africa to both American domestic and other foreign policy
concerns. In .t~eir strongest conjunction they raise the fear of "a racial
bloodbath" in southern Africa, but also reinforce any pre-existing antipathy
toward Africans, particularly those carrying rifles, on any part of the continent.
When the "terrorism" stimulus is not present, Americans can take a remark-
ably sophisticated view of the causes of "instability." In reacting to the
Soweto revolt, Americans by and large ~aw the South African apartheid system
as being responsible for the instability~ not the black youths involved - an
appreciation of the systemic causes of racial violence that has eluded most
white Americans in thinking about their own racial conflicts. In Rhodesia, the
general appreciation, while still fluid, seems much more to pin the blame on the
black ·'terrorists," while Ian Smith has to some extent succeeded in portraying
the internal settlement regime as a source of stability under attack from the
forces of chaos. The cortiunction of terrorism and instability taps troubled
emotions within Americans: 59 per cent of Americans queried are prepared to
condone other countries' abrogation of civil liberties to fight terrorism, while
less than half as many demur. The terrorism theme moreover, links the
African situations with concerns about the Middle Ea,st and arouses strong
69
reactions among those American Jews and others who strongly support Israeli
action against PLO "terrorism." The prospect of massive white flight from
Rhodesia, accompanied by well-embroidered stories of terrorist atrocities, Will
hardly be conducive to public understanding of supportive relations with a new
black regime.
The opinions of ordinary Americans, of course, do not determine foreign
policy, though few policy-makers who survive for long do so by ignoring
intensely held public preferences. More likely to have an immediate impact on
policy are the preferences of articulate social and economic elites and those of
special interest groups. On African issues at least, American elite opinion,
though better informed and more sophisticated as to rationales than public
opinion generally, demonstrates the same contradictory preferences and im-
pulses as the population as a whole. These are well demonstrated in the
confusion of Congressional debates.
Three special interest groups are worthy of particular note. The Committee
on the Present Danger, which includes many prestigious names from past
administrations, would seem at first glance a natural ally of the globalists, but
its concentration on sustaining (or rebuilding) American nuclear superiority
relegates Africa to such a peripheral position as to end up ignoring it
completely, or at best to treat Soviet activities in Africa as derivatively entirely
from the U.S .S .R:s newly acquired strategic parity with (or emerging
superiority .over) the U.S. In this extreme version of linkage, the proper
response to Cubans in Angola and Ethiopia is for the U.S. to reject the SALT
treaty and to embark on a major program to rectify the strategic balance. The
Committee's direct impact on African issues is thus minimal.
The second is the business community. They, too, have not had a decisive
impact on policy discussions, partly because the American busir1ess stake in
South Africa is small (about one percent of foreign investment), partly because
they, like the regionalists, are eyeing future ties with black governments in
southern Africa and present ties with mineral-rich governments further north,
and partly because the investment prospects in South Africa are so uncertain
as to arouse little enthusiasm for a major commitment. Additionally, most
businesses with operations in South Africa are under very substantial pressure
at home from activist groups to reduce or eliminate their South African
operations. While these groups produce more noise than votes at stockholder
meetings, few chief executive officers enjoy spending half these meetings
defending themselves against charges that they are abetting apartheid.
Churches, universities, and some pension funds are under increasing pressure
to divest themselves of what are sometimes significant blocks of stock in
corporations and banks doing business with South Africa, and a few have
already done so. Most major corporations have now subscribed to a code of
conduct (the so-called Sullivan principles) requiring them to integrate their
South African operations and to advance African workers into jobs from which
they have in the past been barred. While the degree of compliance with this
code is not yet certain, sensitivity to pressure is such that the business
70
com~unity as a whole is ·not likely to wage a public campaign against
Amencan government policies.
The final special interest group is· that of American blacks whose cone
fi Af" r ' ern
?r ncan ~o Icy - never absent - has been encouraged by the Administra-
tion b~th directly through the appointment of Andrew Young and through
symbolic acts such as the choice of the NAACP as the locus for Secret
V ' . h Af. ary
ance s maJor speec . on .nca. While little is reliably known about the
nu~nees of blac_k A~encan attitudes toward African policy, even Jess about the
salience of Afncan Issues for large numbers of black Americans there is
~oubt that black ~me~ican leaders are increasingly speaking ou~ on Afric:~
Issues and that their vmces are _bein~ heard. Most black political action is likely
to conce~t~ate ~n southern Afncan Issues and to make it extremely painful for
any ad~mmstratwn t~ pyrsu.e policies which appear to have the effect of
supporting or prolonging white domination in the area.
VI
American policy toward Africa, as we have seen, is the product of a complex
bureaucratic and political process rather than an elaborated vision of specific
goal~ an~ the m~ns required to achieve them. In the absence of a strong
P~esidential commitment, of the sort displayed in the Camp David negotiations
this complex and uncertain process will continue to set African policy in a wa;
that more often responds to events than controls them.
. Nevertheless, one can distinguish clear limits to the range of policy
~Jsagreement. It now seems impossible to visualize any American administra-
tJ?n, no matter how conservative, that would accept as permanent or even
viable "for the foreseeab~e fu~ure" -a state of affairs which does not provide
for .b~ack_ governments m Zimbabwe and ·Namibia or which excludes full
partiCipallon for blacks in the government of South Africa. (No version of a
"h~meland" partition of South Africa would be acceptable unless it were
design~ by·b~k ~outh Africans themselves.) Conversely, barring a major
cha~ge ~n ~he direction of further repression within South Africa, no adminis·
trat~on IS hkely to approve comprehensive economic sanctions against South
Afnca or to provide overt military assistance to black groups seeking to
overthrow that government. The march of events both in Africa and within the
t:·S· .has steadily moved the central tendency of the policy debate in the
drr7ct10n of gre.ater association with a black Africa and greater pressure on
white South Afnca. This movement is likely to continue but not to the point of
changing these judgments. '
~s we look t~ the future, it seems likely that American policies toward
Afnca, and particularly southern Africa, will increasingly be intertwined with
the _policies of the major Western nations and that the ability of the West to
devise ~ommon approaches to African issues will largely determine whether
any ~ohcy succ~e?~· Such coordination will not be easy. On the Namibian
questiOn, the actiVIties of the Western contact group (or the Gang of Five as
they are known at the United Nations) demonstrate how much can be
71
accompli~hed when policies are concerted. Even if it is premature to. judge ~e
ultimate success of that joint venture, it stands as one of the ~ost .1~novat1~e
Western diplomatic efforts of recent years, which has ~lrea~y pa1d diVIdends .m
terms of relations between the West and black Afnca, Isolated the Sovtet
Union, and also sent an effective message to Pretoria that the Winds of Change
are blowing harder than ever. The Gang of Five's ':"ork has also demonstrated
just how difficult it is to concert Western. pohcy, how m~ch contmued
high-level attention is required if any progress ts to b~ made. Fmal. succe:s of
the Namibian negotiations may help entrench a habtt of cooperation; fatlure
could lead to painful recriminations. .
The Rhodesian situation, barring a short-term muacle, sets a less happ.y
precedent. The U.S. and Britain have worked vigorous!~ to conc~rt thetr
diplomacy, but neither country has been able to make san~t10n~ e~fect1ve. on.a
sustained basis nor have the two been able to engage their pnnctpal alhes m
the necessary c~mmitment to the joint task. At root of the diffic.ulty in the l!·~·
is the inability of the Administration to build strong und:rstandmg of w~at tt.Is
after. It has not led either Congress or the public to accept the re!Pon.ahst
perspective that the best way of heading off Soviet influence m t.he regwn IS to
bring the guerilla groups into a Zimbabwean government. Net.ther have ~e
globalists - in or out of government - pro~uc~d a compell.mg alternat~ve
policy. The American public has respon~ed p.n_nctpally to s.tones of guernll~
atrocities, rather than to any comprehenstve vtston of what ts to come next tf
sanctions are lifted after the April 20 elections.
The weak American popular commitment to the Administration's polic~, and
the ineffective interdiction of Western military and petroleum supphes to
Rhodesia have permitted the internal settlement regime to hold on by
continually finding rays of hope in the lack of Western resolv~. At the sa~e
time the inescapable reality that ZIRRA and ZANLA forces, atded by Sovtet
and Chinese arms are making steady progress in their guerrilla war on the
ground has led th~ Patriotic Front Leaders to be eq?ally inn:ansigent.
Whatever Congress mandates following the Rhodestan ~lecuon or :"h~tever
the British government decides to do after the May 3 electton, .Rhodesia, m t~e
absence of a negotiated settlement, seems fated ~o undergo hetghtened con~1ct
leading to massive white flight, a collapse of the mternal settlement and a fight
for power between black armies. The American gove:n~e~t's response to such
eventualities would probably be one of damage hmttauon: to ~eep South
African forces out of Rhodesia altogether or to confine them to localized rescue
missions. Heavy diplomatic pressure would likely be mounted on the Frontline
States, as well as on the principals, to keep the Soviets and Cubans ~ut.
Whether the u.S. itself would partici'pate directly in any effort to rescue whttes
would be a difficult political decision. Through all of this, great. ~otential woul?
exist for misunderstanding and even recrimination between Bnush and Amen-
can officials whose governments would be responding to quite different
domestic political pressures. · . .
South Africa provides the long-term challenge to Amencan pohcy and .to the
policy of all the Western nations. No serious analyst argues that there ts any
72
quick solution to the dilemmas of that country, and few in the U.S. argue that
it will be possible simply to continue business as usual with Pretoria.
Rhetorical pressure on the South.African government has gone about as far as
it can go. Increasingly, the American Administration is likely to consider
actions that will entail at least some minor sacrifices for some American
interests. Most immediately vulnerable are the interests of American corpora-
tions doing business in South Africa, who represent an investment stake of
about $1.3 billion, or some 15 per cent of total foreign investment. These are
likely to be under steadily increasing pressure from concerned segments of
American society and perhaps from government as well to change the nature of
their operations in South Africa as the price of continuing to do business there
- to become increasingly engines of social change within South Africa rather
than the supports for the system that they have been, for the most part, up to
now.
Such pressure is likely to have implications for America's principal allies as
well. American corporations have in the past defended themselves by arguing
that any change in their accommodating practices, certainly any withdrawal,
would only redound to the benefit of businesses based in some other capitalist
nations which would happily rush in to fill the gap. This linkage may now start
to work in reverse, with American business reacting to domestic pressures by
supporting coordinated Western economic policy toward South Africa, so as to
be sure that the Europeans (and Japanese) operate under constraints similar to
their own. Harmonization of the EEC investment code and the Sullivan code to
which American businesses have subscribed, and the effective monitoring of
compliance with these codes, will be a challenge to Western business leaders
as well as to their governments.
Whatever policy perspective dominates Washington's approach to Africa, it
seems certain that America will be obliged to pay increasing attention to that
continent. African policy will be one factor among many- but not a negligible
factor America's relations with its principal European allies which have
traditionally~taken the lead in the West's relations with Africa. As American
society, in its own confused manner, reacts to African events, it seems most
likely to move U.S. policy in southern Africa toward the positions taken by the
Nordic countries and the Netherlands, rather than toward the positions
historically taken by Britain and France. How that will affect Western
cooperation remains to be seen.
* *
In his introductory remarks, the author observed that the lack of a
long-standing tradition of American policy toward Southern Africa made
current policy-making particularly unsettled. U.S. bureaucratic processes were
now perhaps more open than before, which led outsiders (e.g., South Africans
and Rhodesians) to read into various American policy statements just what
73
they wanted to hear. Domestic pressures probably affected African policy
formation more in the U.S. than in Europe, and now upheavals could be
expected, especially from the Congress. The underlying trend, however, was
working against continued open support for white regimes in Southern Africa.
In contrasting "regionalists" with "globalists", the author had not meant to
imply contrasts such as hawk/dove, hardliner/softliner, realist/romantic. More
often than not, though, the globalists now tended to be the Don Quixotes, the
romantics, harking back to a "glorious past where a supreme effort of national
will could make the rest of the world behave."
"Africa for the Africans" might be a reasonable policy objective, he said,
but "American-African policy for the Africans" was not. It was necessary to
look at African events realistically as they happened on the ground, and not to
see them in terms of our own slogans and cliches. We ought to pay particular
attention to the potential effect of our short-term actions. on long-term
relationships. As important as African minerals were to us now, for example,
our access to them in ten or fifteen years' time might be even more important,
and our policies had to look beyond what was immediately convenient for us.
Finally, we had to beware of the romantic notion that "the only thing the
African understands is power." We should not be afraid of using our power in
a direct, controlled and limited way, but Africans were complicated people who
were capable too of other perceptions.
* *
DISCUSSION
A. The Iranian Revvlution. In reviewing recent events in the Middle East,
an American .participant said that, if Iran had been lost, it had been lost by the
Iranians and not the Americans. There had been no lack of awareness in the
U.S. of what was going on in Iran, he said, but any American president would
have faced an equal dilemma in weighing intelligence he might receive against
the consequences of withdrawing support from a friendly and significant ruler.
President Carter had chosen not to do so; others might well have made the
same decision. The die was not yet cast, he concluded, in this arc of instability
- either in ·our favor or against us. We should not conclude that internal
upheavals automatically had to be counted as gains for our adversaries.
A Canadian called this "a washing of the hands indeed". Not only had the
U.S. lost Iran,-he claimed, but it had lost much of the Middle East as a result,
including some of the OPEC countries. Having contributed to the downfall of
the Shah by creating myths about his regime, we were now apparently in the
process of creating new myths about the present situation in Iran - some of
them "of breathtaking ingenuity". Some members of the U.S. State Depart-
ment, most journalists and many American academicians believed in the
74
l
existence of what the speaker described as the "democratic option" in the
Third World. Their theory was that the Shah had been the only obstacle to the
establishment of democracy in lrim, and that the West ought to have supported
the politicians of the National Front. One of the American now being suggested
as ambassador to Teheran had written that Khomeini was "a man of
impeccable integrity and honesty". Now, after the overthrow of the Shah,
Western liberals were mystified by the failure of democracy to spring into
irfs1int life.
In the speaker's view, the "democratic option" did not exist in Iran, nor in
most Third World countries. Iran had been unique in that the West had had a
different option: that of supporting, not a dictatorship, but a "relatively soft
authoritarian regime" (to use Joseph Kraft's phrase), a regime steering a
middle course toward,economic progress. That option had been lost, thanks to
Marxist propagandists, Iranian student organizations abroad (supported by
liberal and left-wing intellectuals), much of the Western media, and the Carter
administration. It was heartbreaking to see a country which, in Lord Chalfont's
words, "in spite of all its faults, inequalities and injustices, was a few months
ago struggling toward industrial prosperity, now (facing) a precipitate return to
Third World poverty.''
The speaker had been disturbed to find traces of the "democratic option"
theory in the American working paper(I), which advocated "staying in touch"
more systematically than in the past with opposition groups. That idea was
impractical in Third World countries, since it invariably weakened the existing
regime by fostering the impression that the opposition had Western support. As
authoritarian regimes were usually overturned by violent means, the opposition
often thought it had a mandate from the West to do just that. Even if some
semblance of a democratic regime were to evolve in a Third World country, it
would inevitably fall prey to extremist forces of the left or right. "There is no
democratic way of developing an underdeveloped nation," according to Robert
Neumann, a former U.S. Ambassador to Afghanistan.
Democtati"$ institutions were unlikely to emerge in Iran in the near future for
another reason, the speaker said. In such Shi'i Muslim states, sovereignty
belonged to the Hidden Imam, a messianic figure whose return to earth had
been expected since 873 A.D. In his continuing absence, the ayatollahs acted
as his agents on earth, and all other forms of government - whether
monarchy, liberal democracy, or whate,ver - were illegitimate. So when
Khomeini said that there had been no legitimate government in Iran since the
year 661, he meant exactly that. The aims of the religious leaders and those of
the Westernized intellectuals were thus poles apart. Western liberals had also
been misled by Khomeini's use of the term "republic", by which he meant an
Islamic state with sovereignty vested not in the people but in God. The
religious law of Islam did not provide for democracy, or the emancipation of
women, or equality before the law of Muslim and non-Muslim citizens.
Furthermore, it was naive to conclude that Islam and the West shared the
same strategic goals: alliances between Muslim and Marxists had frequently
occurred in pursuit or some common goal. There was a 1,400-year history of
75
conflict between Christendom and Islam, and if Muslims thought that their holy
war against the West would be furthered by an alliance with the Communists
they would not hesitate to make it. . .
Finally, this speaker took issue with the statement m the French workmg
paper which he had found otherwise stimulating and realistic - that we had
been "forced to abandon the Shah to his fate." In fact the West had not been
forced, but had done so "with an appalling cynicism for which we are going to
pay dearly in political, economic and strategic terms". Iran's revolution might
not spread in the same form, but Islamic militancy and anti-Westernism had
everywhere been encouraged, and the credibility of the U.S. as an effective
ally had probably been damaged beyond repair.
An American participant disagreed strongly with what he called the "fash-
ionable thesis" espoused by the preceding Canadian speaker and by the author
of the French working paper: namely, that any adverse disturbance anywhere
in the world was somehow the result of America's failure to use its power. It
was particularly ironic to hear this criticism coming from France, where
sanctuary had been provided to the Ayatollah Khomeini. In any case, this view
was profoundly wrong. It bore a heavy overlay of schadenfreude, which
seemed to be almost a conditioned reflex these days.
If the U.S. had made any major mistake in Iran, it had been in May 1972,
when President Nixon and Secretary Kissinger had paid a visit to the Shah and
"started him on the road to megalomania" by telling him he was to be the
guardian of that part of the world and offering him access to sophisticated
American weaponry. This was like "giving a confirmed alcoholic a key to the
liquor store." From then until 1979, U.S. arms sales to Iran had amounted to
$22.5 billion, whereas they had totalled only $1.2 billion for the entire period
1950-72. This American support had not only given the Shah an unrealistic
sense of his own power, but had contributed to the country's economic and
financial difficulties.
It was a mistake to think that the U.S., through some magical exercise of
power, could have kept in power a dictator with dynastic pretensions who w~s
cruel, oppressive and corrupt. He had totally disassociated himself from h1s
people, and by a series of actions over the years had disenchanted all segment_s
of the population. The pervasiveness of their hatred had not been realized until
Khomeini had ''provided the convenient flag of Islam, enabling the Iranians to
unite in a respectable way." At the end, the Shah had found himself wi~h
almost no support and no army. Had he imagined that he could succeed m
using the army oppressively against the people, he would no doubt have tried
it.
The author of the French working paper intervened to say that he had
intended no such simplistic accusation as that the U.S. had been responsible
for "losing the Shah". As for France's having given sanctuary to Khomeini,
this had been done - although the speaker himself could not understand why
- only after explicit consent from the Shah.
The inevitability and foreseeability of the Shah's downfall were debated by
several participants. One American thought that a prime cause had simply been
76
'
. i
I
I
!
!
I
disgust with the regime, particularly among the middle and upper middle
classes who had profited most from the country's economic progress. It was
not that there had been too m.uch modernization or that I.t h d "
. . • a come too .ast
but that It had been done so badly. The bad side had been th '
. . . . . . e most apparent:
waste, corruptiOn, drsorgaruzat10n meffic1ency ugl1
"ness Th b fit
. . . ' , . e ene 1s were
alm.ost mv1srble. The speaker rejected the idea that Western re ·
1 · · presentatives
shoo d_ avoid contact_ With the opposition in Third World countries. That would
be deliberately to bhnd ourselves to the possibilities of change wh· h ld
t . . . , , IC WOU
pu ~s In a sor~y situation when it happened. Those who had not foreseen the
Iram~n revolution w:re precisely the people who had not wanted to know
anythmg that was gomg on except what the Shah told them
A !urkish particip~nt.said tha: it had been obvious two ye.ars ago that the
Shahs fut~re_ ':"as h~Ited. This was because the Western allies always
supported md1v1duals Instead of nations or systems. We now referred t
often, for e~a.mple, to "S~dat" rather than to "Egypt". If we concemrated le~~
on pers?~aht1es, there mrght be fewer "Persian repetitions".
A Bntis~ spea~er thought we had also concentrated too much on the
Ar~b-Israeh conflict,__to the neglect of other areas. The Iranian crisis had
pointed. _up our positive refusal to tlnd out what was going on there, as
exen:phfred by the treatment of the Ayatollah Khomeini in Paris. Khomeini had
published a number of books, which were only now being belatedly discovered.
W~atever _faults he had, insincerity was not one of them. The consistent
whltewas_hing of Khomeini by the media and academia was remarkable. The
general !me was: "_Khomeini didn't say it ... Well, if he said it, he didn't
mean It · · · Wei~, 1f he meant it, he was right." These Western apologists
could not have failed to leave the impression in Iranian quarters that this was a
cau~e favored to succeed the Shah. We could argue about whether it was
demabl~ to sa~e the Shah, and at what date that had.ceased to be possible, but
there rrught still h~~e been some choice about the nature of his successor.
The :V~ster.n positiOn was now turning about abruptly. Before the revolution,
Khomeiru and_ Isl~m had been all but invisible to us; since then we had tended
to see eve:ythmg In the Middle East in terms of Islamic attitudes. But Muslims
after all. did ~ot react much differently from other people when subjected to
ec_onomic ~trams and political repression. They too developed resentments and
gnevances, and these had been important elements in the Iranian revolution.
Islam had not b~en the cause of the troubles, but had provided a form of
expressiOn at a t1?1e when imported institutions had manifestly failed to work
a~d ~ere _colla~smg. One of Khomeini's strongest points had been public
dissatisfactiOn With the Shah's attempt to replace Islamic loyalty with patriotic
loyalty.
The author of American working paper(!) believed that it would not have
been. P_ossible for the Shah to stay in power. In the final months, the only
rema~mng ~hance had depended on his using the army against mobs in the
s_treets, whrch would have led to a bloodbath. Americans had unfortunately not
h~tened t? .the views of Iranian students in the U.S., and had established no
direct off1c1al contact with Khomeini. It was to be hoped that the special
77
French relationship with him would eventually benefit the interests of all of us.
In the future, one might see the emergence of another strong military leader
like the Shah's father, but there was also the possibility of ethnic disintegra-
tion. As long as the present anarchy prevailed, there would be opportunities for
disciplined political movements, such as one sponsored by Moscow.
Another American said that it was hard to defend Khomeini, and that he
would not do so. At the same time, it had to be emphasized that nothing was
settled in Iran. The violent dissolution of monarchies in the Middle East had
led historically to long periods of chaos, with coups and countercoups. (In
Iraq, for instance, it had been ten years after the destruction of the monarchy
when the country had finally settled down in its very leftist manner.) In the
meantime, our aim ought to be the maintenance of national cohesion, and not
necessarily the installation of Western-type parliamentary procedures. The
breakup of Iran into a series of autonomous areas might not harm us in theory,
but a dangerous related possibility was the collapse of the oil-producing areas
into the hands of radicalized Arabs or PLO-controlled elements.
A Belgian speaker counseled against blaming the fall of the Shah on liberals,
Communists or the intelligentsia. We should cure ourselves of that tendency
once and for all. He supported an International participant who said that we
should stop "crying over spilt milk" in Iran and resolve to do better next time
in other places.
The Canadian who had analyzed the Iranian situation at length sought to
rebut some of the arguments advanced during the discussion: (1) Large
segments of the economy had been efficiently run, he said, including ~he
national oil company, the ministry of water and power, and the planmng
organization. In any developing country, there was a shortage of expertise to
overcome. (2) Although democracy might be desired in Iran, one was not going
to get it under Khomeini, if his style of running elections with "goon squads"
watching different colored ballots was any indication. (3) As to the criticism
that we dealt too much with individuals, that was all there was in Iran. An old
Persian proverb said: "I and my tribe against the nation; I and my cousins
against the tribe; I and my brothers against my cousins; I against my
brothers."
B. The Arab-Israeli Conflict. A British participant called the Egyptian-
Israeli treat - despite its defects and dangers - "the most hopeful thing that
has happened in 60 years of this conflict." It marked an "almost seismic
change" in the nature of the conflict. So long as the very existence of Israel
had been in question, there could be no negotiation; there was nothing to talk
about. That was no longer an issue; the question now had to do with Israel's
size. This was not an easy question either, but it was the kind that could be
formulated and discussed at the level of intergovernmental negotiations. One
aspect of the "normalization" referred to by the parties was that this conflict
was now capable of being approached, discussed and resolved, like other
conflicts. There were a number of reasons for this change. One was the
growing realization in Egypt and elsewhere in the region that Israel was not the
78
I
only, or even the most important, danger. It offered a trivial threat compared
with those looming from north and south. '
While the t:ea:y itself ~ad been rejected by the great majority of Arab states,
there were sJgmr:cant differences among the rejectionists. Some were still
opposed to ~he exJste,nce of Israel. Others accepted Egypt's basic position, but
disagreed With Sadat s method of proceeding to achieve it.
J£ -t~e trea.ty held, and. autonomy plans got underway, one might hope that
the re;ectJO~Ists would divide into just two groups: (a) those willing to accept
Is:ael. s .ex1~;enc~ and concerned only with its size, and (b) the "total
reJ~Ctiomsts callmg for Israel's elimination. Among the latter we would have
~o. mclude t.he PLO. T~e tactics of that organization had already attracted
Imitators; With success they would attract even more.
There was still a real possibility that the treaty would succeed, and the
supp~rt of all of us was, needed. For President Sadat, that support would mean
the difference between success and failure, survival and extinctiOn.
~I?eric_:an interventions stressed the importance of the treaty, despite its
d.efi~Iencies, and expressed the hope that wider European support for this most
Sigmfic~nt development would be forthcoming, in the same spirit as had been
shown m the European contribution to UN peacekeeping in southern Lebanon.
One speaker urged the Europeans, even if they could not lend their total
support, ~ot to stand on the sidelines saying to the Arabs and others, "Look,
the Amencans have messed it up again!"
An~ther Ameri~an won~ered why Europeans seemed bent on stressing. the
treaty s shortcommgs, saymg continuously that it did not look as if it would
~ork, w~ile professing mil?ly the hope that it would. No one would deny its
Imperfections, but would It not be preferable to take a more constructive
attitu~e toward the treaty rather than to sabotage it with criticism?
Vanous European responses were given to that question. A Briton,. first of
all, regr~tte_? that Europe could not yet speak with one strong voice. The
commuruqueJ.rom the Nine about the treaty had been lukewarm, which was
not a gr~at help to the American peace efforts. A Belgian then remarked that
n~ one m the West would benefit if the President of the U.S. - whoever he
might be - took a risk for peace and "lost his bet". At the same time, the
s~aker fea~ed that Israel - with or without the conplicity of the U.S. -
might settle m for a "peace of attrition," now that the Arab camp was divided
a~d Egypt effectively neutralized for the time being. To do that would be to
misapprehend fundamentally the conditions of Middle Eastern stability, for as
long as the .radicalizing factor of Islam existed there could be no enduring
peace.
A Frenc~~an said that all Europeans, including his countrymen, could not
help but reJOice that there was a beginning of peace in the Middle East, but it
was n~ more than a beginning. Until the Palestinian problem was settled, it
would mdeed be what the previous speaker had called a "peace of attrition".
An American agreed with the conclusion of previous speakers that the core
pro.blem was a Palestinian-Israeli one, and that whatever might be done on the
penphery by Egypt and Israel would not in itself bring about peace, and might
79
in fact produce more violence. But he did not foresee the Palestinians and
Israelis settling the matter themselves without a great deal of external pressure.
The Israelis were incapable of making a reasonable gesture about either the
West Bank or the Gaza Strip because of the dynamics of their complicated
politics. For every eight members of the Knesset there were nine opinions, so
that policy tended to get settled at the lowest common denominator, and
nothing affirmative was done without a strong push from the outside.
The situation of the Palestinians was also marked by a kind of futility. They
felt that no one was paying attention to them, and that they were not being
permitted to settle their own fate. To make the commitments necessary to
assure negotiations would be to give away their only bargaining counter. And
one foresaw the difficult feelings being exacerbated by Israel's putting more
and more settlements in the West Bank. There was no serious chance that the
resulting stalemate would be relieved without outside pressure, and the speaker
hoped that Europeans would support the continuing American efforts to bring
the Palestinians into the dialogue.
Two other U.S. participants mention·ed the issue of the West Bank
settlements. One felt that cessation of the settlement policy was absolutely
necessary to keep the situation from deteriorating. Otherwise, there was no
hope of any progress. The other argued that the establishment of West Bank
settlements was not a major obstacle. Agreement on Israeli withdrawal from
the Sinai had been reached in spite of the settlements there. One had to bear in
mind, he went on, that Israel was a democratic country. It had taken a big first
step forward, which had engendered a feeling of confidence within Israeli
society. If we sought to force the next step - establishment of some sort of
Palestinian identity - by pressure at this particular juncture, the speaker
thought it would be counterproductive.
Another American said that, to break the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate,
outside pressure w2s needed now iust as it had been for the creation of Israel
in the first place. But a precondition was some unity of conviction and purpose
between the leading European nations and the U.S. If we presented a unified
front on the issue, it might be possible to activate the Palestinians in the West
Bank and Gaza - as individuals, not as an organization.
A Canadian participant thought that would be a dangerous course to follow.
Instead of putting all its eggs in one basket, the West should keep some
national options open to allow for flexibility in negotiations if necessary. That
did not mean, though, that we should not try at a Western summit to define
our common goal and point of view. It was important to educate public opinion
in the Western countries, especially in North America, where ignorance about
the Arab side had been lamentable before the opening of President Sadat's
public relations campaign. This had been because Israel was so much better
recognized and defined in the minds of our people. As a result, the idea of
negotiating with the PLO was unaccep(4ble to American pubiic opinion.
The speaker asked whether a continuation of our unconditional support was
really healthy for Israel in the long run. Security no longer resided in
indefensible frontiers. A better comprehension of this by our Jewish com-
80
-,
I
!
I
:l
munities would promote our dialogue with the Arabs. Then contact between
leaders of the diaspora in North America and leaders of the Palestinian
diaspora might help to further talks between governments.
An American participant pointed out that the strong Congressional tilt
toward Israel was due to the public's perception that U.S. and Israeli policies
had been on a parallel course for the last 30 years. Israel, viewed always as the
S:ggrieved party, had c.aptured the American imagination. There was now an
increasing divergence, though, between Israel's interests and wishes and those
of the U.S., as seen in Israel's West Bank settlements, intransigence concern-
ing Jerusalem, and attitude toward the Palestinians.
When the American public came to recognize that its interests were contrary
in many ways to those of Israel, then more freedom in U.S. Middle East policy
would be possible. Finally to convince the voters to change course would still
take a big effort by the administration, and especially the President, but the
winds of change were blowing in that direction. For example, last year's
Congressional vote in favor of arms sales to the Arabs had been fought
vigorously by the Israeli lobby. But there was growing awareness of the
enormous importance to the U.S. of Saudi Arabia and the other oil nations,
which had been intensified by the chaos in Iran.
A reply to the two previous interventions was offered by an American
speaker. If there was strong support for Israel in the American Jewish
community, it was directed at the survival of Israel and of a people who had
suffered as no others had. American Jews were not unmindful of the
Holocaust, which had destroyed six million of their coreligionists while the
nations of the world, including the U.S., had stood silent.
Prior to 1967, the Palestinian issue had been raised for one purpose only: to
make clear the Arab determination that Israel was to be eliminated. Only after
Israel's acquisition of territory in the six-day war had the issue of Palestinian
nationalism been emphasized. The first concrete step taken by an Arab nation
to recogni.u: _Israel's right of existence as a state in that region had come with
President Sadat's historic mission to Jerusalem in November 1977. As a
previous speaker had asked, why had not the European Community given
stronger support to this vital first step toward peace? When Israel's survival
had been at stake in 1973, very few Western European countries had allowed
American planes airlifting supplies to refuel on their territory. In contrast,
many U.S. Jewish leaders and community organizations had supported the
supply of arms to Egypt even before Sadat's initiative. These Jewish leaders
had continued - even in public advertisements - to urge Israel to follow that
initiative to its conclusion with a peace treaty. It was unfortunate that some
people were espousing the proposition that there was a divergence between
U.S. national interests and those of the American Jewish community.
Another American made the point that, in his country, the security of Israel
was not an international problem, but an intensely domestic political issue.
American decisions were thus calculated in terms of what could be "sold" at
home. What was more difficult to understand was the relative inaction on this
issue in Europe, whose reliance on Middle Eastern oil had a longer history and
81
was more compelling than America's. Europe had deferred - sometimes
uneasily - to the U.S. and its policies ever since the early days in office of
Henry Kissinger, who had said, in essence, that the U.S. had the best access
to the parties concerned and would mediate the dispute at its own pace and in
its own ways. As a British observer had put it: "In the Middle East, American
paternalism has replaced British colonialism.''
Now Western Europe and the U.S. were at a crossroads in the Middle East.
It was more probable than not that they would diverge. For instar:ce, the EEC
communique of March 26- after faintly praising the Washington talks had
called for a comprehensive settlement based on UN Resolution 242, and a
translating into fact of the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland. As we
moved into the autonomy talks, we would probably come up against unbridge-
able differences between Israeli and Arab ideas of what should take place in
the West Bank and Gaza.
The creation of new settlements would sharpen the differences. President
Carter would fiJJd himself in the unenviable position of a mediator with little
ability to move the parties to any agreement, much less to an agreement that
would lead to the creation of the homeland cited by the EEC. Moreover, he
had deliberately cut himself off as a mediator from one of the key parties: the
Palestinians. He had shown courage, but not necessarily wisdom, when he had
committed himself publicly to moving toward a comprehensive settlement
which would satisfy the aspirations of those Palestinians. There was an odd
paradox in the U.S. government's attitude toward the Palestinians: they were
saying that there could be no settlement if the guerillas were involved, while
they were saying just the opposite about Rhodesia. (Another American thought
it was unjust to compare in effect Israel - a legal, Western-supported,
democratic state - with Rhodesia - an illegal, non-Western-supported,
undemocratic, racist state.)
The speaker went on to warn that failure of the autonomy talks would
undoubtedly contribute to the instability in the Middle East. Saudi Arabia and
Jordan, historically close to the U.S., were moving away a deliberate distance.
In Saudi Arabia, that movement was being led by young members of the
cabinet, most of them U.S .-educated, who had spent many years in America.
And one heard American journalists, senators and anonymous White House
spokesmen already belittling or blaming King Khalid and King Hussein for the
anticipated failure of the talks between the U.S., Israel and Egypt. There was a
growing anti-Arab tone in the American media, where Islam was being treated
with disdain. This drift apart from some of America's traditional friends would
not redound to anyone's benefit.
A U.S. participant observed that the only representatives of the Palestinians
visible to American eyes were the PLO, who seemed quite intractable in view
of their refusal to alter Article 15, which rejected the existence of Israel and in
fact implied its elimination. Was there any sign of a PLO willingness to
abandon that as one of their basic objectives? Another American intervention
indicated that the U.S. had, through indirect contacts, given the PLO ample
opportunity to suggest the basis on which they could be brought into the
82
discussions. But American public opinion in general _ not just among
supporters of.Is.rael - was so negative about the PLO that a major concession
by the Palest1mans would be necessary at the outset.
A ~r.enchman, on the. oth.er hand, thought that negotiations with the
Palestlmans ought to begin With the PLO in any case. Their recognition of
Israel and R~solution 24~ shou.Id be seen as the end of the dialogue, not the
?epal't~re pOint. Otherwise thmgs might be blocked where they were now
mdefimtely.
An American participant, taking an overview of the discussion so far said
that every question raised under this agenda topic touched in one w~y or
an~ther on the central problem of the continuing differences between the Arab
n~tions and.I.srael. Eve? Iran and Pakistan were affected, as was the U.S. sec-
unty capabihty (overflights, home-porting of vessels, etc.). While there was
some dispute about the uniqueness of America's role in dealing with the prob-
lem, its cl~se links .with Israel were clearly an advantage. The U.S. sought no
hegemony In the Middle East, and its peace efforts were costing the American
taxpaye:s s~veral hundreds .of millions of dollars. Americans coold understand
how th~ir different perspective could occasionally confuse Europeans and seem
to get In the way of practical politics. But in the end we all had common in-
tere~ts which r~qu.ired us to work together. There was no real alternative to
contmued negotiations - however difficult - (a) between Egypt and Israel,
and then (b) between Israel and the adjoining Arab states and the PLO.
Another Geneva conf7rence offered no hope, nor did a direct dialogue between
Israel and. the PLO wtthout some major changes in both of their positions. The
speak~r d1d not believe that pressure exerted on Israel by the U.S. or other
countnes w?uld he!~ .achieve what was being sought through negotiations.
An Austnan participant spoke from the vantage point of one who had
travelled extensively in the Middle East as a member of an international
fact-finding mission exploring possible peaceful solutions.
. A~ Egypt ~as the most important Arab state, the peace agreement was a
~tgruficant event in itself, provided there would continue to be political forces
tn the. two countri~s willing to implement it. But the agreement would not alone
constitute a solutwn to the problems of the Middle East until a satisfactory
answer had. been found for the Palestinians. Although it was a genuine treaty, it
was - With respect to the West Bank and the Palestinians - only a
chronological compilation of intentions, which said nothing about their im-
plementation.
UN Resolution 242 was a useful working hypothesis, but no more than that.
!he Palestinians ?id not recognize it, and the Israelis would not implement it in
Its present wordmg. On the other hand, the demand for a Palestinian state
could ~ot easily be given effect. Neither the U.S. nor the USSR could provide
a solution, nor would the Arab countries be able to do so· in the foreseeable
future: .Therefore the problem had to be solved by the Israelis and the
Palestiruans themselves - even though it might look like wishful thinking to
hope for that.
83
The speaker went on to suggest that the final solution might be a
confederation of two states, an idea which was close to the proposal of Shimon
Peres for a confederation of Israel and Jordan. Such a solution would, on the
one hand, respond to the Palestinians' need for a state of their own, while, on
the other hand, providing that limited autonomy and sovereignty which were
the hallmarks of confederation.
If one decided to pursue such a goal, the negotiations could be carried out in
stages, so that the graduality of the implementation would play an important
role. It would be difficult, though, to find the partners for such a negotiation,
given the uncertainty as to what the final objective should be. The lack of a
definition of a final objective would lead to attempts to introduce a specific
objective, or to block one. That would make any kind of negotiation extremely
difficult. Any sort of formal autonomy would have to be tested as to what the
final result would be.
This rather daring solution would only become realistic when public opinion
in Israel had evolved so that it would recognize the necessity of it, and when
the Palestinian leadership had come to realize that terrorism would ultimately
fail and that only limited help would be received from the Arab states. What
would the other, more radical Arab states do? In the end, they would accept
what the Palestinians, after heavy internal strife, were willing to accept. (One
problem with the Palestinians was that their more moderate wing had trouble
convincing the others that their ideas were realistic.)
For the Arabs, the confederation would, in a way, come close to their idea
of restoring and preserving the old Palestine. For the Israelis, the important
thing would be that the West Bank could not again become hostile territory.
These two factors would militate strongly in favor of the confederation
solution.
It had been said that representatives of the Palestinians could not be found
who were not explicitly identified with the PLO. The speaker did not believe
that. It was the task of the Palestinians to tell us who their spokesmen were,
and the more sensitive among them would soon recognize that the present
situation promised no solution. As for the Israelis, exerting more pressure on
them now - except moral pressure - was not the best way of getting them to
understand what had to be done.
A Greek participant thought that the foregoing proposal for a confederation
was one of the most hopeful lines of approach - and perhaps the only one that
would make sense of autonomy as an intermediate step. Would it not be
possible for the U.S. to bring the Palestinians into the talks informally? They
were fundamentally a secular, nationalist movement which was prepared to use
any means to secure their goal of national independence - and that included
both Arab nationalism and Islamic feelings. If they could be brought in
gradually, there was at least a hope that they would find a modus vivendi with
the Israelis- who this year, for the first time, had begun to talk in terms of
the Palestinians' existence as Palestinians (something which in the past their
leaders had resolutely refused to do).
84
T
l
A British participant referred to the confusion between the Palestinians _ a
real people with a real problem and the PLO - a specific political organiza-
tion with its own program and methods. At the moment, the PLO had pre-
empted the use of the term ''Palestinian,' but that would not necessarily remain
so. The terms "Palestine" and "Jordan" had had no more than an administra-
tive meaning in ~ormer ~imes. "Palestine" now had no firm geographical sig-
mfi~;mce, but an Ideological and programmatic one. The terms "Palestine" and
"Jordan" had been applied to both banks. If we considered this problem within
the context of the area west of the Jordan, simply using the name ''Palestin-
ian," we would get into a vicious circle of confusion. There was also the Jor-
danian Kingdom east of the river, and while the King and his government were
obviously not anxious at the moment to participate in this process, that too did
not ne.cessarily need to uemain so. One would have thought that chances of de-
vising an acceptable solution were far greater within the larger area comprising
both banks, than within the West bank alone.
The idea of a confederation between Israel and a Palestinian state which
at the present time could only be a PLO state- seemed somewhat unrealistic
to this speaker. In other parts of the world - including Europe and North
America- one could witness the difficulty of having people with different cui·
tural backgrounds living together within the same political framework. There
were enormous disparities between the Palestinians and the Israelis, to which
one had to add a record of 30 years of conflict. A better possibility of success
might be offered by some kind of intermediate arrangement or condominium. It
would not be acceptable just yet to either Israelis or Jordanians, but it ought to
be explored. To some extent, the Israeli military administration of the West
Bank had been a sort of condominium; the degree of Jordanian participation
had been much greater than·commonly realized.
The Austrian participant who had proposed the idea of a confederation inter-
vened to say that he had not specified the PLO as a party. If one wanted a
formula, wlw not say simply "representatives of the Palestinian people?" Shi·
mon Peres haafound that acceptable as had, curiously enough, leaders of the
PLO.
C. Turkey: Again the Sick Man. While the U.S. was acting as the principal
mediator in the Arab-Israeli conflict, it had been agreed at the Guadeloupe
meeting that the Federal Republic of Germany would play the principal role in
trying to resolve Turkey's economic crisis. An American speaker said that the
urgency of the Turkish situation was shown by the fact that more and more
provinces were falling under military control, as extremes of right and left
sought to destroy the center. He wondered whether more austerity was indeed
the best prescription for Turkey's ills, and observed that nothing much seemed
to be happening to improve things. Had all the steam gone out of the "rescue"
effort?
Certainly not, replied an International participant. Since Guadeloupe, a
comprehensive program was being actively developed. The first part involved
IMF help for the balance of payments for the remainder of the year, with an
appropriate accompanying program. The Turks had been waiting to renew
85
contact with the IMF until they had mapped out their own plan. The talks
between them were now ready to be resumed, and neither the Turks nor the
IMF were to blame if. this process had taken longer than expected.
Beyond the IMF's limited help, a program of solidarity assistance would be
mounted by a large majority of the OECD member countries. The aim would
be effective cooperation on medium-term economic policies, without this
leading to government control of the Turkish economy. These matters were
now being negotiated in a rather confidential sphere. It was to be hoped that
the program would involve not only· the IMF and intergovernmental aid, but
also the IBRD, institutions of the EEC, and the banking community.
Interventions from two International speakers underlined the gravity of the
situation. One said that it would be "a disaster" if Turkey fell to pieces
economically because of tardy or insufficient help from the West. The other
described Turkey as ''the most important task for the Western alliance". If the
alliance wanted to preserve any credibility at all about supporting regimes in
non-allied countries, it should not hesitate to help one of its own get back on
its feet. But we would have to act quickly: 1978 had been too late for Iran;
1ff79 might be too late for Turkey.
A Briton emphasized the difficult balance to be struck between what would
be right for Turkey on traditional economic grounds and what was now feasible
without producing contrary results. The Turks were aiming at a domestic
economic program which would in the long run produce the necessary stability,
but in the meantime enormous sums were necessary to achieve reasonable
external financing, which made the situation extremely delicate.
A Turkish participant likened his country's plight to that of a man stricken
with a heart attack, for whom the oxygen tank might come too late. He went
on to explain that Turkey differed from Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan in that
its problem was - at least superficially - an economic one, whereas the
others had to do with the resurrection of Islam as a political power. Contrary
to the general belief, Islam shared no responsibility in the Turkish situation. (In
the last election the religious party had received only one per cent of the vote.)
Turkey was suffering from "the malpractice of the democratic system," its
politicians and labor leaders having given the most irresponsible promises. This
was part of the country's active war of extreme ideologies.
Turkey along with Israel - was one of the two democratic states in that
part of the world. Its government and political leaders were not corrupt. Its
press was free. As the "soft belly of Russia," it had 600,000 men under arms,
fully committed to NATO.
Turkey's present economic difficulties were based on an acute short~ge of
foreign exchange, caused by the oil price increases. All of its export earnings
had to be earmarked to cover oil imports and external debt service. A
democratic system was not the ideal framework in which to take the radical but
realistic measures necessary. The Turks recognized that this was their problem,
but they suffered - as did all underdeveloped countries from a paucity of
trained managers. As a consequence, the country was "most unprofessional"
in its approach to international organizations such as the IMF and the OECD.
86
r
Furthermore, the Turks did not appreciate the subtleties of American politics.
The speaker concluded with a plea to Turkey's friends to be patient. If his
country could not find some solutions fairly soon, their democratic system
would collapse, leaving a vacuum ip. a society of 45 million people.
A Greek participant said that his compatriots would prefer, and hope, that
the energies of the Turkish people would be engaged in economic progress
rather thl;ln in the ''forward foreign policy'' that had characterized the last few
years. tjreeks admired the way in which Turkish political leaders had held up
against recent waves of violence. Yet there were 30,000 Turkish troops on
Cyprus, many of the beaches of the eastern Aegean islands were mined, and
80,000 men and landing craft were based, outside NATO, opposite those
islands.
The West, by and large, seemed to consider those facts irrelevant to the
issue of aid to Turkey, and the Greek government had rightly been careful not
to take any stand in the matter. This did not mean, though, that informed
Greek opinion was not aroused and concerned. One result was widespread
political disenchantment in Greece about the West, reflected in the fact that the
neutralist, anti-NATO parties, which had scored only 25 per cent of the votes
in the first election after the dictatorship, had been able to score 35 per cent by
1977 and were considered capable of mustering 40 per cent today. In this
country where a third of the voters thought foreign policy was the most
important issue, a bitter conviction was emerging that the West suffered from
moral paralysis and was unable to stand on principles.
The Greek mood was worsened by large arms expenditures, leading to
budget deficits and more inflation. (Greece and Turkey had the highest rate of
growth of defense expenditure of all the NATO countries.) If this process put a
heavy burden on the Greek economy, it was ruinous for Turkey. Western aid
could relieve the pain indefinitely, but was that the solution? Iran had shown
the futility of money where structural problems remained unsolved.
Greeks and Turks usually got on well personally. Their two nations could
provide a solid b~ for the West in the Middle East. But until their differences
were resolved, they constituted a "time bomb, ignored at one's peril".
D. The Oil Imbroglio. Discussion of this subject was led off by an
American participanL whose comprehensive review of the current oil situation
is summarized below:
OPEC's new system of setting prices confronted the oil-importing nations
with an unprecedented threat. By setting a base price for crude, while
permitting each individual oil producer to add its own surcharges to that,
OPEC had laid the groundwork for a continuing escalation in prices. If the
importing countries sat idly by, as if hypnotized into inaction, shortages would
lead to unrestrained bidding for scarce supplies. There would be no end to the
merry-go-round if we did not take coordinated action to cope with it.
Only a few months ago, it had seemed that there would be enough oil
available to meet world consumption until perhaps the second half of the
1980's. But Iran's current policy of limiting production to 3 or 4 million barrels
87
~day would hold its output at some 2 million barrels belo"': t~~ pre--r~volution
leveL Other OPEC members had committed themselves to hmt~ng thet_r ou~put
so as not to create a surplus in the market. We were thus headmg raptdly mto
a sustained period of shortages, or at best a precarious balance between supply
and demand.
This year's consumption in the non-Communist world might outrun produc-
tion by 1.5 million to 2 million barrels a day, or by 3 to 4 percent. ~he short_fall
would have to be made up through conservation and out of mventones.
Accordingly, we would enter 1980 in a very tight and vulnerable supply
position. . . .
As of April 1979, OPEC had increased the floor pnce of the Saudi Ara~Ian
"marker crude" to $14.55 a barrel, a 14.5 per cent increase over the prevt~us
year's price. Besides this adjustment, OPEC had given i_ts ~ember_s the r~ght
"to add to its price market surcharges which they deem J~Sttfiab!e m the_ hght
of their own circumstances." With the exception of Saudi Arabta, practt~~lly
all the producing countries had already announced s~rch~rges. The poht_tcal
and economic pressures on the Saudis to adjust thetr pnces upward mtght
become irresistible. .
The oil markets were likely to remain tight. Saudi Ara?ia, ~uwatt, Iraq, :he
Emirates, and Venezuela, among others, had expressed mtent10ns of lower~ng
production as Iran expanded output from the meager amount_s pumped _dunng
the revolution. Saudi Arabia, which currently could sustam production of
perhaps 10-11 million ballets a day, had previously been counte_d upon to
expand capacity by the mid-1980's to some 16 million bar;ets. No_w It appeared
that the Saudis had cut back on those plans and that thetr capactty target was
unlikely to exceed 12 million barrels by 1987. In the short t~rm, _nei_ther Mexico
nor other non-OPEC suppliers could increase their productiOn stgmficantly and
there was no new Saudi Arabia in sight.
By 1985 the OECD countries, with a projected 31;2 pe~ cent annu~ GNP
growth, would need another 8 million b/d from OPEC, whtch was unl~kely to
be available. One half could perhaps be made up by effective conservation; the
rest would have to come from restrictions on growth. This was likely to happen
long before 1985. And this assumed continued progress on nuclear energy,
which after the Harrisburg nuclear accident was more doubtful.
In addition there were further threats to the world's oil supplies. The Iranian
revolution h~d certainly not run its course, and there were secession!st
movements threatening the stability of the country. So one could not predict
when and how the country would settle down again to a reasonably dependable
production of perhaps 3 to 4 million barrels a day. . . .
The effect of Camp David even on moderate Arab states; mclud_mg ~audt
Arabia, might well detrimentally affect the influence and spectal relationship of
the U.S. and other Western powers in that area. There :-vas also th~
contingency of a political upheaval in some of the producing ~atJO?~·. or an 011
workers' strike or an accident or sabotage that would put ml facihties out of
operation. The 'soviets had achieved positions of power in Afghanistan, South
Yemen and in key areas controlling the Horn of Africa. Turkey, a key country
88
in the area, was threatened with economic chaos and political instability. And
the attempts ofthe U.S. to establish a power base in the Persian Gulf did not
appear to be too promising. The energy outlook, and thus the economic
prospects for the oil importing countries, was thus at best severely clouded if
not miserable.
In tight markets, international traders would be able to extract additional
premi'!Jms over the official OPEC price and the surcharges. If these premiums
persisted, producing countries would raise the surcharges to "capture" the
additional premium for themselves. An increase in the surcharges would bring
pressures to jack up the floor price, and the spiral of escalation would start all
over again.
The world's oil import bill would grow immensely from the April price
increase alone. Based solely on the OPEC floor price and individual sur-
charges, and ignoring the spot trade, the volumes of oil imported last year
would increase in value by nearly $35 billion, from about $40 billion to an
annual rate of around $175 billion. For the U.S. alone, import costs would
increase by $10 billion. The less-developed countries would face an increase of
about $5 billion on top of their previously anticipated current account deficit of
$38 billion. The inflationary impact would be even more severe than the the
rise in crude price implied. Prices for refined products would, whenever price
controls did not prevent it, increase even more than crude prices. The harmful
consequences on the U.S. balance of payments and the value of the dollar
were obvious. All the oil-importing nations would have to devote a larger
proportion of their foreign exchange earnings to bringing in the same quantity
of oil, and there would be less left over to pay for other goods.
The Saudi oil minister, Ahmed Zaki Yamani, had warned that the surcharges
might turn into a "free for all" if the tight supply of oil continued. In the end,
he had tossed the ball to the industrialized countries, calling on them, and
especially the U.S., to cut consumption quickly and sharply or risk further
price increase.~,
The major reaction by importing nations had been a resolution, adopted by
the International Energy Agency shortly before the most recent price increase,
to reduce oil demand on the part of its 20 member nations by about 5 per cent.
But the resolution had a number of weaknesses: it served only as a non-binding
guide, leaving to each member the means of achieving the goal; the measures
taken to lower consumption were not supposed to depress any nation's
economic activity; and the only mechanism the IEA had in place was an old
one, born of the 1973 embargo, for reallocating oil among members if there
were a supply reduction of 7 per cent or more.
West Germany hoped to achieve the desired conservation by exhorting
consumers and counting on higher market prices to reduce demand. This raised
the question whether a market-price approach could be effective in resolving
the problems we faced. In the short run, oil demand was only moderately price
elastic, and supply was no longer determined predominantly by economic
considerations. In the absence of a system of fair distribution, those nations
89
that followed the market approach. might force other countries to match their
higher prices.
The upward pressure on prices was further aggravated by the need for major
international oil companies, which were now themselves short of crude, to
reduce or phase out existing third-party sales to non-affiliated customers. It
was hard to reconcile lEA's statement that all the measures suggested should
contribute to the maintenance of reasonable oil supplies to all countries with
the reality of the situation.
We were thus confronted by a vicious circle of high prices, with dangerous
economic and financial consequences, leading to a lower level of economic
growth. The importing countries had not created the necessary framework to
cope with the multifaceted problems posed by their continued dependence on
large-scale ilil imports. This was not just a temporary problem triggered by the
Iranian revolution, but was likely to stay with us for some time. We faced a
serious threat to our future well-being. A divided approach and timid
half-measures would not only prove useless, but would contribute to a further
deterioration of the Western world's power position.
The time was long overdue for the importing countries to coordinate both
their oil supplies and all policy problems related to energy. France had
proposed a dialogue among European, Arab, and African nations, implying
disassociation from the U.S. and an emphasis on a medium-power grouping.
This was playing a futile game that would lead to the consuming countries'
being divided and conquered. A coordinated effort had to include all the major
importing countries and encompass political approaches, strategic considera-
tions, and economic and financial measures designed to cope with the world oil
supply. These nations had to agree to abstain from outbidding one another for
crude supplies, which would push prices even higher. To prevent this, a
process should be designed to discourage any country or company from paying
unreasonable premiums for added marginal supplies, with a system where the
purchasers would not benefit from making premium-priced transactions.
Such a system could take any number of forms, but the following example
was illustrative: The oil-importing nations could agree on what would constitute
an equitable distribution of supplies in case of a shortage. Any country
obtaining more than its "fair share" would be required to transfer the excess to
those having less than their fair share, at a predetermined price not exceeding
the OPEC floor price plus reasonable differentials reflecting special circum-
stances such as transportation and quality factors. Nations that obtained an
extra supply by paying premiums would be required to give it up for less than
they had actually paid for it. Each nation would treat its own oil companies in
a similar fashion, deciding what constituted an equitable distribution among
them and requiring those with overages to sell to those with shortages at the
predetermined price.
We should adopt this system in a spirit of cooperation, not confrontation,
with OPEC. The effort should not be limited to discouraging price premiums,
but should also address other matters of mutual interest: precautionary
measures for the financial support of the most vulnerable countries; and
90
pr?te~tion of the oil facilities in the producing countries and the security of the
sh1ppmg lanes, to be shared by consuming and producing nations alike
In t~~ .final analysis, OPEC depended as much on our economic and str~tegic
capabilities as we de~ended on their oil. But this interdependent relationship
would become a credible factor only if the importers had first agreed to place
?ur. c.ommo? welfare above any shortsighted attempts to act exclusively in our
l~dlvld~at mt~rests. Such a unity of purpose had to precede any joint
d1scuss1ons With OPEC.
We had been reluctant to try to cope as a group with oil and related
problems. out ~f fear that OPEC might characterize this as confrontation.
Instead, 1mportmg countries had pursued their selfish interests to save their
own skin by attempting to make special deals at the expense, if necessary, of
all other consumers even though such an approach would prove futile in the
en.d. But O~EC had nev~r questioned its own right to act as a group on oil
pnces. And It was OPEC Itself that had expressed in its most recent resolution
a de.ep con.ce.rn ''for the lack of necessary measures that should be taken by
t~e I~dustnahzed developed countries with a view to controlling the market
situatiOn."
. The .importin_g countries had to reassess their joint position, have confidence
m their combmed economic, political, and strategic strength and handle
the~selves a~~ordingly. What was at stake was the economic ~ell-being, the
pohtic~l stability, .and the strategic capabilities of us all. The effective
protect10~ of these Interests th;ough a cooperative effort was not confrontation;
mste~d, tt ~as the .only policy that could provide for the prosperity and
secunt~ of oii-1mportmg and exporting countries alike. The time available was
~hor.t, If not .already passed. Should we remain disunited or passive, and thus
IneVItably fall, we would have nobody to blame but ourselves.
. S~v~ral speakers found th~ forego.ing analysis realistic and not overly pes-
s~mtstt~, although some took Issue With one or another of its conclusions. The
d1scusswn. by'Oth.er participants was extremely wide ranging and touched on
the followmg aspects of the energy situation:
- G_ons~rva?on, pricing and new production. A German speaker said that
the oil pnce mc;eases of 1973-74 had had an enormous impact on Western
economies, slowmg growth and boosting inflationary potentials. But we had
only stayed shocked for a short time, and had soon learned to Jive with the
new OPEC policies, with no thought for the future. There was little evidence
that we were serious about conservation. It would probably take some more
energy blackouts to start us working at it. The speaker wondered whether a
different price p.olicy might not lead to less energy waste, particularly in the
y.s·(~he Amencan analyst replied that pricing would have a sizable effect on
mdustn~l production- in fact, it already had. In 1978, the U.S. had got a
greater .mcremental gro.wth in ?NP than other OECD countries out of a given
energy mput. Automobile gasoline consumption, however, was growing in both
Europe and America despite price increases.) .
91
A Belgian believed that our main emphasis should be on restricting consump-
tion, and that exhorting the public would probably not be sufficient. Direct in-
tervention by the authorities might be needed, at least in the short term. It was
expected in his country that some sort of rationing would be introduced soon.
A Canadian participant referred to the difficulty of convincing the public that
we indeed faced the prospect of short oil supplies. The shortages of the coming
winter would provide a good political opportunity to put in place policy
changes to shape spending plans. This would promote the development of al-
ternative energy sources and achieve better international cooperation. In the
U.S.- faced with adjustments in Mexican relations- the time was propitious
for the Congress to bring about changes sought by the Carter administration
energy policy. It was also time for us to get going after two years of waiting
- on the northern natural gas pipeline. As another Canadiav had pointed out,
many appeals had been issued for the political will to carry out policies which
had yet to be identified. Perhaps another cold winter would help to form those
policies and that will.
An American said that Westerners - especially his people - were used to
cheap energy, and would have to realize that they would never have it again.
At the risk of being called a laissez-faire industrialist, he wanted to defend pric-
ing as one of the elements necessary in the array of solutions for the energy
crisis and our Western Asian problems. Price controls imposed on natural gas
in the U.S. in 1954 had held the price in the range of five cents to 15 cents per
I,000 cubic feet for 20 years. That had crippled the coal industry, which had
dropped from a 35 per cent share of American energy usage to. around 18 per
cent.
The U.S. held the free world's largest supply of coal, largely unexploited.
Now that the natural gas price had been allowed to rise to $2.15, coal was
competitive but there was a shortage of capacity to burn it. It was essential to
let energy prices rise to the level of the cost of developing alternate fuels -
which were not that far out of sight. Coal gas and liquefaction were in the
range of $25-35 a barrel, a price which would be brought down with economies
of scale after initial development costs.
With only five per cent of the world's population, the U.S. consumed 30 per
cent of its energy. Half of America's oil supply was imported, so any appreci-
able switch there to alternative sources would take a lot of pressure off the
Middle East, facilitating the solution of its regional problems. The best way to
develop those alternative sources was to let the pricing mechanism work.
A Briton spoke from the vantage point of one·in the petroleum industry. The
Iranian shortage had accentuated a problem we would have had to face in five
years anyway. Demand was now hitting the ceiling of supply, as we moved
into the era of marginal supplies. A shortage of even one or two million barrels
a day gave OPEC the scope it needed to control both production and price,
leading us to more inflation, unemployment and a weaker dollar all of which
tended to encourage the spiral with further oil price increases.
Our dependence on Middle Eastern oil was nothing new, but we were now
aware that it was not limitless. Japan relied for 90 per cent of its energy needs
92
on Middle Ea~tern oil, Europe 40 to 50 per cent, and the U.S. only 10 to 15 per
cent. (That did not mean, though, that in case of a shortage the U.s. would
not, as the most powerful country, be able to take advantage of any supplies
there were.)
The supply of oil was not "running out," as one sometimes heard. About 50
mjiJ\on barrels a day were being produced for the non-Communist world, which
equalled roughly the consumption. This was predicted to move up to 60 million
barrels over the next decade, then back again to around 50 million by the end
of the century. We would probably be producing as much oil 20 years hence as
we were today. The problem was that oil production might not keep pace with
the growth of the economy.
Profits were essentia~ to finance new production. If the experience of one in-
ternational ~il com~any .was not atypical, the industry was spending half again
as much as Its earrungs m the search for new oil. Even so, one did not foresee
the discovery of any considerable quantities that were going to solve the prob-
lem.
An American hoped that the pricing mechanism would not be the sole basis
of solving the energy crisis. It had worked imperfectly in the U.S. petroleum
industry, and the two-tier system was blamed for producing inadequate oil
supplies. Not all American oil companies, he said, had been reinvesting their
profits in exploration; many had gone in for industrial diversification instead of
concentrating on developing new sources of energy.
-Growing East bloc requirements. The supply-demand equation was com-
plicated by the growing energy needs of the East bloc countries. Because of
the high development and transport costs of new Soviet oil production, and the
pricing of intra-Comecon trade, the East bloc was greatly dependent for its
growth on the price of non-bloc oil. Recent and future OPEC price increases
would prove to be an "unmitigated catastrophe" for the Comecon countries
according to-a Spanish participant. Two significant trends in those countrie~
were (a) that their rates of capitalization had reached maximum levels, and (b)
that their productivity, in both industry and agriculture, was either declining or
increasing at a reduced rate. There was thus little room for repression in those
systems, and it was doubtful if leaders could impose a further reduction in liv-
ing standards. Soviet growth plans had already been slowed, and the other East
bloc countries were either reducing living standards indirectly by retail price
increases or achieving growth by transferring investment from agriculture to
industry, where productivity was higher.
In terms of economic interests (as opposed to military or purely political in-
terests), the Comecon countries, like the underdeveloped countries, were with
us in being opposed to OPEC. Perhaps the West could turn that situation to its
advantage, given the fact that Comecon's economic needs seemed more press-
ing at the moment than Soviet expansive military aims.
A Briton referred to the dependence of a country like Hungary on the USSR,
not just for power but for the development of its raw materials.
93
-Alternative sources of energy were discussed by a number of participants.
Shale oil production involved huge mining operations (requiring water, little of
which was on site) and the disposal of vast amounts of waste. The production
of one million barrels a day of shale oil (less than two per cent of our needs
five to 10 years hence) would require the mining of 500 million tons of shale (80
per cent of our present coal production). That would obviously require imprac-
tically expensive materials handling; the only hope was on site combustion to
avoid the mining, but even that would take 15-20 years to develop. Tar sands
in North and South America contained enormous reserves, but that involved a
similarly large mining proposition.
Coal was abundant in the U.S., the USSR, Australia and perhaps South
Africa. Even for them - but above ail for coal-poor countries - large scale
use would necessitate immense investments in production, transport, and
coal-burning facilities. There was also the unknown danger of the "hothouse
effect," in which the rise of a few degrees in the temperature of the earth's
atmosphere might cause melting of the polar ice cap. Oil from coal would be
another huge industrial project. The production of a million b;mels of oil a day
needed 170 million tons of coal (25-30 per cent of present production). We
would gain very little from that process.
Alaskan and U.S. offshore crude production had so far been disappointing.
Decontrol in the U.S. might lead to a saving in imports of 800,000 barrels by
1985. During the past four years exploration in the U.S. had increased enorm-
ously, as the price of new oil was attractive. But in spite of that, production
and proven reserves had declined. Solar energy for heating might in due course
cover two to four per cent of our needs (mainly residential).
Nuclear energy was the most promising alternati~e in sight. If we did not
have it now, two million barrels a day of additional oil would be needed. But it
was anybody's guess what delays would now be encountered in expanding nuc-
lear capacity - partly because of the ecologists and partly because of the
Three Mile Island accident. A German speaker said that with reserves down, a
petrol shortage and a cold winter ahead, one might expect the public to be
more receptive to nuclear energy. But the reverse seemed to be the case. Op-
position groups were growing fast, particularly on the reprocessing question. In
Germany, 15 nuclear plants were in operation; four of those had been stopped
because of technical problems. Of the II under construction, most had been
stopped by legal intervention. The II more on the drawing board were not
likely to be built in the foreseeable future. There was no chance to resolve our
energy problems, she said, within the framework of short-sighted political
needs.
In sum, concluded an American analyst, it would take us 20 years in the best
of circumstances to add, say, I0 to 15 or 20 per cent in the form of substitutes
for what was presently covered by oil. To the speaker who had blamed natural
gas pricing for decimating the coal industry, he said it had more probably been
much cheaper Middle Eastern oil.
94
- International Energy Agency. A German recalled that the lEA had been
created in 1974 for the very oil policy purposes that were being discussed here.
It should be revitali~ed, he s.aid, to serve as the suitable instrument to bring
about concerted actiOn. It mtght have to be adjusted to the widest scope of
p~ob_lems foreseeable, but a number of elements were already in existence
':1~m. the_ lEA f~amework w.hich were binding on the energy policies of par-
ttctpatJRg t:ountnes. Those mcluded conservation programs, renewed on a
country-by-country basis; commitment to a group target of 26 million barrels a
day by 1985; the crisis management system, and in particular the oil allocation
system in case of shortages. In none of these programs had the lEA taken a
"confrontational" approach to OPEC.
The lEA's pot~ntial h~d .~ot been used because a number of participating
governments, feeling no 1mmment danger for their oil supplies had felt it was
increasingly difficult to accept the lEA's authority and controis. This was not
surp_rising, sin~e supplies had been abundant until a few months ago, prices had
not mcreased m real terms, and the public had no longer sensed a latent crisis.
As a consequenc~, the IEA had lost substance and political weight, and sup-
port from the capttals. It had been transformed from an important endeavor in
international cooperation into a series of gatherings of experts following the
narrow and sometimes barren and unconstructive instructions they received
from their governments.
The original spirit of IEA needed to be restored, as a place where the vast
majority of industrialized countries could develop a coherent energy policy. A
French decision not to stay apart from the group any longer would be wel-
come, the speaker said. (Both French and American participants agreed with
that suggestion, but a Belgian pointed out that the French had in fact, at the
European summit, undertaken commitments that were virtually the same as the
lEA's.)
- The need for ./l. broader united front was emphasized in several interven-
tions. An American said that we needed a union of oil-consuming nations. He
used the word "union" in the same sense as a trade union, as much of our
employment and productivity went to .pay the oil-producing states. One
oligopoly required another in opposition. Such a union ought to be used not
simply for negotiations, but as a useful tool on the supply side. The U.S. had a
number of important energy resources which were awaiting technological
breakthroughs to be properly exploited. It made sense for America's allies to
buy into that technological development now rather than later.
A Canadian speaker agreed that the Western countries ought to coordinate
their efforts in "playing the OPEC game". National interests, especially com-
mercial ones, should be put aside to make way for a common approach.
A Frenchman defended his country's recent proposal in this regard which
some other participants had feared might create a split in the Western' world.
He agreed that it was important for the consuming countries to negotiate to-
gether with OPEC, but the French government had felt that a "third element"
would add a presence that might facilitate compromise. Involving the African
95
countries in that way would make sense, as they had no inter.est in the confron-
tation between OPEC and the West. The absence of Japan would make it pos-
sible to limit this "third element" to the African continent. Otherwise, it would
logically have to include the Third World as a whole. That would globalize the
conversations in stich a way as virtually to assure their failure. If that point
were widely understood, perhaps some of the uneasiness which the French
proposal had caused -particularly among the Japanese - would be dispelled.
The French government believed that our solidarity (including the Japanese)
should be close and comprehensive, including conservation research. Although
France was not a part of the lEA, it was making a considerable effort on
energy, especially in the nuclear field.
A Belgian speaker remarked that the union of oil consumers would be in the
long historical tradition of leagues and crusades. This sort of saber rattling was
sometimes effective, but he was skeptical about rattling a "wooden saber". It
was more to the point for each country to get down to business developing its
own program of production and conservation to lessen its dependence on the
Middle East. (Such a program had been talked about by successive U.S. ad-
ministrations ever since 1974.) These comments were endorsed by a French-
man, who thought that little could be expected from international cooperation
unless it was preceded by much more intensive national efforts. With regard to
the American analyst's suggestion for a ''fair sharing'' system, this speaker
cautioned against wishful thinking about forms of cooperation that would never
be achievable. That proposal might be all right technically, but it raised all
kinds of the most difficult political questions.
- The human element in all this was touched on by a few participants. One
American said that some of the oil nations (e.g., Saudi Arabia, Mexico) were
bound to start thinking through their development plans, and wondering how
they could avoid inflation, rural depopulation, urban slum growth and the dis-
content that sprang from too rapid modernization. What effect would that have
on their production and development policies?
Another U.S. participant noted that in the past personal contacts had played
an important part in Middle Eastern policy development, particularly in Saudi
Arabia. It. would help to restore some of our neglected ''back channels of
communication.''
A French speaker asked the meeting what right we Westerners had to regular
deliveries of oil from the Middle East. Absolutely none, in his _opinion. The
Islamic crowds were chanting the praises of God, and it seemed that all we
were doing was lining up our democratic crowds shouting, "fill up our jerry
cans!" If one could subject the Western world to a psychoanalysis of its collec-
tive subconscious, one might produce what the Jesuits called a "delectation
morose". We seemed more and more wrapped up in material concerns, at a
time when most of the world was still hungry.
From now on, the West would be consuming in a "heavy atmosphere of
penitence". There was no moral support for our petroleum aspirations, and in
our Western civilization in search of justification, this was embarrassing. Did
96
we really mean to tie the defense of the fundamental values of our civilizatio
to the number of barrels of oil available from Kuwait? n
}\'hat we had to do was to work frantically on conservation and substitution.
God helped those who helped themselves. Even if we did not entirely succeed
we should not let it be said that we thought the values of our democrati~
societies were endangered just because the growth of our economies was tem-
porarily slowed down. That would be unnecessarily to add humiliation to dis-
comfort.
An American replied that one had after all a moral right to fight for one's
survival. "That's the issue."
E. Islam, the Third World, and the West. Were attitudes and values in Is-
lam, and in the Third World in general, so different from those in the West as
to perpetually bedevil our relations and our mutual understanding? The remark
of a Canadian- in the discussion of Iran- that the "democratij; option" was
virtually nonexistent in the Third World drew comments from several speakers.
One International participant agreed fully. Democracy in the Third World, he
said, was an "unknown, unwanted and almost unworkable concept, which
left-wing llberals often choose to ignore."
A Briton argued, on the contrary, that there were areas of the world where
Islam was cooperating satisfactorily with Western ideas of democracy. For
example, Malaysia, with a multiracial society, was very much a functioning
democracy. The Islamic courts imposed only fines in cases of adultery, and
school teachers were not allowed to veil up on the job.
A Greek participant rejected the notion that democracy was not appropriate
for the Third World as a whole. It might be the case in Iran, but India was the
largest democracy in the world and had proven its attachment to that form of
government in a most dramatic manner. Our struggle should be aimed at seeing
our Western ideals prevail wherever in the world the social/moral/political
structure made it possible.
A British speiiker made the point that Islam was not a cause of grievances. It
was rather an effective symbol, a form of consensus and mobilization for polit-
ical leaders. Islam was not necessarily on one side or the other in the larger
geopolitical picture. When the Soviets had opened their embassy in Teheran
during the war, one of their first acts had been to establish close links with the
Muslims.
To gauge the effect of Islamic attitudes and current leadership on East-West
relations, it was helpful to understand the Islamic concept of power. Moham-
med had been not only a spiritual leader, but a head of state who commanded
armies, dispensed justice and collected taxes. So religion and power had been
intimately associated from the very beginning of Moslem scriptural history.
The specific Islamic attitude toward government had no parallel in Christian-
ity. This involved an acute perception of the realities of power and an apparent
willingness to use it. The recent Islamic foreign ministers' conference had re-
mained remarkably silent on the question of the 50 to 60 million Muslims in the
USSR, whose position was ''not entirely happy from the Islamic point of
97
view." When a Turkish leader had been asked about that, he had replied that
the Russians were simply too strong to oppose on this issue. The direction of
the Islamic revival would, in the speaker's view, be determined largely by that
way of assessing power. In any case, it seemed unlikely that the effect of the
revival would be limited just to Iran and one or two other countries.
An International speaker drew attention to this paradox: We Westerners
tended to believe that our influence over events in other countries was limited,
whereas politicians and public opinion in the Third World judged our influence
to be extremely powerful. A recent case involved protests by Pakistanis, blam-
ing President Carter for the hanging of President Bhutto. To surmount this sort
of misunderstanding, it was important to coordinate Western contacts with the
Third World within a regular framework, such as an expanded Lome Conven-
tion.
F. Security Considerations. The protection of our oil supplies and our
situation vis-a-vis the Soviet Union in the Middle East Were discussed by a
number of speakers. An American participant said that some of the interven-
tions added up to a sort of "chamber of horrors", with the implication that the
worst was yet to come. He conceded that the West's interests had been set
back by (a) the removal of the Shah, and (b) the subtle change of attitude in
the Persian Gulf states, who would henceforth charge all that the traffic would
bear for their oil, whereas they had previously refrained from "pushing the
West to the wall" economically. But we could make things darker than they
needed to be. The Soviet Union, our principal protagonist, had not moved for-
ward in the Middle East. It would be wrong to think of the various conflicts as
a zero sum game, in which a defeat for the West was necessarily a gain for the
USSR. As far as we knew, Soviet interests had not been advanced by the Iran-
ian revolution. In th~ Gulf states, fear of the USSR was greater than ever. It
would be a mistake to take Saudi and Kuwaiti gestures toward the USSR as a
sign of accommodation. On the contrary, they were an effort to dull the Soviet
appetite for further penetration in the area by establishing a more normal inter-
change.
Another American pointed out that the King of Jordan and the Saudi princes
had repeatedly said that their main problem was not the Soviet Union but the
Palestinians and Jerusalem. Even without the Russian threat, instability in this
area was inevitable; all the governments were fragile, the institutions incom-
plete. As power there was concentrated, not diffuse, change was bound to be
violent. The old intra-Arab rivalries were only disguised by hostility toward
Israel, and now Egypt.
The traditional Middle Eastern friends of the U.S. and its allies were uneasy
about the implications of what had happened in Taiwan and Iran. Stationing
more troops in the Middle East would not be enough. We had to move the
parties there toward a real peace, and the U.S. could not do that alone. In the
meantime, the Soviets were sure to draw what advantage they could from the
instability in the region, and the threat to our security was obvious.
98
A Briton described the increase in Soviet influence on the southern shore of
the Mediterranean not only their political influence but, through Libya, their
revolutionary influence, which was supporting terrorists around the world.
Moreover, Soviet naval strength was growing in the Indian Ocean and the
Mediterranean. It was foolish to consider the security problems of the Middle
East as separate from those of Southern Africa or the Horn of Africa. They all
went toge.ther. An International participant had wondered whether we could
make it more attractive for the USSR in these areas to "play a responsible
role, rather than a wrecking one." This speaker thought that was an illusory
hope; the Soviets' aim was to foster instability wherever Western interests
were effected. On the other hand, one should not assume that "stability" was
always the most desirable goal; it might lead to "stable" Soviet satellites.
One had hoped that we might help Somalia, after they had got rid of the
Russians. They had originally been the aggressors, but then so had Egypt in
invading Yemen. A minimal Western commitment could have helped Eritrea.
The time to act was before a threat developed fully. "Little and early" was
better than over-reacting too late. If the timing was right, not much was re-
quired, as it would take hostile force to remove it. The speaker cited the
examples of Oman and South Yemen, and the French in Djibouti. The Soviet
threat was to some extent a ''paper" one, in that they were opportunistic,
exploiting weaknesses, probing rather than attacking. Detente was a seamless
fabric, as was defense. It had been not far from the site of this conference, at
what was now Wiener-Neustadt, that the Mongols had been stopped in the 13th
century not by united European forces, but by a need to return east to
secure their positions at home.
Another Briton intervened to point out that the Third World countries almost
invariably sided with the USSR vs. the U.S. in the United Nations. To vote
against the U.S. entailed no risk, while it pleased the Soviets, academia, the
media and a large part of the American public. But when the USSR was op-
posed by China,~ CUJite different situation arose. A good example of this had
been the admission of the Vietnam-sponsored Cambodian delegation. For once,
the nonaligned countries had been really nonaligned, sensing that it might also
be dangerous to displease the Chinese. The only Third World states which had
voted with the USSR on that occasion, despite severe Soviet "arm-twisting",
had been Angola, Mozambique, Ethiopi,li, South Yemen and Afghanistan.
A Frenchman suggested looking at a world map and reflecting on recent his-
tory. It was obvious that the USSR in acting from the Horn of Africa to
Vietnam, passing through Afghanistan and Pakistan - was seeking to kill two
birds with one stone: (a) to strengthen their hand against the West across the
zone of oil production, and (b) to weaken China. One should have no illusions
about Russia's unrelenting drive.
As for the reaction of the Middle Eastern countries, though, one had a
reason to be optimistic. Almost all oil producing states, whatever their political
regime, needed maximum receipts in foreign exchange. But the Saudis and
other people of the Arab peninsula were less in need and therefore had more
liberty. The Saudis for several years past had shown an extraordinary sense of
99
their world responsibilities, which was a hopeful sig? for the future. The ~oviet
encirclement of Saudi Arabia was a grave threat wh1ch deserved to be skillfully
combatted by the Western nations - who should not, sai.d the speaker.' fe,~l
impelled to "push their defense of human ri~hts. to the po~nt of masoch1s~ ·,.
An American participant said that the Saudi pnnces cons1dere? the Russ1~ns
to be as much their enemies as the Israelis. They were paranoid about bemg
squeezed by a Soviet pincer movement. Whether. or not recent events h_ad p:o-
vided new temptations for the Soviets in the M1ddle East, on~ c.~ul~ 1mag~ne
other risks to our oil supplies. Some of the "scary scenanos c1rcula~1?g
around washington were: a shutoff by the Saudis themselves, o,r, the. Ku':"altls:
the scuttling of ships in the Strait of Hormuz; a terronst coup d etat m Riyadh,
an Iraqui invasion of Kuwait. Given the will to act, th~ U.S. could respond ~o
any of those eventualities by airlifting troops to the M1ddle East, although this
would involve an immense logistical problem. .
If there were a cutoff of Middle Eastern oil and we lacked adequate supplies,
the two primary questions wuuld be: (a) would t~~ ~arter Administr~~i~n act
militarily, or still feel inhibited by the so-called V1etnam S_Ynd~ome • (~he
speaker's guess was that the U.S. would act, the shutoff of 011 bemg mo_re 1n:·
portant than the Shah's downfall); and (b) would the U.S. be supported m this
by the Europeans, who were even more de~endent on .Middle East. oil? M.ore
attention needed to be given to transatlantic consultattonfcooperatwn agamst
military threats in the Middle East. . .
A fellow American agreed with the conclusiOn of the previOus. speake;. t~at,
if a crisis in the Middle East seriously threatened Western secunty, the VIet-
nam syndrome" would not deter U.S. action. If o?e had regarded t_he Shah's
Iran as a Western-oriented pillar of military secunty, then the dechne of our
military presence in the Middle East had recently b~en vicariously preci~itate.
But, as another speaker had noted, Soviet gains_ ~ad _not been as 1mpress.1ve as
they might have hoped. They had lost their positiOn m E~ypt ~nd Somaha and
were less predominant in their military supply relat1?nsh1~ with Iraq. ?n th:
other hand, in the past 18 months they had substantially 1mpr~ved the1r po.si·
tion in Ethiopia, South Yemen and Afghanistan, and had a puta:1ve opportumty
in Iran. These events had been at least as disturbmg to Saudi Arabia as h~d
been Camp David, and had led the Saudis to seek s~ecial U.S. t~ken comn:It·
ments to their security. One result had been substantial U.S.-Saud1 cooperatiOn
in North Yemen.
Should the Western military presence in the Middle East be increased? If s~,
how? The establishment of U.S. bases was an unlikely answer. The Israelis
would welcome a base, but that would not serve to reassure the Arabs. !he
moderate Arab states, surrounded by radical neighbors, tended to cons1~er
U.S. bases on their territory as more of a political liability than a ~...c~n.ty
blanket. More bilateral military assistance was advisable, but there w~re hmtts
to how much the recipient countries could abs0rb. There were ~enume ques-
tions about the relevance of greater military p;:,wer to the most hkely threat~,
and whether the recipients could not better use these resources for economtc
rather than military purposes.
100
Should the modest U.S. fleet in the Indian Ocean be augmented? The
speaker personally thought so, but this could not be achieved without political
costs to offset the benefits. (Some of the littoral states, especially India, would
be very much opposed.)
By force of circumstances, the U.S. would continue to bear the major se-
curity burden in the Middle East. Yet Europe's stake there was surely as great,
and it -was natural that the American public should expect the Europeans and
Canadians to provide concrete contributions, in addition to political support.
As a practical matter, though, the concrete contributions might not be feasible
on a substantial scale. If that was a problem, we ought to explore some form of
indirect burden-sharing. Perhaps the European members of NATO, for exam-
ple, could provide a relativttlY greater contribution to increases in NATO ex-
penditures. This was an issue of increasing political importance that needed
closer attention.
A British speaker hoped that America and its allies would not allow the syn-
drome created by the tragic experience of Vietnam to compel them to give up
the possibility of military intervention on a small scale. Recent examples had
shown that this could be highly effective in limited areas and ways (e.g.,
British Honduras, the French and Belgian intervention in Zaire). It was impor-
tant in the Middle East to be selective about those areas where it was still pos-
sible to exercise effective influence. A single squadron plus some contract of-
ficers, for instance, had managed to hold Oman within the Western sphere.
An International speaker said that the moment might come when the use of
force by the West would be unavoidable in some part of the world. He was
pessimistic about the likelihood of our taking the course that would be in our
obvious interest. The Vietnam syndrome had led to an erosion of the credibility
of the U.S., especially in Africa and Asia. A kind of paralysis was evident, as
where the Congress had refused to give the guarantees sought by the Adminis-
tration in connection with the Portuguese withdrawal from Angola. But this
"non-interventiOn·..omplex" fortunately did not affect the American commit-
ment to NATO, which appeared undoubted. A Frenchman confirmed that
Europeans were worried, not only about America's tending toward foreign dis-
engagement after Vietnam, but also about the effects of her rather unrealistic
idealism.
An American replied that U.S. foreign policy failures were usually the result
of not having defined where the national interest lay. The lesson we had appar-
ently learned in Vietnam was to withdraw, whereas what we should have
learned was to identify our interest and to pursue it vigorously. It had not lain
in Vietnam, according to the speaker, but it did lie in the Persian Gulf. The
vitality of our Atlantic economies, as well as the very existence of our political
systems, depended on the independence of those Gulf states.
Another American participant, who described himself as a veteran of the
Vietnam experience, recalled how the U.S. had been reproached, first silently
and then explicitly and vocally, by almost every chlmcellery in Europe for hav-
ing got so hopelessly embroiled in a conflict for which it was so unsuited. Why
were the Americans not now being congratulated, he asked ironically, for not
101
making a similar mistake elsewhere, in Angola, Ethio~ia or Somalia? Was this
not a sign of a new maturity? One could not help bemg confused about what
exactly America's allies wanted it to do. .
In closing the discussion of this phase of the agenda: the author of Amen~an
working paper(l) reminded the meeting that the M1ddle Eastern countnes
needed us at least as much as we needed them. We should not be ove~l~ con-
cerned about their internal evolution. There was a deep-rooted oppositiOn to
Soviet designs in that area, based not only on Islam bu~ also o~ the nation.alism
of those countries. The Soviets were themselves paymg a pnce for their ac-
tivities there. Russians were being killed in Afghanistan, and their reso.urce.s
were being used in battling guerilla warfare. One could not count on the Immi-
nent success of the poorly-armed, badly-led tribesmen, because the l!SSR had
apparently decided to do all within reason to keep the ~overnment m powe;;
but this was not without cost for them. They had expenenced reverses too m
Egypt and Iraq and Iranian gas supplies for their Caucasus area were en-
dangered. So re~ent events had been far from a one-sided strategic disaster for
the West.
G. The Republic of South Africa and Namibia. An Ameri~an par~ici~ant
reported impressions gathered during a recent trip to. South Afnca - ~s. s1xth
visit there in the past 18 months. He had spoken With governmen.t mimst.ers,
opposition leaders, black leaders, businessmen and others. Domestic ~eadhnes
were dominated by the information scandal and the spy ~tory, wh1ch we:e
having a notable impact on white South Africans and especmlly the leadership
of the Nationalist party. A lot of the "noise" in South Africa now was related
to the rebuilding of unity within that party. Events in recent months would
have an important effect on the black population:
- The difficult problem of Crossroads, a black community in Capetown,
had been settled by a group made up of a government minister, t~e new Urban
Foundation, three key Afrikaner civilians and black leaders. Th1s was a r~re
example in South Africa of a genuinely negotiated settlement of an explos1ve
problem.
A new framework for black labor in South Africa would be created
imminently with the release of a special commiss~o~'s report, which ';as
expected to give status to black unions ~nd t.o elu~unate. many or all JOb
restrictions. This would remove real or 1magmed 1mped1ments to greater
equality in the work place and enable managements to do things they should
have done on their own initiative years ago.
A thorough investigation and reassessment of the c~untry's secu~ty laws
had been called for by the Nationalist press boss, with the warrung that
deviations from the rule of law could lead to corruption and decay, assisting
the very subversion they were meant to restrain. The· significance of this was
that it had been the body of restrictive personal legislation that had affected the
lives of Africans more than almost anything else.
- The recently-created Urban Foundation working on housing, education
and the quality of life among urban blacks - was receiving increasing support
from its constituency, who had viewed it suspiciously at first.
102
I
If one could generalize about black attitudes (which were h d · ·
h
. , . . ar er to elicit
than w 1tes ): they had no part1c1pation within the system but th d'd
th r · 1 · • at 1 not
mean ~re .was ~oh po 1Uc~. conversat~on among them; they had little or no
commumcatwn w1t authont1es on the 1ssues affecting the1
'r !1
'ves (h ·1· ·
· · Uml latiOnS
and frustratiOns w1th pass .laws, security rules bureaucrat· d 1
. ., . . . • 1c e ays and
harrassment, lfilenor education and housing) A government m1
'n·st d ·b
. · I er escn ed
a certam person as the real leader of Soweto, but he was found to b · t 11
k h h
· h 'II e VIr ua y
un ?~wn t ere, w 1c .' ustra~ed the communication problem.
DISinvestment w~ Widely d~scussed within South Africa, where some 20 to
30 codes - domestic and foreign- sought to govern corporate beh · Th
EEC d
· d b avwr. e
.co e was v1ewe Y. blacks as superior to the U.S. Sullivan code, but in
practl~e more progress m the work place was being achieved by those
followmg the U.S. code.' (Adver~e co.mments were made by South African
blacks about the Japanese operations m the Republic.)
Attempts to evaluate developm~nts in the business community were being
made by chu~ch groups, urban Afncans, and journalists. Companies we b ·
'd I k d . d re emg
~~ .e y nown ~n JU ged by their practices, although open discussion of the
d1smvestment 1ssue was arguably treasonable and therefore risky. Students
~~re.generally more opposed to foreign investment than adults, who supported
It 1f 1t followed one code of conduct or another.
Th~ .issue most in the press and in the minds of government officials was
Nam1b1a. The lack of confidence in the several parties to that negotiation
1 · di was a
rea 1mpe, ment to agreement. ~his might be a lost opportunity for a genuinely
constructlv~ step for South Afnca, the rest of the continent, and the West. A
cloud of d1strus.t hovered over the attempts to achieve an internationally
acc~ptable. solutwn to the Namibian problem. One found people in South
Afnca askmg themselves whether "going it alone" would solve anything
I d I 1 · · ' or
e~ to ong-term so u~w.ns m Southern Africa. To an outsider, the differences
With . respect to Nam1b1a seemed very small compared to the value of a
solutwn. __
~n International. speaker noted a toughening in recent weeks of the South
Afr;can go.vemm:nt's position on Namibia. If that line was confirmed, it would
be mcreasmgly difficult to stave off the call for sanctions against South Africa.
If the UN voted for sanctions, we could expect the Soviet Union to offer itself
as one of the monitoring powers. The strategic implications of that were not
~gre~abl.e to contemplat~ - quite apart from the moral, ethical and political
1mphcanons for the specific countries concerned. This made the Western effort
on Namibia doubly important.
A Briton agreed that any attempt to impose sanctions on South Africa could
do great harm to the West and achieve very little. In Namibia, apartheid was
largely on. the way .out; a class system was replacing the race system. There
was a cho1ce, even 1f one was not keen about the alternatives. One of the most
successful Western undertakings had been the efforts of the Five on Namibia.·
One could still hope to see an independent country there under black rule
although the exact identity of those who would ultimately emerge in power wa~
still to be determined.
103
Another British speaker was "appalled" at the pessimism expressed by some
about the future of Namibia, and he said that any pressures on South Africa
would ignore the help that country was already giving to Zambia and
Mozambique. Decolonization had not normally been accompanied by an
immediately.peaceful situation, and events in Southern Africa did not suggest it
would be an exception to the rule. It seemed sometimes as if the West were
determined to see the downfall of the whites in Africa, and almost to connive
in the violence.
An Italian alluded to the unique importance of South Africa in controlling the
sea lanes around Africa. It was the only state below West Africa w}th a harbor
large enough to accommodate supertankers. Moreover, it had the ships and
aircraft needed to protect the sea lanes. At the same time, it was under
embargo from oil producing states. (Egypt was in a similar situation,
controlling the supply route through Suez.) This suggested t!Je possibility of a
serious crisis for which contingency management plans should be ready. An
American also raised the question of the implication of the Iranian embargo on
oil shipments to South Africa and Israel. The response of another American
was that •'if you pay, you can get everything, even from those countries who
say they won't supply you."
On the subject of human relations, a U.S. speaker identified himself as the
president of a foundation which had participated in the founding of the South
African Race Relations Institute, which had worked there for half a centurv
maintaining communications between whites and blacks. The Institute was now)
preparing to observe its fiftieth anniversary, and it was ironic that the speaker
himself had not received a visa enabling him to attend.
The author of American working paper(II) thought that the expansion of
trade unions in South Africa - although a welcome advance - would not
solve the problem because it was not a free society. What the blacks there
needed above all was some legitimate above-ground organizations to
complement the extensive underground network that had produced upheavals
like Sowetci. It would be especially useful if foreign companies operating in
South Africa would put pressure on the government to allow those trade unions
to function.
Another American agreed that even slight changes in the status quo could be
cause for encouragement, but he saw little reason for optimism about the South
African situation. As had been reported, there was political conversation
among blacks there, but no real political participation, no discussion of real
issues.
H. Rhodesia-Zimbabwe. An American speaker said that the w.ar in
Rhodesia-Zimbabwe was not going to disappear overnight; it was in fact likely
to heat up. Thousands of people were being threatened daily, hundreds were
being killed. It was important that the West retain some flexibility to bring the
warring parties together. Present U.S. policy objectives there seemed to be
reasonable, logical and appropriate. The speaker prayed that America's allies
would not bring pressure to bear on the U.S. to try to change that policy.
Americans wanted to see a peaceful transition from what was now an illegal
104
minority government to a democratic majority government - which meant a
predominantly black one. Ian Smith had consistently outmaneuvered the West
and the blacks in his own country and seemed to be on the verge of
outmaneuvering the world. The recent so-called election did not constitute at
all a transition from white minority government to black majority government.
The constitution had not received an· affiramtive vote from any single black
citizen of that state. So this process had simply concretized the segregated
whi-re' 'minority state with the trappings of some constitutional legality. There
had been no opportunity for any part of the black population- 95 per cent of
the nation - to express themselves on the question.
At base, this "transitional" constitution established apartheid in the formal
government structure. Whites voted for whites, blacks for blacks. The elements
that had been used to sti-fle black aspirations - police, army, judiciary- were
left beyond the reach of the black population. In a parliament of 100, 28 would
be white and only 22 were needed to block any change in the white-dominated
structure. At the end of 10 years, a commission would review whether the
structure should be continued.
It was dangerous to insist that this new government should be recognized by
the U.S., which was the only great power that had the legitimacy to try to
bring the parties to the conference table some time in the future. By
recognizing the new government, the U.S. would lose that flexibility and
acceptability.
Much of what the preceding speaker had said simply did "not accord with
the facts," according to a Briton. Besides differences between blacks and
whites, there were enormous differences among blacks throughout Africa. A
major misunderstanding in the West resulted from use of the term "tribe."
Nkomo was a member of a tribe that comprised only 20 per cent of the
population. At the moment various factions were working together, but their
differences would eventually emerge. Eighty per cent of the Rhodesian army
was black :._ mcluding officers - so it was wrong to think of a "panoply of
naked white power."
The speaker pointed out that the situation of sanctions was different in
Britain from elsewhere. To end them required no positive act, but simply a
failure to renew them. It was uqthinkable that the probable next Conservative
government would not let them 'lapse, and it was likely that it would move to
de facto recognition if it were satisfied that the election had been fairly
conducted under the circumstances. (A U.S. participant pointed out that in his
country the implementation of sanctions was a legislative prerogative, while the
recognition of a regime was an executive prerogative.)
An American participant intervened to say that the issue was not the
population of the army but its control, and control resided in those white seats
in the parliament. Another American reported that the highest black officer was
a first lieutenant, and that there were only 14 or 15 second lieutenants. He
made a comparison with the police force carrying out the evictions in Ireland in
105
the 19th century, who had been overwhelmingly Catholi~ but under Protestant
command.
In resp~nse to a suggestion that Rhodesia's woes would have been av~ided
had Bri'tain sent in special forces at the time of the unilateral declaration of
independence, a Briton said that one could not have risked war in that way
without a clear mandate from the British public. The speaker agreed with the
analysis that the new constitution was defective, but that did not mean that it
might not produce a government, however imperfect, and that this transition
was not preferable to a terrible civil war. It was open for men of good will to
differ about this. One did need to include Mugabe in the arrangements. Perhaps
Muzorewa was not of a caliber to sustain the government over a long period,
but that was for the future. We might have to live with the transitional
arrangements because anything else would be worse. One of the tragedies of
Rhodesia was that the whites there had been infinitely more
multiracially-minded than the whites of South Africa.
While recognizing the defects of the new constitution, one American said
that he still favored recognition and the lifting of sanctions. This might risk a
rupture with some members of the O.A.U., but how many of them really cared
much what black ran Zimbabwe? More important, recognition would bolster
the new government - legitimate or not - and give the blacks something to
fight for, and a better chance to deal with the Patriotic Front from strength. If
Western recognition was not forthcoming, there would be a continuing
deterioration of both black and white morale, in a protracted struggle which
would destroy the existing political and economic structure. In the end. the
Patriotic Front would win, but what would be left to work with? .
A Portuguese argument challenged the wisdom of recognizing the new
government It was difficult to see how the recent elections could produce a
workable solution; Sithole had insisted that they!had been stage-managed. This
speaker agreed with a previous intervention that it was important for Western
countries not to jeopardize now by recognition their capacity to effect an
eventual settlement. He also warned against more intensive military
intervention in Africa. It was best to maintain a cautious attitude and not to
react too strongly, intervening only when invited or when directly safeguarding
the lives of European citizens.
Since the settlement process had begun, Western policies toward
Rhodesia-Zimbabwe risked damaging both our interests and those of the
Africans, in the view of a British participant. By not backing Bishop
Muzorewa, we appeared to support the guerrillas. A peaceful transition was
not possible under any circumstances, but one could contain the degree of
damage. Counter-guerrilla activity did not require massive forces or
sophisticated weaponry. The Patriotic Front did not exist within the country;
they were united only outside. Nkomo and Mugabe would continue to fight
each other unless an interim settlement were suggested after a successful
election. We should aim for such a solution, trying to reduce the transition
period to less than 10 years. If Britain acted quickly, reinforcing its proposal
with substantial economic aid, black acquiescence could be obtained.
106
Ifno compromise were reached, and the U.S. could not bring the parties
together, an International participant foresaw "fearful consequences" for the
whole region, not just Rhodesia. ·
An American sought to explain the apparent contradiction between U.S.
policy in the Arab-Israeli struggle and in Rhodesia. In the Middle East, the
Americans were prepared to go against the will of the most powerful states in
the area, while in Rhodesia U.S. policy was justified partly on the ground that
oneYhad to follow the will of neighboring states. In each case, U.S. policy was
heavily motivated by guilt - about the Holocaust and about the treatment of
blacks. Those feelings lay beneath the surface and had a great deal to do with
American reactions.
The author of the American working paper(II) said that the Rhodesian
election had done nothij1g to resolve the armed struggle because it had not
involved any of the principal nationalist guerrilla groups. Recognition of the
election results and the Muzorewa-headed government would remove the
West's ability to act as a broker, stiffen the internal settlement, prolong the
war, assure that Mugabe would be supplied by the Soviets (which he had not
been up to now in any appreciable way), and account for the deaths of
additional thousands of Africans and hundreds of whites. (Contrary to what
had been said by a previous speaker, this guerrilla war was highly
technological, modelled very much on Vietnam.)
Our best course was to encourage the quiet and intermittent contacts now
going on between Muzorewa and Mugabe (or, less likely, Nkomo). If a
settlement bringing in at least one of the principal guerrilla groups would entail
the overthrow of the present "quite unacceptable" constitutional arrangements,
we should work for that. If we did not cave in now, some sort of solution was
bound to be found within a year. The stakes were high, not just in terms of
immediate loss of life, but for the long-term relations between all of our
countries and the African continent and the whole Third World.
I. Economic--Considerations. A Swiss participant referred to the point in
American working paper(Il) that U.S. government economists in various
departments had recommended that no action should be taken which would
seriously disrupt American business practices or profits. That was a poor basis
for defining a long-term policy toward Africa, in the speaker's opinion. Then
the French working paper had suggested that Europe's dependence on African
raw materials was not very great. The speaker did not agree, and went on to
cite statistics from a recent World Bank report showing the extent of the
industrial world's dependence on the Third World, in which Africa held a large
share. If the African countries stopped or reduced their supplies, we would be
faced with problems very much like the oil crisis. Were we aware of our
vulnerability?
We also needed to have a better sense of history. A great many conferences
had been held recently about the "new international economic order." The
Third World, including Africa, was that new order. The developed countries-
who counted for only about a quarter of the world's people, and were shrinking
107
proportionately - had to start thinking of fashioning economic policies with
Asia and Africa. The Western world now had a wonderful chance to get on a
new economic footing with the African countries for the next 50 years, a
chance which the Communists were not in a position to take advantage of. It
was a common fallacy among rich countries to think that the poor nations had
little bargaining power. That was a great mistake. The instruments of collective
bargaining were not limited to oil, and the Third World was well aware of that.
We had too long underestimated the Asians and black Africans, and it was time
for us to take a more positive approach.
*
* *
108
III. OTHER CURRENT ISSUES BEARING
ON EUROPEAN-AMERICAN RELATIONS
(During the half day devoted to other current international issues, the
discussion occasionally overlapped the two formal agenda items. Remarks on
those topics have been incorporated in the two. preceding sections of this
report.)
A. Relations with the Communist Powers. An Austrian participant began
the discussion of this topic by reminding his American friends that the world
power which stretched to the Amur had also extended its influence to the
Danube, to the Austrian border and the Bavarian forests. Therefore any
conflict in the Far East coul,d not be viewed by Central Europeans as simply a
conflict between two Communist powers.
We knew frorQ our Cold War experience that it was the praotice of the
Soviet Union to attack wherever it could be effective, including Central
Europe. The speaker therefore considered the attitude displayed by Chancellor
Schmidt, President Giscard and President Carter concerning the Chinese
invasion as very reasonable. The distrust within the Soviet Union- based on
the inherent Soviet outlook, and probably intensified by the age of its present
leadership had been assuaged to a certain extent by the attitude displayed
by Messrs. Schmidt, Giscard and Carter.
Occasionally one heard the opinion that any sort of commitment by the
USSR in the Far East ought to be made use of to engage in some kind of
policy of pressure to be exerted by the West on the Soviet Union. The speaker
feared that such a policy would have negative consequences for detente.
It was for the experts to judge whether SALT II was desirable militarily. But
it was important to reiT!ember that the policy of detente was the result of a
state of equilibrium, and could continue only so long as that equilibrium was
maintained. That was why it had to involve the U.S. as well as the USSR. But
unilateral disarma-ment would be the most dangerous thing of all. SALT II was
desirable from the point of view of detente, but it was likely that the
restrictions on conventional armaments would be very much limited in the first
stage.
The policy of detente would not succeed in the long run unless we had some
partial success in disarmament, too. Detente had now entered into a phase
which required concretization in the fields which had been agr~ed upon in the
various "baskets". It had been said that a democracy was stabilized by
keeping it on the move; one might say the same thing about detente. Unless it
was kept moving, it would ossify and decay. It had now entered upon a crucial
phase.
The Austrian experience provided an argument for detente. The capital of
this Western-type democracy was only a few kilometers from the Iron Curtain.
From it, each night, radio and television stations beamed a fascinating picture
of a living democracy to hundreds of thousands of Czechs, Hungarians and
Yugoslavs. Since the conclusion of the state treaty a quarter century ago, there
109
had not been a single day on which .the Austrians had feared for their
independence and freedom. In that time, there had been the Hungarian
uprising, in which Austria had given asylum to some 200,000 Hungarians, as
well as the Czech uprising, when Austria had again provided political refuge.
From time to time, the Soviet Union questioned whether something the
Austrians were doing was consistent with the state treaty, but the Austrians
had been able to take closer steps to the Western European groupings.
(Austria, Switzerland and Sweden had decided against joining the EEC, but
were carrying out their European associations in other ways.)
In the 25 years before the state treaty, Austria had faced two dictatorships
(the German one and their own), a world economic crisis, empires that had
broken apart- a great world revolution. The most recent quarter century had
also brought changes, but most of them positive. The speaker was optimistic
that the Western democracies could solve the problems which confronted
them.
An American reported that the U.S. wanted satisfactory and useful relations
with the USSR. But the American public's acceptance of the nation's policy
toward the USSR could not be detached from its perception of Russia's
policies. The U.S. was seeking, however imperfectly, to express i?. its foreign
policy the support for human rights and democracy that were positive aspects
of Western society. The fact that the American thrust in the human rights field
was often tempered by considerations of strategy, security or trade was not
unique to the U.S. There was a division on both sides of the Atlantic about
detente. Some in the U.S. saw it in terms of total Soviet activity around the
world. Others saw it in terms of specific bilateral Soviet-American issues.
An International speaker was worried about the danger of two detente
policies emerging: one European, the other American. The U.S. might feel that
SALT II was so complicated and controversial that it ought to be delayed,
while Europeans might be pressured to accede to Russian proposals that they
not do it in tandem with the U.S. (Europeans were already getting overtures
from the Russians to the effect that the Americans were not to be depended
on, and that detente was more important to Europe and the USSR than to the
U.S.) Rejection or postponement of SALT II ratification by the Senate could
produce a bifurcation of detente that would be dangerous to our common
interests.
Another International participant warned that if detente was only possible
with a certain military equilibrium between East and West- that equilibrium
was now being eroded to the advantage of the Soviet Union. Both this speaker
and a Briton warned of the dangers of divergent Atlantic attitudes about
detente. The continued existence of free independent states such as Austria
depended on a continuing role by the U.S., not just in Europe but on the sea
lanes over which the Europeans were supplied.
A British participant alluded to the erosion of the Vietnam treaties by the
continuing rearmament of North Vietnam by the Soviet Union. Ought one to
assume that the Russians would be relentlessly expansive? They had recently
handed a terrible dilemma to the Chinese, who had had either to acquiesce in
110
f
•
f
f
Russia's domination of the gov.ernments ~f Southeast Asia or to give warning
to North Vietnam to lay off Its expansiOn. They had deCided to give that
warning by force. (It had been no coincidence that North Vietnam had moved
when the Iranian government was falling.) Might the same sort of dilemma
confront the West one day in, say, Saudi Arabia or another oil-producing
country? ·
A Frenchman detected "a certain atmosphere of neutralism" in the West.
We congratulated ourselves for not being involved directly in any conflict, and
limited our efforts to lending our good offices to help solve problems. So the
lives of our people were not being sacrificed, which was something to be
thankful for but detente was taking on so many different faces that it was
hard to define it any more. The speaker was worried that the West was
deluding itself and losing its•sense of responsibility. We needed- under U.S.
leadership to define with more precision the real frontiers of our security.
A German speaker agreed that fearful consequences might result from the
"mismanagement of detente" in Washington, such as the Senate's rejecting
SALT II or attaching riders which forced the Administration to renegotiate it.
For the Europeans, and especially the Germans, detente was not just a figure
of speech but something that had yielded palpable results. They did not want to
see those results jeopardized, especially at a moment when the Brezhnev era
was drawing to a close and a momentary breakdown could grow into a long
hiatus in East-West relations.
B. "The German Question." An Austrian speaker said that one thing which
detente could not achieve was the reunification of Germany, or the overthrow
of Communism. Those high-flung hopes could not be fulfilled without an
entirely different set of processes. There was, of course, a "German question",
but Austria was not involved in it. The question existed not only for the
Germans, but for the Soviets as well. The speaker recalled a conversation he
had had with a SQviet leader, who had remarked that Germany was divided
into four parts: West Germany, East Germany, beyond the Oder-Neisse Line,
and Austria. To the speaker's protestation that Austria had been part of
Germany for only seven years under Hitler, the Russian had replied that an
axiom of Soviet policy was to prevent a reunification of those four parts. As
for Austria, the state treaty might be a sufficient guarantee for the Russians
against another Anchluss (which they knew ~as opposed by the majority. of
Austrians anyway). But, the Soviet leader had said, for a large country (hke
Germany) a "piece of paper" was never enough to guarantee neutrality.
A German participant reported that a debate was going on in his country -
somewhat artificial but nonetheless spirited about this German question. If a
solution was to be found to it, the Austrian experience had shown that it would
have to be one which far transcended the old concept of the nation state.
The so-called "Wehner initiative" had nothing to do with the realities of
German politics; it was the "outburst of an aging politician." The German
people had made their choice under Adenauer to put freedom above umty and
Europe above national identity. That basic choice had not been revised by any
Ill
one. West Germans had found their military security within the alliance, where
they were pulling their weight. They had found their economic security within
the EEC and the other Western trade and monetary organizations. And they
had found their emotional security in the ideal of European unity.
The basic point of the Ostpolitik of eight or nine years ago had been to put
"the German question", if not to rest, at least away where it was no longer an
integral part of operational policy. Most Germans probably still felt that unity
was perhaps the natural destiny of the nation, but they also recognized that
they had taken the wrong decision about their own self-determination a
generation ago, for which there were inevitable consequences. The question of
unity had therefore to be left to the tides of history, "which might run against
us." If unity ever became possible in an environment in which the two halves
of Europe grew together again, then in fact it might not be necessary. Most
Germans viewed this matter in much less nationalistic or patriotic terms than
Herr Wehner's vocabulary seemed to suggest.
Despite the reassuring tone of this speaker's remarks, other participants were
uneasy about this new debate on the German question. A Norwegian said that
it had caused disquiet in Scandinavia. Another German wondered if it heralded
the separate detente which had been mentioned. And a widely-travelled
International participant reported that he had recently been questioned
intensively in both allied and non-allied countries about what the Germans
were thinking. The mere fact that the question had come to the fore was what
was making people nervous. But the speaker was personally convinced that
Chancellor Schmidt's government was determined to remain in the Western
alliance and not to "indulge in Utopian thoughts."
C. The .4ustrian Example. A Briton paid tribute to the courage and
achievements of the Austrian political leaders just after the war, when their
country had been divided and threatened by Communism. We had much to
learn from the Austrians, he said, and we tended to underrate the contribution
they had made, both in establishing the postwar coalition and then in
maintaining an effective democracy just beyond the Iron Curtain, in spite of
intense Soviet pressure. It was appropriate that this meeting was being held in
a country which had made great contributions to democratic freedom.
D. Transatlantic Moods and Attitudes. A German participant found
transatlantic relations today to be characterized by a "surprisingly high degree
of tranquility." Europe and America had settled down to each other's strange
ways, and a number of topics had disappeared from the front pages since the
early days of the Carter Administration. The feeling in Europe was that the
Americans - with SALT II for instance - were making a serious and
sophisticated effort, compared with what had been seen before as a rather
impetuous and crude effort.
Both America and Europe were in transition, and were unsure where they
were headed. But the issues left between them were ones about which serious
p<'uple anywhere might differ (e.g., the peaceful uses of nuclear· energy).
112
r
..
..
··.·.···i··
An American described the transitional mood in his country. The scars and
inhibitions of Vietnam were still there. In foreign policy, this was expressed by
a suspicion of further involvement. Yet there was a growing realization that the
nation could not be uninvolved. Americans were being pressed not only by the
challenge of events, but by the activity of their adversaries. This mood had
been illustrated by the applause of many in the Congress to President Carter's
rece~ .rapid response to what had been seen as the Soviet-backed challeng to
North Yemen and Saudi Arabia. Yet some of the same legislators were now
objecting to the President's having taken the waiver authority that had made
that rapid response possible.
America was troubled by internal problems (inflation, resource allocation,
the conflicts of public interest advocates), but despite the mood of debate on
many of those issues, the'country was as active in world affairs as it had ever
been. Cooperation with Europe remained fundamental to U.S. policy. The
addition of emphasis on Japan did not diminish the strong belief that the U.S.
had a fundamental interest in the security and health of Europe. One no longer
heard talk about the withdrawal of American troops. Seldom had there been a
more dramatic example of transatlantic cooperation than in the Contact Group
which has been seeking to resolve the Namibian problem.
In the Middle East, the only alternative seemed to be the hard, frustrating
route of negotiation. One had to deal not only with the Arab nations, but with
a "resolute, inward-looking, emotional and effusively democratic Israel". It
was easy to talk about putting more pressure on one side or the other, but
political realities were not so simple. The U.S. remained in contact with the
key Arab leaders, who had made assurances that they would give the peace
process a chance (although it had admittedly brought serious disarray to their
world). The Carter Administration, it was claimed, had done more than its
predecessors to acknowledge the role of the Palestinians. But no dialogue with
the PLO would be acceptable to the American public without an unequivocal
acceptance by rtre Palestinians of the existence of Israel and of UN Resolution
242 as the basis for a solution.
The tremendous responsibility of making this peace process succeed now lay
mainly with the U.S., the speaker concluded, but America wanted Europe to
share that responsibility. The energy crisis affected Europe as much as the
U.S., and the Europeans had an equal interest in seeing the end of conflict in
the Middle East. Those who were negotiating there, he said, felt a little like
soldiers in the trenches. They "appreciated it when roses were tossed in, but
they would prefer the ammo."
A Frenchman was shocked by the tone of these last comments. It sounded to
him as if the American speaker had been appealing to Europeans for a
commitment in the face of the Middle Eastern situation, as if he believed that
the Europeans could possibly not be interested in the outcome of the
negotiations there. The fact was that most European countries- and France in
particular- were much more dependent on Middle Eastern oil than the U.S.
and consequently felt much more implicated. If they criticized U.S. policy from
113
time to time, it was certainly not as uninterested outsiders, but as people very
much involved who were seeking a constructive solution.
An International speaker wondered whether the U.S., when it emerged from
its transi tiona! mood, would continue to belong to that community of common
concerns. Or would it "become more like the rest of us" - emphasizing
national interests - and leave Europe to adjust?
A Belgian participant detected in some of the American remarks the old but
mistaken notion that a nation could be both powerful and widely beloved. The
British during their imperial days had learned to give up that illusion. Why
could not the Americans do so too?
There really was no feeling of schadenfreude about the U.S., he went on,
but Europeans sometimes felt that all the U.S. wanted from them was
applause, and exclamations of "hear! hear!," When Europeans behaved as
equal partners, they were likely to be looked on as disturbers who were
rocking the boat. Consultations were frequently contradictory. Europeans
would be given a proposal in a first consultation and, before they had had time
to react, the Americans changed policy and convoked a second consultation.
This unfortunate habit was not without significance for our future strategic
consultations; it would take on a sharp sig!lificance when negotiations for
SALT III were launched.
In other areas, such as monetary and commercial affairs, the
European-American consultation had improved since Secretary Kissinger's
frank proposal for a division of labor in April 1973, under which the U.S.
would take the lead on questions with global implications, while Europe's
responsibilities would be primarily regional and local. There had been real
progress in consultative procedures and the harmonization of points of view.
Serious discord had been eliminated, and consultations had improved in
frequency, breadth and cordiality - if not always in coherence.
A French participant recalled Raymond Aron's observation that Europe was
becoming "a voyeur of history". If that was so, it was partly because the
Europeans had been progressively assigned that role. They had been left out of
a role in the Middle East since 1956. They needed to learn to become actors
again, not voyeurs. This would require a change of reflexes, a re-education,
which would take time. The French remembered that, when they had criticized
the U.S. involvement in Vietnam 12 years ago, which seemed reasonable
enough now, they had been accused of acting against American interests.
The tendency to look for a culprit behind every unfortunate event was
condemned by· an American participant. It had the effect of blocking
constructive solutions, especially when blame could be assigned to the U.S.
Unfortunate things just happened, often due to stupidity or misjudgment.
What had we learned from recent events? One thing was that, once the
"unravelling process" had begun, there was little we could do about it,
particularly because of domestic political constraints. The unravelling process
was encouraged whenever the general atmosphere of confidence in the West
declined. Another thing was that we should not indulge ourselves in the
rhetoric of impotence, even if we believed that we had to prepare our peoples
114
r
I
I for the policy failures to come. That sort of rhetoric tended to be self-fulfillin
and encouraged the forces of instability. · g
* *
*
In closing the meeting, Lord Home gave thanks to all those whose help hac
assured the success of the conference: to the Austrian Federal Chancellor for
his presence; the Austrian hosts, led by Mr. Treichl and Mr. Igler; the authors
of the working papers; the secretariat and interpreters; and the hotel staff. An
American spokesman for all the participants expressed their appreciation to
Lord Home for havjng acted as Chairman of the meeting.
115
