'
,
......._
- --.r
•*
t .....
CONFIDENTIAL
NOT POR PUBUOAT!OM
ErrHl!R IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
VILLA D'ESTE
CONFERENCE
2-4April 1965
~~r'~#!ii::M*11!.J'11!lri\fJ"3P"WR'iiA,1\Ml!jii\l·Jilii $WiUijA@JQNWM/WiliiW; 41\4)ii j ¢ ¢11NP8%4Z441..,i4 g 4
..
~
g
v
J
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
VILLA D'ESTE
CONFERENCE
2-4 April I 965
~
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JOSEPH E. j OHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
J. MEYNEN
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ARNOLD T. LAMPING
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ANSIAUX, HUBERT
ARL!OTIS, CHARLES c.
ATHANAssIADEs, BoDossAKI
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARZEL, RAINER
BAUMEL, jACQ.UES
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BENED!KTSSON, BJARNI
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BERG, FRITZ
BIRGI, M. NURI
BLAISSE, PIETER A.
BRADEMAS, j OHN
BREWSTER, KINGMAN
BROGGINI, GERARDO
BRosro, MANLIO
*
* *
ITALY
BELGIUM
GREECE
GREECE
UNITED STATES
GERMANY
FRANCE
FRANCE
ICELAND
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
TURKEY
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
SWITZERLAND
INTERNATIONAL
3
..
BRUCE, DAVID K. E. UNITED STATES PETERSEN, HOWARD UNITED STATES
CARLI, GuIDo ITALY PETRILLI, GIUSEPPE ITALY
CEFIS, EUGENIO ITALY PIPINELIS, p ANAYOTIS GREECE
COLLADO, EMILIO G. UNITED STATES PIRELLI, LEOPOLDO ITALY
CooK, DONALD C. UNITED STATES
PoRTiscH, HuGo AUSTRIA
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES REINHARDT, EBERHARD SWITZERLAND
DEUTSCH, JOHN J. CANADA
RESTON, JAMES UNITED STATES
DONOVAN, HEDLEY UNITED STATES
REUSS, HENRY UNIRED STATES
EczACIBASI, NEJAT F. TURKEY ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
EDINBURGH, H.R.H. the Prince Philip, Duke of UNITED KINGDOM RoosA, RoBERT V. UNITED STATES
EMMINGER, 0TMAR GERMANY RUMOR, MARIANO ITALY
ERLER, FRITZ GER¥ANY SAMKALDEN, Ivo NETHERLANDS
GEDDES, REAY UNITED KINGDOM SAMUELSON, PAUL A. UNITED STATES
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s. CANADA SAUVE, MAURICE CANADA
HEALEY, DENIS UNITED KINGDOM SCHILLER, KARL GERMANY
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES SCHMIDT, AnoLPH W. UNITED STATES
H0EGH, LEIF NORWAY SCHWEITZER, PIERRE-PAUL INTERNATIONAL
HuvELIN, PAUL FRANCE SNOY ET D'OPPUERs, BARON BELGIUM
KNUDTZON, HARALD DENMARK STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
KosTER, HENRI J. DE NETHERLANDS TAVERNE, DICK UNITED KINGDOM
KRISTENSEN, THORKIL INTERNATIONAL TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
LA MALFA, UGO ITAI.'.Y VITTORELLI, PAOLO ITALY
LECANUET,JEAN FRANCE WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
LENNEP, JONKHEER EMILE VAN INTERNATIONAL WARBURG, SIEGMUND UNITED KINGDOM
LINDSAY, JoHN V. UNITED STATES WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO GERMANY
LOUDON, JONKHEER JOHN H. NETHERLANDS
LUNS, JOSEPH M. A. H. NETHERLANDS IN ATTENDANCE:
MALAGODI, GIOVANNI F. . ITALY H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX NETHERLANDS
MARJOLIN, ROBERT E. INTERNATIONAL BRAAM HoucKGEEST, A. EGBERT VAN NETHERLANDS
MAUDLING, REGINALD UNITED KINGDOM CESI, MARCHESE JEAN GASPARE CITTADINI ITALY
McCLOY, JoHN J. UNITED STATES CHIUSANO, VrrTORINO ITALY
McGnEE, GEORGE C. UNITED STATES RoY, BERTIE LE NETHERLANDS
McKINNON, NEIL CANADA VERNEDE, EDWIN NETHERLANDS
MELANDER, JOHAN A. NORWAY
MOUNTBATTEN OF BURMA, LORD UNITED KINGDOM
N0RGAARD, IVAR DENMARK
NYKOPP, JOHAN FINLAND
PALME, s. 0LOF J. SWEDEN
PEDINI, MARIO ITALY
PERKINS, JAMES A. UNITED STATES
4 5
'·t
·!
INTRODUCTION
The fourteenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Villa d'Este, near Como
(Italy) on 2, 3 and 4 April 1965 under the chairmanship of H.R.H. the
Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 87 participants representing the United States, Canada, fifteen
Western European countries as well as various international organisations,
and drawn from leaders in the field of politics (governments and parliaments),
business, journalism, public service (national and international), the liberal
professions, trade unions and employers' organisations.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organisation they might belong to. In order to enable partici-
pants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were confi-
dential with no representatives of the.press being admitted. A short communi-
que, enumerating the items included in the Agenda, was issued to the Press
at the close of the conference.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. Monetary Co-operation in the Western World
II. The State of the Atlantic Alliance.
7
MONETARY COOPERATION IN THE WESTERN
WORLD
The groundwork for the discussion of this item consisted of:
- a memorandum drawn up by a European participant, which was distri-
buted prior to the meeting;
- an oral statement made by an American participant.
* * *
The European rapporteur began his memorandum by re-stating the two
main objectives of international monetary policy since the second world war:
convertibility of national currencies and liberalisation and non-discrimination
in international trade and payments, the attainment of which by about I 958
had in turn given rise to two major problems:
1. the problem of maintaining equilibrium in the international payments
of the major countries;
2. the functioning of the international monetary system.
I. THE PROBLEM OF EQ,UILIBRIUM IN INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS
The rapporteur pointed out that the problem was not a new one but the
views on how to maintain payments equilibrium had changed with the passage
of time. Under the gold standard the maintenance of payments equilibrium
had priority over other policy objectives, such as high business activity and
price stability, and no view was held as to inflation or deflation. It was the
severe depression of the thirties which changed these objectives. Governments
strove to reduce internal unemployment and at the same time to soften the
external effects of their internal policies by means of stringent regimentation
such as exchange controls, import restrictions, etc...
The post-war system as mapped out in 1944 at Bretton Woods, when the
International Monetary Fund was set up, had attempted to achieve a com-
promise between these two extremes, the idea being to recreate an inter-
national division of labour, characterised by increased international trade,
while at the same time ensuring the attainment of the major objective of full
employment. International balance was to be assisted by control over capital
9
I
..
movements, which was to be supplemented if necessary by the non-discrimi-
natory re-imposition of quantitative import restrictions, if approved by
GATT, in case of serious payments disequilibria, and devaluation in cases of
"fundamental disequilibrium".
An essential feature of the system was the assumption that it would work in
a world where the United States would remain the dominant economy that
country being the only one with large monetary reserves and a tendeiicy
towards balance of payments surpluses. In order to enable other countries in
case of payro'ents deficit not to resort to the extreme measures mentioned
above, financial means were to be provided by the I.M.F., the latter in tum
being mainly financed by the United States.
It was also assumed that there would be a short transitional period covering
the change-over from wartime to peacetime economy, but in fact this period
lasted much longer than had been foreseen and only came to an end in I958
with the restoration of currency convertibility. It then became clear that the
conditions under which the system had' to function were far different from
what had been supposed in I944· The main differences were:
a) The United States no longer constituted the only major economic
centre, and Western Europe had become a second one:
b) As a result of this recovery, and of the I949 devaluations which had been
equivalent to a revaluation of the dollar, it was Western Europe and not the
United States which showed a persistent tendency towards balance of pay-
ments surpluses.
c) The United States, with a payments deficit, was unwilling to resort to
the instruments foreseen in the Bretton Woods System (capital controls,
restrictions and devaluation), both because' of traditional economic philo-
sophy and so as not to compromise its position as centre of the international
monetary system and leader of the Western Alliance:
d) A small group of prosperous nations had emerged, which had liberalised
not only trade but also, to a large extent, movements of capital, and were
unwilling to go back on such liberalisation.
e) These countries were less disposed than had been assumed to change
exchange rates, partly because of the disruption that such changes cause in
trade and finance and partly because of the speculative movements liable to
accompany such changes.
The resulting situation could be summarised as follows: a small group of
major countries had largely forsworn the instruments for maintaining balance
of payments foreseen at Bretton Woods. They wanted to reap the benefits of
intensive international trad~ and payments relations, and therefore aimed at
IO
maintaining strong currencies, large monetary reserves, a large degree of
freedom for international trade and capital movements, and stable exchange
rates. At the same time, they wanted to attain full employment, a high rate of
economic growth and price stability, without allowing any of the impulses
received from the outside world to have an effect on the national economy, as
had happened at the time of the gold standard.
Hence, a major problem of economic policy for the countries of the Atlantic
World was how to reconcile freedom for international transactions with
important objectives of domestic policy, and still ensure international pay-
ments equilibrium. They sought to do this by attempting to coordinate their
economic and financial policies.
Continuing, the rapporteur pointed' out that, in the Atlantic World, this
task of coordination had been entrusted to Working Party 3 of the O.E.C.D.,
which included representatives of the United States, the United Kingdom,
the Common Market countries, Canada, Switzerland, Sweden and, since
I 964, Japan. Experience had shown the advantages of keeping the size of this
group within reasonable limits; these were the countries upon which mainly
depended the stability and proper functioning of the world economy and
monetary system, and it was between these countries that the major imbalances
occurred. An adjustment of the exchange rate of any one of them might
threaten the stability of the world monetary system.
The problems encountered in the coordination of policies were as follows:
a) When should a deficit be eliminated through adjustment policies and
when was it sufficient to finance such deficit?
b) What measures should be adopted in the case of adjustment?
c) How should the burden of adjustment be divided among surplus and
deficit countries?
The rapporteur mentioned the classification often made in economic
theory between various types of balance of payments deficits:
a) "Temporary" or "reversible" deficits not necessitating drastic measures
and sometimes due to political developments.
b) "Persistent" deficits necessitating measures of adjustment.
c) "Fundamental" deficits calling for a modification of the exchange rate
in addition to measures of adjustment.
This distinction provided the basis for a judgement on the remedies ap-
propriate in each case. Deficits of category (a) were the type for which short-
term central bank credits could be appropriate, but such credits would be-
come dangerous ifthey fostered the maintenance of the deficit, to say nothing of
an increase in it. This was the reason why the countries of Working Party 3
II
had decided on a multilateral surveillance of the ways and means of financing
deficits.
It was for this reason that "easy" financing was not appropriate for category
(b) deficits, in. respect of which multilateral financing by the I.M.F., sub-
ject to the adoption by the country concerned of a strict programme of adjust-
ment, was more suitable.
For category (c) deficits monetary financing was not acceptable at all,
since unrealistic .exchange rates should not be financed by monetary credit.
The rapporteur pointed out that category (b) was the commonest type of
deficit and that the question arose as to how the burden of adjustment should
be shared among surplus and deficit countries. The answer depended partly
on the cause of the deficit needing correction. If the cause was excessive de-
mand in the deficit country or insufficient demand in the surplus country, the
remedy was easy in principle. However, policy makers were sometimes·
prevented from using the appropriate policy instruments by such considera-
tions as the pressure of public opinion, ill informed concerning what was at
stake.
But the major imbalances of the last few years had not been of such a relati-
vely simple nature and had been due to both disparate movements of costs
and unbalancing capital movements. As long as such a situation persisted,
international equilibrium could only be ensured by:
- a certain degree of unemployment in deficit countries and some price
inflation in the surplus countries;
- some direct influence on capital movements (e.g. through selective tax
measures or moral suasion);
- restriction of imports (e.g. surcharges);
- as a last resort, a change in parity.
The use of each of these measures was painful. They involved a political
choice which, moreover, could hardly be based on strictly national consi-
derations, both on account of their influence abroad and because of the ques-
tion of sharing the burden of adjustment.
Working Party 3 was adding a new dimension to monetary cooperation,
by discussing this question of burden sharing.
One of the problems of disequilibrium arising in the Western world was
that of movements of capital from the United States to other countries owing
to the recent phase of rapid economic growth in Western Europe. The result
had been a deficit in the United States balance of payments which, in the
late fifties, had been of the same order of magnitude as the increase ·of the net
private capital outflow. This had given rise to the problem whether the
equilibrium should be restored by a reduction of the current account surplus
12
or by an adjustment of the capital movements. In recent years there had been
a tendency to look somewhat more to the latter solution on both sides of the
Atlantic, since:
- adjustment of the current account would probably be impossible except
at the cost of substantially increasing U.S. unemployment or further inflation
in Europe; . ;
- a painful adjustment of the current account might have to take place in
a reverse direction if the capital flow to Europe were to stop;
- an excessive and persistent inflow of foreign capital might '!rouse political
resistance, as it had. done in Canada and France;
- it might be considered preferable for surplus savings to ·be directed to the
developing countries.
The rapporteur pointed out that, since 1960, the tenpency of the U.S.
balance of payments had been to increase both its surplus ori current account
and its net capital outflow. He hoped that the measures recently adopted by
the United States authorities would be effective and fur.thermore that European
governments would encourage increased capital outflow from Europe.
So far as the United Kingdom was concerned, he thought thatd1e current
account position needed strengthening)n ord!!r to avoid the renewal of.recur-
rent balance qf payments crises. .
It was a matter of urgency to eliminate the deficits of the U.S.A. 'a~1d the
U.K. for a number of reasons:
a) in the interests of the Atlantic Group's cohesion, it was desirable to
avoid a continued development of two groups in the monetary field-the
"EEC-surplus countries" and the "Anglo-Saxon deficit countries";
b) excessive deficits by the reserve currency conn.tries undermined confi-
dence in the existing international monetary system;
c) objective leadership by the United States in tlie international monetary
field would only be forthcoming ifthat country were freed from direct balance
of payment worries.
Closelyrelated to the problem ofadjustment oftheU.S. deficitwas its financing.
This problem had two aspects liable to give rise to conflicting views:
a) since the U.S. dollar was a reserve currency, prudence was required in
judging the extent of gold loss which could be sustained without causing
speculative capital movements;
b) this did not abmlve the U.S. authorities from taking adequate measures
to ensure equilibrium, such as were incumbent on all countries.
In order to deal with the threat of large-scale conversions of reserve cur-
rencies into gold, "General Arrangements to Borrow" had been concluded in
13
'tr,
!·'1\t
December 1961 between the "Group of Ten Countries" and the l.M.F.; by
the terms of which the Ten, in the event of such threat, agreed to make
available to the I.M.F. up to a total of 6 billion dollars of their currencies.
These agreements:
1) made it possible for the United States to draw on the I.M.F.;
2) provided a reasonable safeguard against speculative attacks against
reserve currencies;
3) underlim;d the special collective resp.onsibility. of tl;ie Group of Ten
countries for the maintenance of the monetary sy~tem;
4) provided for a procedure of consultation and approval which increased
the influence of the European countries in the I.M.F. ap.d thus adapted
to the current situation the balance of power in the Fund as it had
been established at Bretton Woods;
5) led to meetings of the Ministers of the countries of the Group of Ten,
thus allowing for the discussion of major monetary problems on a poli-
tical level.
The rapporteur thought that these General arrangements constituted a
well-balanced compromise between justified demands by the European
countries for greater influence in the affairs of the l.M.F. and the difficulties
and dangers of overhauling the structure of the Fund and of giving too pre-
ponderant a role in its functioning to the major members. .
2. THE PROBLEM OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
Given the special responsibilities of the· Group of Ten, these countries had
decided to embark on a common study of the inte~national monetary system,
the results of which were published on August 10, 1964.
Gold remained the basis of the system, but reserve currency holdings played
an increasingly important part. While, during the decade 1954 to 1963,
nearly $ 6 billion of gold had found its way into the official reserves, this
was accompanied by an increase of pearly $ 8 billion in foreign exchange
holdings, to say nothing of a wide range of bilateral and multilateral credit
facilities which had come into being.
The accumulation ofreserves in the form offoreign exchange came naturally
to the countries belonging to the so-called "currency areas" (Sterling and
Dollar), whose international trade and financial operations were preponder-
antly centred on the United Kingdom and United States, to the mutual ad-
vantages of the countries belonging to such areas and their respective centres.
But most of the members of the Group of Ten traditionally held the bulk of
their reserves in the form of gold, and while they had accumulated large dollar
14
balances in recent years, they were becoming increasingly aware that such
accumulation contained an element of credit granted to the reserve centre.
The gold exchange standard that had thus grown up had served remarkably
well over the past 20 years and, amongst other things, had made it possible to
achieve the main economic goals; i.e. a high level ofemployment and free inter-
national exchange of goods and services, which had been set at the end of the
Second World War; moreover, many countries achieved a rapid economic
growth. The main problem remaining unsolved was the persistence ofinflation.
The objections against the existing system were not that it was unable to
create sufficient liquidity, but rather that such liquidity was created too
haphazardly and was too closely geared to the balance of payments position
of the reserve currency countries, particularly the United States. There was
a certain amount of contradiction between the fact that a United States
deficit provided the world with liquidity in the form of dollars and the fact
that this same deficit caused a lack of confidence in the dollar. Inversely, a
restoration of the_ U.S. balance restored confidence in the dollar but dried up
the source of liquidity.
So, the necessity of reforming the system was generally realised, particularly
in view of the fact that the dollar appeared to be approaching the natural
limits to the amount of short-term debts that reserve currency countries
could accumulate. But it seemed unlikely that the currency of any Common
Market country could play the same role, for a number of reasons. Nor
indeed was such a development desirable, since it would again make the
creation of international liquidity dependent on the balance of payments
position of the major countries instead of being managed consciously in
accordance with predetermined objectives.
Further objection against the existing system was that, by accepting dollars
as monetary reserves, the monetary authorities of other countries became too
dependent on American monetary policy. This was primarily due to the
tendency to regard the parity of the reserve currencies as unchangeable so
that, in case of disequilibrium, the other countries were faced with a choice
between deflation or inflation on the one hand, or a change of their parity on
the other. It was also feared that, by accumulating short term debts, the
reserve countries would be in a position to finance large exports of long-
term capital with all the political and economic power attached thereto.
A reform of the international monetary system based on existing institutions
was now generally advocated. There was a general rejection of any proposals
to change the price of gold or adopt fluctuating exchange rates. This was the
starting point of the survey recently carried out by the countries of the Group
of Ten. It was agreed that there was no overall shortage ofliquidity, although
15
this did not imply that all countries had sufficient reserves. It was also recog-
nised that a moderate increase (25 %) of the quotas of the International
Monetary Fund would be appropriate. Furthermore, it was agreed that some
reform of the monetary system was necessary for the following reasons:
1) The future supply of gold could not prudently be expected to meet the
growing liquidity needs of an exp~nding world economy. ·
2) The United States could not safely continue to supplement gold pro-.
duction by ru.nning a' balance ·of payments deficit indefinitely, thus
accumulating short term debts .which constituted reserves for the coun-
tries holding them. ·
3) It was unlikely and undesir~ble that any other national currency would. ,
assume the function of an international ~eserve currency in the near·
future..
Some form of additional reserve assets would therefore have to be created.
Discussions regarding the form these future assets should take were highly
technical and no agreement had yet been reached but the basic political
problem could be described as: "to whom and by whom should the new reserve
assets be issued?". This gave rise to another question: what "needs" were
legitimate? There were various possible answers:
1) Those of the countries with a balance of payments deficit and low
reserves. This, however, led to the danger that .the financing of balance
of payments might l;>e made too easy, while giving too little incentive to
combat infl~tionary tendencies.·
2) The new reserves could be distributed on a prorata basis in accordance
with existing reserves or I.M.F. quotas. The first possibility would make
it possible to take into account the wishes of the various countries to
accumulate reserves, while the second would make it possible to take
into account certain political facts.
3) The riew reserves could go to countries in process of development,
which had the greatest "need" of them. ·Although this method had poli-
tical appeal, it gave rise to the most serious objections ofa practical nature,
owing to the almost unlimited demand for development capital. Pres-
sure by the countries concerned for the creation of ever more inter-
national money might give rise to inflationary tendencies similar to
those which might arise at national level when the issue of money by a
central bank was unduly subject to political influence.
The second question was: "who will decide on the amount of the new
assets to be issued?" Since there was no formula to measure the adequacy of
international liquidity, it would be necessary to make institutional arrange-
16
ments for ad hoc decisions, and it was important that such decisions should
be kept free, as far as possible, from short-term interests of individual coun-
tries or groups. of countries, and that the only relevant criterion should be
avoidance of world-wide inflation and deflation. There were two points of
view on this subject:
1) Monetary stability being in the interest of the world as a whole, it was
imperative that all countries should have a voice in the matter, and
decisions should be taken by the Board of Governors or the Board of
Executive Directors of the International Monetary Fund. A decision
taken by a small group such as that of the Group of Ten would be politi-
cally unacceptable to the less developed countries and would not ade-
quately safeguard the interests of the other countries.
2) The other view was that creation of a ~ew ·reserve asset resulted in
establishing claims against certain countries. But in terms of real re-
sources,. the only countries capable of honouring these claims were the
advanced industrialized countries already working together in ·the
Group of Ten. In view of the considerable risks of inflation involved in
the creation of new reserve assets, it was importa~t that there should be
an institutional arrangement enabling the major economic powers of
the world to keep the operation under very close watch.
Closely connected with this questfon was that of who should issue. the new
reserve asset. Those who argued in favour of decisions by a limited group
would have difficulty in accepting the idea that the I.M.F. should issue
them. The rapporteur considered, however, that ~his did not exclude the
possibility of a special responsibility being entrusted to the Group of Ten,
under the auspices of the I.F.M.; as a result of a ·compromise agreement
recognising the special position of the Ten, rather in the same way as the
General Agreements to Borrow had clone in respett of the credit operations
of the Fund.
Another question was to what extent a reform of the international system
was an urgent matter. There were some who denied this urgency. In their
opinion there was sufficient liquidity and they feared that reform might weaken
the importance of the dollar. They hoped the monetary system would right
itself by its own means. Others considered that something ought to be done
because the existing instability was aggravated by uncertainty concerning the
future, which gave rise to undesirable practices and proposals, such as pro-
posals to increase the price of gold or to create a European reserve currency,
bilateral financing of balance of payments deficits etc. ·
In conclusion, the rapporteur stated that it was not clear what solutions
17
would finally emerge. He considered it was fortunate that there seemed to be
no disagreement as to the necessity for investigating new ideas, providing
they were constructive and could be put into practice without interfering with
what had already been achieved. He suggested that, in this connection, the
same courage might be needed as that which had inspired the founders of
the I.M.F..
*
* *
The rapporteur appended to his memorandum a number of questions for
discussion: • . , .
I. Has the burdep of the balance of payments adjustments been shared
fairly between the United States and continental Europe? Are changes in
the relative burdens desirable? What is the urgency of achieving equilib-
rium?
2. Does the present organisational set-up of monetary cooperation seem
adequate for dealing with the special economic relations and responsi-
bilities among the members of the Atlantic Group? Does Working Party
3 suffice? What changes are necessary? Are more meetings of Ministers
desirable?
3. What are the advantages and disadvantages of the increasing American
direct investments in Europe, irrespective of the balance of payments
problem?
4. What urgency must be attached to a reform of the in'ternational mone-
tary system? · ·
5. To whom should newly created international reserve assets be issued?
Initially: '
to the industrialised nations;
to less-developed countries;
to all countries in relation to their Fund quotas?
6. How should the creation of new assets be managed?
by the International Monetary Fund;
by the IMF on proposal of the Group of Ten;
by the Group of Ten?
* * *
An American participant opened the discussion by putting forward a
number of observations and ideas.
He stated that for the past twenty five years the dollar had been consid-
ered so strong that its generalised use as a reserve currency could be taken for
18
granted. This was why the U.S.A.'s current balance of payment difficulties
gave rise throughout the wo~ld to a, be it perhaps exagerated concern. These
difficulties could be attributed, not to any weakness in the United States
economy, but to the very rapid growth of the economies of other Western
countries. It was therefore neither necessary nor desirable that the former
pre-eminence of the dollar in· the monetary field should be mairtained. Bu,t
this change of relative position had not been accompanied by the assumptiop
of fresh responsibilities in connection with the need for reserves by the other
currencies. However, the speaker pointed out, the monetary system should
not be considered as the prime mover in this process: money was merely a
mirror which reflected the achievements of the economy. He thought that
extreme prudence should be exercised in proposing radical changes, which alone
wouldnotsufficetoremedythesituation. The role ofthe dollar alone should not
be exaggerated in the future, and the currencies of the other major advanced
countries should be entrusted with responsibilities appropriate to their
situation. And so far as the problem of adjustments between advanced coun-·
tries was concerned, the remedy should be sought in the e'conomies· as such
and not merely in the monetary system.
The speaker emphasised the importance of realising that the existing
monetary system still had vast potentialities, as had been revealed by the
recent credit facilities, the creation of which had been mentioned by the
rapporteur; these could have far greater long-term significance than speculative
manipulation of one or another currency. Apart from tJ:i.e part played by the
I.M.F. in this respect, mention might be Jnade of the development of the
various arrangements between countries enabling them to finance practically
any sort of deficit. These were being increasingly used, in combination with
reserve assets, the former simultaneously acting as a disciplinary factor to
enforce the adoption of the necessary measures of economic recovery. Tem-
porary expedients, therefore, were of far iess importance than a method of
long-term adjustments to be used between economies of widely differing
characters, and a reform of the international monetary system alone could
not bring about'such adjustments.
The speaker thought it was essential to be somewhat more introspective in
examining the system which was available, which could be really meaningful
if it resulted not only in a "multilateral surveillance" but also in a joint effort
of mutual assistance in making our payments balances really complementary.
In view of the fact that the economies of the various countries concerned did
not always advance at the same rate, the monetary arrangements between
the various countries and the International Monetary Fund for all countries
in the world could facilitate smooth advance free from the disturbances
19
"
which accompanied the gold standard, which the speak~r described as an
over-simplified and outdated system. He concluded by expressing the hope
that the monetary system would be directed and controlled by the leading
nations, fully conscious of their responsibility. The United States for their
part were quite willing to assume an increasing share in this respect. In
particular, it was essential to ensure increasing "multilateralisation" of the
expedients available f~r strengthening existing reserves and creating new ones,
and to make a better use ofthe former. He agreed with the rapporteur that the
I.M.F. constitute9 the most appropriate framework for the development of
such a process. ,
*
* *
In the discussion which followed, most speakers dealt jointly with the prob-
lem of international payments balances (paying particular attention to the
situation in the United States and Great Britain) and that of the functioning
of the international monetary system. For the purpose of clarity, these two
problems are dealt with separately in the present Summary, which follows the
lay-out of the Introductory Paper. It was not always possible, however, to
make a clear distinction between these two subjects, owing to the fact that they
are interwoven, as many speeches had shown.
* * *
BALANCE OF INTERNATIONAL PAYMENTS
An American participant referred to the analysis of balance of payments
disequilibria of his country and gave a description of th.e measures adopted to
remedy them. He pointed out that the cause of disequilibrium was not the
trade balance, which showed ~surplus, and.said that for the past four or five
years his Government had been striving to reduce the repercussions of its
economic and military assistance measures on its balance, be it without
eliminating or even reducing this assistance to any great extent. Disequilibria
had become acute eighteen months previously with a disproportionate in-
crease of foreign dollar loans on the United States market at more attractive
rates of interest than those prevailing abroad; this induced the United States
Government to institute an interest equalization tax, which was expected to
be rather efficacious. However, some nine weeks previously, the capital
outflow, both on short and long term, had increased to such an extent that the
Government, anxious to avoid authoritarian currency control, had asked all
those concerned, both lenders and investors, to exercise voluntary restraint,
under the auspices of the Federal Reserve Board so far as the banks were
concerned, and under the supervision of the Department of Commerce in the
20
case of industry. In particular, the former were asked not to allow their,
engagements abroad to exceed 105 % of the engagements of the previous
year. This was by no means an easy matter, since the demand from abroad
continued to be strong. But the banks and industrial enterprises were fully
prepared to assist the Government, and the system had shown itself to be
efficacious: an improvementin the United States balance of payments situation
had already been noted.
A European participant asked whether such measures, if they proved ef-
fective-which he expected they would be-and successful in re-establishing
equilibrium by the end of the year, were not liable to have undesirable effects
in the long run. He wondered whether it might not be better to supplement
them with other measures aimed at reducing the abundance of liquidity on
the American national market.
In the ensuing discussion, other European participants, while recognizing
the cogency of measures adopted by American Government and business
circles, expressed the hope that they would not be continued for too long. If ·
they were not completely successful, they should not be considered as the only
possible means and perpetuated for that reason. A Swedish, a Norwegian
and a Dutch participant all pointed out in similar terms that, if these measures
would be successful, they might well have a restrictive effect on the expansion
of European industry, owing to the resulting shortage of capital; a British
participant added that this would also encourage deflationary trends, in
which view he was supported by a Norwegian and several other participants.·
A German participant also stated that on the long run this would bring the
problem of creating international liquiditie$ to the fore again.
An American speaker expressed the firm hope that current measures would
be effective shortly, and therefore be suspended or at least gradually reduced;
he based his optimism on the healthy situation of the Unitep States economy
already mentioned by another American participant, and on the competitive
position of its industry. Subsequently, other American speakers supported this
view. He pointed out that, after all, the income from capital previously invested
abroad had made a by no means negligible contribution to the present impro-
vement, and if current measures rendered investment in Europe less attrac-
tive, it might be possible to restore the balance rapidly.
He admitted that, so far as the complementary part that might be played
by measures aimed at a moderate tightening of the capital market was con-
cerned, this was a problem which was currently the subject of discussions in the
United States.
Another American speaker considered that circumstances allowed a slight
increase in the interest rates, without involving any danger of compromising
21
•
the economic growth which had been proceeding for 50 months or of causing
unemployment. Two other American speakers, however, expressed the con-
trary opinion. One of them said that measures of this sort might compromise
the conditions of price stability and full employment in which this growth
took place, while the other said it should not be forgotten that, at national
level, the American Government had launched a vast programme of full
employment, assistance to certain regions and expansion of educational
facilities, while at the same striving to lighten taxation. Such a programme
was possible only under conditions of a steady economic expansion, and any
restriction ofcredit would constitute a threat to such expansion - a threat to be
avoided at all costs. As against this, an international participant pointed to
the example of Europe which showed that high interest rates were not incom-
patible with economic growth. '
On the subject of the American balance of payments deficit, many speakers
devoted part of their speeches to the problem of American investments in
Europe, some of the European participants taking the opportunity to express
their views as to the advantage of such investments for the receiving country.
A German participant said that the main reason for the American deficit was
to be found in the extent of the responsibilities taken and undertakings given
by the United States since the end of the last world war (Marshall Plan,
assistance to underdeveloped countries and military undertakings for the
defence of the free world); he did not think that investments played a decisive
part and considered it would be a bad thing for Europeans to discourage them.
A Dutch participant also recalled that, combined with American aid, U.S.
investments in Europe had made a vast contribution to the post-war recovery
of the European economy, but the proportional importance to the national
economies of the countries concerned should not be exaggeratecl; according to
the EEC Commission,' these investments accounted for about 2 % of overall
investment in the six countries; in the case of Germany, the proportion was not
more than 3 or 4%, and in the case of France it was only r.4%. Out of a
total of 40 billion dollars investee\ by America at the end of r963, ro billions
had gone to Europe, while out of 8 billion dollars foreign investments in the
United States, 5.5 billion had come from Europe. Any European measures
inspired by hostility to American investments might well give rise to counter-
measures in the United States.
An international speaker, whose point of view was also expressed by a
Canadian participant, pointed out that foreign investments should not be
assessed according to their cash value alon_e since they were frequently ac-
companied by the introduction of new techniques and "know-how", which
in themselves had helped to equalize the level of industrial progress on the two
22
sides of the Atlantic, at a time when Europe was still lagging behind in this
respect.
A French participant, supported by a compatriot, said that, while re-
cognising the advantages of American investments in Europe, the possibility
might be considered of restricting them, or at least accepting them on a
selective basis, and limiting them to fields where new techniques and means bf
production were necessary, while avoiding those where fresh investments in
markets already saturated were likely to disrupt the economy unduly. The
second French participant thought, however, that the necessary limitations
should emanate from the American industrialists themselves, with the advice
of their own government, rather than from European governments.
The Dutch participant who had already spoken intervened at this point to
state that many foreign investments were inspired not only by the mere
desire to make profits but also by the wish of countering high customs tariffs.
This applied both to American investments in Europe and European invest-
ments in the United States. The speaker therefore considered that a general
reduction of customs tariffs would make an important contribution to the
long-term solution of the existing disequilibrium problem.
A Belgian participant and a number of other speakers, including a Nor-
wegian and an international member, agreed with the rapporteur in empha-
sising the importance of setting up a real European capital market. Narrow
regulations and national jealousies had the effect of freezing a considerable
proportion of European savings, which were looking for investment opportuni-
ties. In this connection, it was striking to note that the two deficit countries-
the United States and the United Kingdom-were precisely those which had
the most highly developed capital markets. European countries had made
less progress in this direction than in that of liberalising trade. And yet,
Europe was certainly in a position to finance her own development from her
own savings, and even to export capital, jointly with the United States, to the
under-developed regions of the world. The rapporteur added, however, that
what mattered was to reduce the net movements of capital in either direction
across the Atlantic, rather than to reduce the gross capital flows
themselves.
An Italian and a Dutch participant supported the argument of the Belgian
speaker, already mentioned, and developed it even further. While many
European industrialists might see cause for anxiety in certain American
investments, the answer to the challenge should be found by Europe in her
own energy and potentialities by means of positive measures. The pre-re-
quisite for this was the creation, by way of mergers and agreements, of major
European production units on a scale comparable to those in America, and
23
the development and intensification of European cooperation in the field of
scientific and technical research. The Italian speaker added that such steps
ought to be facilitated and encouraged by the Commission of the European
Economic Community. .
A number of speakers echoed the remarks of the German participant who
had already spoken, by expressing a desire that, in considering the United
States deficit, Western countries should not confine their attentions to invest-
ments alone, but should cooperate in other fields. A Norwegian and a British
speaker even spoke of a "Marshall Plan in reverse" in this connection. After
all, they said, by eliminating a few items from their assistance programme,
the United States could wipe out their deficit; here, they were alluding to a
remark made by an American participant, who had pointed out that his
country's trading surplus (6 billion dollars) did not suffice to cover the cost
of the various foreign aid programmes undertaken by the United States on
behalf of the free world. The British speaker again intervened to state that
he considered a more equitable distribution of world burdens among Western
countries desirable. The rapporteur concluded by saying that in any case a
step forward would have been taken if European countries with considerable
surpluses were to effect advance reimbursement of their Marshall Plan debts
to the United States.
* * *
While the majority ofspeakers who dealt with this subject mainly concerned
themselves with the United States balance of payments, some also mentioned
the balance ofpayments deficit of the second provider of "reserve currency"-
the United Kingdom.
A British speaker pointed out that, while the dollar played a unique role in
providing access to gold owing to its convertibility, Sterling played a secondary
role in providing access to the dollar to the countries of the Sterling Area, and
to some extent to all countries which held Sterling. A sort of equilibrium was
established in the Sterling Area, the members of which had free access to the
central reserves of the Bank of England, owing to the fact that the United
Kingdom was an exporter of finished goods, while the other members were
exporters of raw materials, with the effect, in case of a rice in raw materials
price, of increasing the resources of the Area, while the British balance proper
suffered from the situation. But the demand for dollars by members of the
Area resulted in a constant pressure on Sterling. Equally the monetary
measures recently adopted by the United States had not failed to influence
the position of the Pound Sterling, for as distinct from the pre-war period,
the ratio between the United Kingdom's short-term engagements and liquid
24
assets had greatly deteriorated. In other words, the United Kingdom's reserves
were extrenwly limited as compared with the extent of the country's foreign
trade and international engagements. Any fluctuation in the balance of pay-
ments, therefore, had to be corrected very rapiclly,, especially as, owing to this
same weakness, apy movement affecting the demand for dollars had even more
rapid repercussions on Sterling.
In the longer run, there were two persistent burdens encumbering the
British balance of payments situation: a high level of foreign aid and defence
on the one hand, .and the incre<ise of imports as a result of the growth of the
domestic economy on the other; in addition, the latter had caused a rise in
costs (particularly wages), wfaich. was greater than the rate of gro~th .of
productivity. Moreover, in 1964, the British balance of payments situation had
been even further aggravated by a very extensive capital outflow, mainly due
to investments in the petroleum industry. There were, however, better pros-
pects for 1965, owing to a reduction in investments abroad and an increase
in revenue by the Sterling Area.
An international participant drew attention to the handicap which the.
lack of a rural reserve of manpower constituted for the United Kingdom and
deplored the fact that it appeared impossible for that country to achieve a
rapid rate of economic growth without running into balance of payment
problems. He thought that the necessary processes of adjustment would take
longer than in the case of other countries, which made it· necessary for the
United Kingdom's balance of payments deficit to be partially financed by
means of a loan on a longer term than the temporary monetary assistance to
which it currently resorted. Another international participant, however,
pointed out that there was no "magic wand" for financing unlimited deficits
over an unlimited period, and when the time came for the I.M.F. to renew
the temporary credits which were being currently granted, the. United King-
dom would have to submit a detailed plan for eliminating its deficit.
*
* *
THE PROBLEM OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY SYSTEM
During the discussion various opinions were expressed both on the defects
of the existing system and the remedies and improvements to be made to it,
but it would appear to have emerged that participants agreed on two points:
- the idea of returning to the old system of the gold standard and that of a
modification in the price of gold were out of the question;
- the necessary reforms should be based on the existing system and not
upset it.
25
I
tf'i!ihlw'11
A German speaker referred to the disorders created by the International
Monetary System after the first world war, and particularly in his own country
during the period r922 to r929. On the other hand, in spite of their weaknesses,
the instruments devised at Bretton Woods had worked very well, and it was
during the period when they were being fully applied that western economies
had recovered most rapidly. ,No doubt, the transition from a shortage of
dollars to the existing situation had not been foreseen, but that did not imply
the necessity of a return to the gold standard or of setting up a new inter-
national reserve currency system. He thought that what was required was to
lighten the burden on the doll:;1r and Sterlil"lg by entrusting other currencies
with more responsibilities, and to abandon certain "automatisms" in favour
ofjoint agreements.
A number of these points were taken up by other speakers, who pointed
to the benefits of the system in force which, as an international participant
stated, had been to some extent distorted by the persistence of the American
deficit-a fact which revealed that a certain limit had been reached. This speak-
er and another international participant pointed out that this limit was the
amount which creditor countries were prepared to keep in dollars. A British
speaker added that this limit was also determined by the deficits which the
two reserve currency countries could allow themselves, since such deficits
were, in the last resort, indebtments,
A number of participants thought it was essential to adjust the deficits of
these two countries before considering a reform of the international monetary
system. A Belgian participant pointed out that, if for no other reason, this was
because speculative measures which might be encouraged by the persistence
of deficits could constitute a threat to the very foundation of the system. A
German participant pointed out that these deficits could not be eliminated by
reforming the system. Other speakers contended that the elimination of such
deficits, or even their reduction, could give rise to other problems, not the
least of which would be a slowing down of the European rate of growth and
the resurgence of certain deflationary trends.
An international participant said that, when considering the disequilibrium
caused to the international monetary system by the United States balance of
payments deficit, attention should also be paid to the responsibility for the
situation borne by the surplus countries. The latter, in resisting inflation, had
sometimes placed excessive restrictions on credit, thus creating distortions
in the movement of capital by attracting availabilities from the deficit coun-
tries. It followed that, when it came to restoring the current situation, the
surplus countries must also play their part, or in other words share the burden
of adjustment. A German participant, however, thought that, in doing so,
26
they should try to resist "imported inflation", the danger of which ought not
to be under-estimated. On this particular point, an international participant
had already expressed his confidence in the instruments which should be
available to the governments of the various countries in this respect.
However, a French, a Canadian and a Belgian participant believed that
the main task fell to the deficit countries in correcting their balance of pay-
ments situation.
A Belgian participant, referring to the Memorandum and enlarging on it
somewhat, emphasised the variety of categories of deficits and thought there
might be more than the three listed in the Memorandum. Thus, the American
deficit, which was accompanied by stable prices, could not be compared with
the conditions obtaining in certain European countries, where a deficit was
accompanied by rising prices. The diversity of situations called for a diversity
of remedies.
An international participant, referring to the problem of investments
abroad in this connection, wanted to dissociate it from the problem of the in-
ternational monetary system; in this he was supported by an American speakei".
Another international participant brought out its relatively limited nature.
Some participants analysed the respective parts played by the dollar and
gold in the existing monetary system and improvements which might be
made to it. A Swedish participant, expressed a certain concern prevailing in
business circles; he emphasised the importance of a stable exchange system to
ensure future progress, and thought that, with a world economy progressing
at a rate which the extraction of precious metal could not follow, the im-
portance of gold was bound to diminish. A French speaker, on the other
hand, maintained that gold remained the basis ofinternational trade, although
he did not consider that its parity with the dollar should be modified. This
was not a reason for thinking that gold was the only means of settling inter-
national debts, and even the partisans of gold considered that other instru-
ments such as credits were desirable, as had appeared from a recent speech by
the President of the French Republic.
A Danish participant, while declaring himself opposed to a devaluation
of the dollar, wondered why gold should be the only basic product whose
price could not change. He coupled this with two other questions. If, after all,
the price of gold were increased in relation to the dollar, would all the other
currencies be devalued? And would world prices automatically rise in the
same proportion? He wondered whether the Soviet Union might not one day
declare at least the partial convertibility of the rouble, thus wielding an in-
fluence over the Western monetary system. An American participant who
had already spoken answered that a stable price for gold in dollars was an
27
essential because the world economic community needed a system of reference
based partly on the parity of the currency which played the preponderant
role, and, while countries whose currencies played a lesser part could modify
their exchanging rates to some extent, it might·be considered that the United
States had lost its liberty of action in this field, on account of the country's
importance. As for the risk of the rouble being made convertible, he thought
the Russians had too great a need of their gold as a tactical and 'strategical
instrument; in addition, they would not be inclined to comply with the
discipline imposed by convertibility.
Another American participant intervened again to point out the dilemma
in which the United States was placed by its role of reserve currency centre,
when confronted with the necessity of restoring its balance of payments. He
thought the problem could be solved, but he wondered whether there was
not a specific idea underlying the emphasis currently placed on the part
played by gold in connection with these difficulties. Although the policy of
the United States was not to devalue, since it was felt that the dollar should
be considered "as good as gold", this did not mean that the United States
would always be .prepared to buy all the gold offered. He concluded by saying
that the dilemma was becoming so serious that the time was approaching when
changes would have to be made in the system of payments.
Towards the encl of the discussion, the rapporteur said he would like to
clear up one or two misunderstandings. The fact that a number of European
countries held reserves of gold was based on long-standing tradition, and by
converting dollar surpluses acquired over the past few years into gold these
countries were not attacking the monetary system or indulging in an anti-
American policy. On the other hand, countries which held gold in this way
should understand that other countries had always held their reserves in other
forms (Sterling or dollars) and should above all refrain from arousing sus-
picions likely to encourage such countries to change their habits, which
would give rise to real dangers; fortunately, the danger signals announcing
such a trend had not yet been observed. It was natural that countries which
had reserves of gold should think, when there was talk of reforming the mone-
tary system, that this might have repercussions on their gold holdings.
The American participant who had made the introductory oral statement
expressed similar views and pointed out that, while there was room in the
present-day world for all sorts of procedure, it would be as well if gold-holding
countries were prepared not to refrain from using also gold for settling their
deficits, but he thought it was even more important that means should be
found of supplementing gold, Sterling and the dollar by common agreement.
At the special request of the Chairman, a European participant expressed
28
the point of view of the European Economic Community towards two ques-
tions:
- Could the Six be considered as a monetary unit?
- If so, how conic! they contribute to a solution of international monetary
problems?
He said that, to a large extent, the Six already constituted a monetary
unit, since the. development of trade within the Community had been such
that any modification of exchange rates by one member country would have
disruptive effects; and the fact that agricultural prices had recently been
fixed in units of account made such modifications even more difficult. In
addition, the six countries were all in a similar situation, with positive balances
of payments and, considerabk reserves without short-term debts, while the
recent recovery in the Italian situation without resorting to import restrictions
provided an excellent example of joint action within the Community.
Answering the second question, the speaker said that the Six had already
made a considerable contribution to world monetary equilibrium, as was
shown by their share in the l.M.F. credits, (which came to 80%, not counting
the part financed by sales of gold). What more could they do? The speaker
agreed with the rapporteur in rejecting the idea of setting up a European
reserve currency, which would only be possible as a result of a long period of
deficits. He considered such a course highly improbable and every other
procedure artificial. In his opinion the Six would tend increasingly to act as a
unit, and this was desirable, for example in adopting a common attitude
towards the composition of their reserves, in acting jointly in the financing of
medium-term monetary credits, as in the case of the British deficit,. or in
deciding on a common policy in connection with long-term investments. The
speaker considered that in all such cases a joint attitude had better chances of
being reasonable than individual policies, since the extremes canceled each
other out. But all this was possible only if the sound monetary position of the
Six were maintained and present risks of inflation were kept in check. The
Community must be in a position to assist other countries without getting into
difficulties itself.
A Canadian participant, while agreeing with the two participants who
had opened the debate, emphasised the imperfections of the system. The
monetary system might well be a "mirror" of our economy, but the fact
remained that its functioning had repercussions on the solutions which might
be found to basic problems. The existing system was erratic and unreliable
from many points of view, particularly because it rendered us dependent on
phenomena which could not always be controlled, such as the process of
formation of reserves, movements of capital, and fluctuations in the balances of
29
payments of one or two countries, particularly the United States, not to
mention questions such as Russian sales of gold. It was therefore necessary to
have a system of international reserves giving confidence and allowing of a
smoothly growing economy on the basis free international payments, although
without a reversion to the gold standard or the creation of a new reserve unit.
Confidence was absolutely essential, particularly for preventing deflation
crises.
The same Canadian and other participants dealt with the question as to
what reforms should be introduced in connection with the problem of the
creation of fresh liquidities and of the institutional framework within which
such operations should be carried out. ·
Various opinions were expressed as to the advisability or urgency ofcreating
fresh international liquidities. An American participant expressed the hope
that first of all the concept Itself would be clearly defined by means of an a-
nalysis of concrete problems. In this connection, an international participant
drew a distinction between "conditional" liquidities which were in his opinion
provided in sufficient quantities by the I.M.F. and various bilateral arrange-
ments, and "unconditional" liquidities which could reasonably be provided
by the I.M.F., but not by a small group of countries for their exclusive use.
Here, the General Arrangements to Borrow provided a fairly good precedent.
A British participant mentioned two obstacles to an agreement regarding
the creation of fresh liquidities. Firstly, debtor countries wete hardly in a very
good position fo dictate the solutions which they needed, and secondly, for
historical reasons, the United States and Great Britain had adopted an at-
titude very different from the policy of the Common Market countries towards
this problem, the former fearing deflation as much as the latter feared in-
flation. He himself' hoped that, in the event of a threat to international
trade, the risk of inflation would not be the main preoccupation. An Italian
and a German participant put forward the opposite point of view. The former
thought that the term "expansion" which was very fashionable in European
countries, was a euphemism for inflation, but governments, trade-unionists
and even, to a certain extent, employers were much too prone to think that
"everything could be done very quickly" and embark on expenditure without
keeping in mind the amount of revenue required to pay for it; any increase
in liquidity, by eliminating the salutary fear of a balance of payments crisis,
might well do away with one of the last remaining brakes on this tendency (in
this connection, a British speaker thought that the competititon resulting
from increased fiberty in trade would constitute an equally effective brake).
The German speaker added that even if the expansion of international trade
were to become slower than over the last few years as a result of measures now
30
being adopted by the United States and Great Britain to reduce their balance
of payments deficit, the prevailing trends were undoubtedly inflationary.
That being so, it was not advisable to create fresh liquidities. On the other
hand, once the United States and Great Britain had restored their balances
and the surplus countries had succeed in resisting "imported inflation", the
problem would be a long-term one and would have to be solved by appropriate
international cooperation.
A British speaker intervened again to state that the countries which had
the most extensive reserves were those which had the least need of them; he
thought the problem was to distribute such reserves rather than increase
them. On the other hand, in view of the fact that currertcy reserves were
merely the reflection of former deficits and that those of the United States and
Great Britain had attained their reasonable limits, Western countries, inclu-
ding Japan, would have to discover jointly the various forms that could be
assumed by a new international reserve fund, supplementing gold, the dollar
and Sterling, although not supplanting them.
A Belgian participant thought that gold reserves would have to be supple"
mented by some other similar means, if only because gold production was
increasing by only t to 1 %, whereas countries were adopting p
0
olicies to
increase national products by from 3 to 4 %, but he trusted that no new, and
untried system would be devised. He thought that the foundation should be
a sound one, and of all instruments available, the I.M.F. could be used more
systematically and constantly, e.g. for such purposes as the periodical settle-
ment of balances, rather than being considered as a last resort in difficult
situations. Such a procedure would enable the Fund to act more rapidly and
efficaciously in a deteriorating situation. ·
A number of participants mentioned the role of the I.M.F. in correcting
disequilibria and the creation of fresh liquidities as well as the part which the
Group ofTen should play in this matter; the majority agreed with the proposal
put forward by an international participant that action should be undertaken
by the Group of Ten through the I.M.F., with which, incidentally, the rap-
porteur agreed. A French and Belgian participant expressed the hope that the
increasingly large share in supplying the I.M.F. (and the I.B.R.D. and
international transactions generally) assumed by European countries would
be taken into account by giving them a larger say in the affairs of this organi-
sation. The Belgian participant added that countries with supplementary
claims on the fund ought to be given special guarantees (super gold tranches),
which would also provide an extremely simple and practical way of increasing
liquidities and reserves.
An international participant reminded him that the system of weighted
31
',
votes in force at the I.M.F. already gave the Group of Ten a majority; he
deplored the fact that all European countries had not taken advantage of the
opportunity of increasing their influence when the quotas had been raised.
recently.
A European participant, who appeared to have the backing of most other
speakers in this connection, hoped that, so far as the extent and distribution of
new liquidities were concerned, these would be created in a flexible manner as.
requirements made themselves felt, and that fresh liquidities would be distri-
buted to the various countries on the bas~s of their quotas or reserves at the
I.M.F. He als~ hoped that another method could be found in connection
with existing dollar balances so as to reassure the Americans about the
risk of large scale conversions into gold. The rapporteur mentioned, in this con-
nection, that the creation of fresh liquidities might occur, not only in the form
of credits but also in the form of an increase in owned reserves, such as
those held within the I.M.F. :
It was pointed out on several occasions during the debate that modifications
to the monetary system should not be devised purely and simply by experts
but that businessmen, and above all responsible political authorities should
take a leading part in devising a better state of affairs. A number of speakers,
who appeared to be expressing the view of the majority of participants,
considered it a matter of urgency-particularly in order to avoid unilateral
actions and half-measures which, as a Greek participant. pointed out, are
showing an alai·ming tendency to increase,-that responsible politicians at the
highest level should meet to consider these problems calmly, free from the
glare of public;ity ai;id doctrinaire considerations. An international participant
added that, once the United States and United Kingdom deficits had been
eliminated, it might be possi_ble, with the assistance of existing institutions
(I.M.F. and O.E.C.D., Group of Tt<n and Working Party 3) to reach a more
general agreement to organise a monetary system based on realistic and
stable rates of exchange, the convertibility of the major currencies and an
unchanged price of gold.
32
I
i
THE STATE OF THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
Discussion of t~is item on the agend<i; was rrepared. by: .
- a Note drawn.up by a Netherlands participant and distributed to parti-
cipants prior to the Meeting; ' .
an oral statement by an American participant.
*
* *'
'
The author of the Note began by pointing out that the grave difficulties and
differences of opinion in the Western world existed not only in respect of
methods whereby the Alliance functioned but also in regard to fundamental.
principles.
When NATO was conceived and in the first 8 to ro years of its existence
a few assumptions were generally. accepted:
r. The United States was the recognised leader of the Alliance and was
considered as the dominant source of economic. strength, the practically
exclusive source of military strength and as incarnating the ultimate and
decisive voice in matters of foreign policy.
2. European unification was promoted both on the continent of Europe and
by the United States and constituted a key element in U.S. foreign
policy while it was likewise regarded as a contribution. to Atlantic
strength and cohesion. It was astonishing that practically nobody during
those years raised the question whether this state of affairs would al-
ways be beneficial to the Alliance and in the interests of the United States.
3. It was accepted that the military efforts of the Alliance were indivisible
and that military policy was an Atlantic function.
4. There was a general concensus ofopinion that the solution of the German
problem lay in the inclusion ofWestern Germany in a process of European
integration. Germany could thus be tied to the West not only by an
orthodox alliance but through a federating Europe.
5. It was equally deplored in the United States and on the continent of
Europe that the United Kingdom was not prepared to join the efforts
for European integration in the sense of the Schuman-Monnet concept.
33
6. It was generally assumed that economic integration on the continent
was only a first phase of the federated structure which would later
exercise political functions and ultimately lead to the United States of
Europe. It was even considered that economic integration could not
survive without a rather quick political follow-up.
Over recent yea.rs, these six assumptions, .once regarded as self-evident, had
all been challenged in one way or another.
The author of the Note then proceeded to analyse the three main existing
schools of thought concerning the structure of the Atlantic Alliance,· em-
phasising that a ce~tain over-~~mplification of the approaches was involved and
that the various sections of opinion and the different policies did not neces-
sarily adhere to any one of them.
I. The first school, he said, wanted to increase the power and influence of
Europe to such an extent that it would eventually have an independent
policy in a world hitherto mainly dominated by the United States and the
Soviet Union. Without denying the necessity for co-operation with the United
States, it desired the option for independent European action in the possible
event of conflicting interests.
It considered that practically every assumption underlying NATO when it
was conceived had ceased to be valid.
From the economic point of view, the Common Market was in the process of
becoming an economic unit ranking among the great powers. From the
military point of view, this school aimed at ~ military posture capable of
producing a viable and indep~ndent force even if not one which could riyal
that of the United States.
Basically, it did not belie~e in the permanency of the U.S. commitment to
Europe and, more particularly, did not believe that the former was ready to
meet every threat to the integrity of the European continent. Because of the
nuclear development, it could not envisage a situation in which the United
States would risk its own destruction for the sake of its European allies and
this underlay its desire to see Europe with its own nuclear force. The American
nuclear monopoly was felt to condemn Europe to a state of permanent in-
feriority and there w.as particular resentment of the idea that the United
States and the Soviet Union might come to an arrangement in which the
European voice would not be heard.
It believed in a natural affinity between the members of the Common
Market and considered inclusion of the United Kingdom as undesirable, more
especially fearing that the latter would be a Trojan Horse for American
hegemony.
34
Its aim was to "Europeanize" Germany in the sense that the latter should
give priority to its European vocation.
It was against any increase in Atlantic co-operation in the economic,
political and military fields which it saw as a continuation of the United
States dominance it particularly resented.
Whether one agreed with the concept or not, it was clear and consistent
although clarification was needed on one basic point: it combined the search
for European solutions to ·certain basic problems with the idea of the supre-
macy of the nation state as opposed to European integration on the Schuman-
Monnet line. The question was how to reconcile the two concepts.
II. The second school ofthought undoubtedly comprised the great majority of
political opinion on both sides of the Atlantic which made many shades of
opinion within that school inevitable.
The school not only believed in the compatibility of European unity and
Atlantic cohesion but even considered the former as ·a pre-requisite of Atlantic
strength, in which respect it shared the views of the late President Kennedy ori
equal partnership. Without European unity, the Alliance would consist of
the United States leading a collection of individual states with national
aspirations detrimental to the Alliance.·
It strongly felt that Germany should be closely tied to the West through a
supranational structure.
It assumed that present economic integration would be paralysed or would
even break up if there was no political follow-up. k majority attaches great
importance to the closest possible relations with the United States but it
cannot conceive them without a strong unitf of Europe. A majority hoped
that the United Kingdom and other non-Common-Market countries would
join the European structure but was inclined td pursue further development
without them, strongly believing that certain faits-accomplis would ultimately
impel the United Kingdom to join. Other members of the group, however,
attached less importance to such inclusion since they feared a watering-down
of their concept of Europe, in which respect they came close to the first school
of thought already mentioned.
There were many who believed that Europe should not aim at military
independence and supported the MLF or other integration concepts. Others
again hoped that "!'Europe unefoisfaite exercera la totalittf de ses pouvoirs" which
implied its own foreign and military policy.
All of them fundamentally differed from the first approach in that they
firmly believed in a supranational Europe and held that "!'Europe des Patries"
could never achieve the goals they adhered to. Such aims, together with
35
further democratization of the European institutions, justified every further
step forward even if this only took place among the Continental European
countries.
Members of this school were generally activists who considered any slowing
down of European unification as being by definition detrimental to the
cause of the West.
III. In many respects, the small group which adhered to the third approach
was rather close to the second school but there was a difference in emphasis anc;I,
more especially, greater scepticism concerning the value per se of European
unity. This group gave absolute priority to Atlantic strength and rejected
every form or structure which might endanger co-operation between members
of the Alliance. It strqngly believed that foreign policy on the main issues and
military policy in general were Atlantic and not European function~ and
hence believed that the concept of equal partnership was wrong since it im-
plied a possibility of independence in the fields of foreign and military policy
which it regarded as an inherent danger to the Alliance.
It believed, at least fo~ an appropriate period, in strong leadership of the
Alliance by the United S,tates. and wished to see the ultimate control of nuclear
power in the hands of the President of the United States, both to ensure an
effective military policy 11nd to preserve the peace.
It had grave doubts as to the thesis that a partnership was only possible
between equals,
It rejected .the idea of politif:al unification. between the members of the
Common Market because of the fundamental differences apparent between
them in this sphere and considered that such upification would lead to erosion
of the "Atlantic" point of view of q:rtain Common Market countries. It
admitted that economic integration led i~ the lo,ng run to unification in other
fields but rejected the idea that the Common Market would be endangered
at present if there were no pursuance of political integration at the moment.
It supported every form of military co-operation and integration in the
Atlantic framework as the only valid solutions and realised that the integrity
of the West could only be maintained through the American military potential.
It recognised the importance of the German problem but considered that an
Atlantic rather than a European framework offered the necessary safeguards
against a resurgence ofGerman nationalism, ifindeed such a danger existed.
It unreservedly wished for the inclusion of the United Kingdom and other
European countries in the European structure for exactly the same reasons
which impelled the first school to reject such a concept.
It preferred a supranational Europe to "/'Europe des Patries" and a demo-
36
cratic Europe to a technocratic one. Contrary to the views of the second
school in this regard, it did not, however, believe that supranationality and
democratization as such guaranteed an "Atlantic" policy.'
In general, it did not wish for the moment to take important and spectacu-
lar steps in the field of political co-operation between continental European
countries out of a fear that this· might lead to a further weakening of Atlantic
cohesion.
For the present it would prefer to limit efforts in Europe to the economic
field, to continue the struggle for the inclusion of the United Kingdom and
other countries in the continental group and ·to deepen and develop military,
economic and political integration, co-operation and consultation in the
Alliance.
* * *
In an annex to the Note, the author.expressed the hope that discussion
would be concentrated on the consequences arising from these three schools of
thought in respect of future policy rather than on the validity of the respective
approaches.
* * *
Prior to the discussion and without wishing to opt for any one of the three
schools, an American participant put forward a certain number of consi-
derations in respect of European and Atlantic questions from the United
States angle. '
He recalled that the progress made by the·Atlantic world was based on a
profound inculcation of the lessons of history and was· inspired by the desire to
avoid the main causes ofthe two previous European tragedies, For this purpose,
post-war policy both in Europe and the United States was largely' guided by
two principles:
- the creation of a United Europe to put an end to destructive rivalry
between Nation States and to enable the peoples of Europe to conduct their
affairs through institutional arrangements which, by their, extensive nature,
met the needs of the mid-20th century and hence be in a position to contribute
the full measure of their capacities and resources to the world;
- the creation of a close tie between Western Europe and the United
States through a partnership which would enable the peoples of that area to
combine their resources so as to promote their own prosperity in an inter-
dependent world, cope with their joint defence and accomplish the great tasks
which confronted the Atlantic nations as a whole since these represented 90%
of the industrial capacity of the Free World.
Those great tasks were:
37
'
- the defence of those values to which We were attached wherever they
might be threatened in the world-and that danger, because of the aggressive
ideological and imperialist power of communism, was a permanent one;
- to provide our political protection and our economic and defence aid to
developing countries.
The Atlantic partnership as we understood it, said the speaker, implied the
total commitment of American resources for'joint defence, a defence system
comprising a joint command and the existence offorces which would eliminate
one of the major causes of the past tragedy, namely the refusal of America to
mix itself in European affairs until the two world wars had already exacted an
inconceivable toll. There was, he went on, a tendency to forget the extent of
the change which had taken place in American policy.
The North Atlantic Treaty and· subsequent arrangements represented a
vast decision on the part of the United States whereby that country turned
away from isolationism for ever and irrevocably linked its own destiny with
that of Europe.
During a long time, said the speaker, the Atlantic world had made swift
and spectacular progress along these lines:
- the economic integration of Europe through the Rome and Paris Treaties
had proceeded at a rate exceeding the most optimistic hopes and it seemed as
though Europe would ultimately extend its own boundaries by reason of the
United Kingdom's adherence to the Rome Treaty; .
- NATO developed and the defence· of the whole Atlantic area was guaran-
teed not only by a definite 'and complete commitment of the U.S. strategic
deterrent but by the institution of a joint independent command and the
inclusion of existing forces in a forward strategy;
- the Atlantic nations were in the process of creating a basis for consistent
prosperity by co-operating on the economic level through the O.E.C.D. and
other bodies and by undertaking· joint tasks through the D.A.C., etc.
The twelve years between 1950 and 1962 were the Golden Age of progress
towards European unity and the· Atlantic partnership, continued the speaker.
But, at the beginning of 1963, one of the leading European nations had
started to reverse the trend by a statement which had since been regarded as the
first salvo in a nationalistic counter-revolution.
What was the nature of this counter-revolution? In the eyes of Americans,
it seemed to be devoted to recovery offreedom of action and decision on behalf
of Nation States-a freedom of action which both Europe and the United
States had abandoned in their own commitments.
In the place of a united Europe, this counter-revolution aimed at a return
to a "fragmented" Western Europe. While it oddly employed the language of
38
unity, the counter-revolution seemed to aim at restoring that national rivalry
between European ~tates which had caused so i:nany tragedies in the past. We
were told that the alliances were perfect but it was implied that the integrated
forces and commands should be dismantled to some extent. The British should
remain on their island and the Americans return to their COI\tinent so that
Europeans might be free to settle their own affairs in their own way-in other
words, apparently, return to a situation very like that of the past. In fact, not
only should the "Yankees go home" but so should American dollars, as had
been noted the previous day:
The speaker went on to say that what was even more disturbing in this
process was not only the fact that a Europe firmly based on the supremacy of
the Nation State was to be re-established but that the principle of equality
between European states-implicit in the drive towards unity-had been
replaced by the notion that some of them:_or at least one of them-were
"more equal than others", especially in the nuclear sphere, and that any
attempt to re-establish the balance through collective action should be firmly
resisted.
This was how Europe apJJeared to America at present and while the picture
had been painted somewhat darkly so as to bring out our viewpoint, it was not
in fact unduly exaggerated, said the speaker, who emphasised the deep anxiety
which this trend aroused in him·. He recognised that there were also a certain
number of positive elemeµts: progress towards economic integration seemed
latterly to have recaptured some of its vitality and the logic which 'made
European unity essential contributed to an impetus which mightbe temporarily
slowed down or paralysed but which could not be permanently halted.
For there were very few ofus, said the speaker in conclusion, who consciously
desired to return to the bad old days when the fate of mankind depended on
rivalry, jealousy and the whims of Nation States which were not channelled
through joint plans, co-operation agreements and solemnly contracted obli-
gations. He said that we all knew that such a system was ineffective and would
never function again. It was as well to recall that history could repeat itself
and that, if it repeated itself in the nuclear age, we would all vanish in a
mushroom-cloud.
*
* *
The discussion provided many participants with an opportunity to clarify
their views on the subject matter of the introductory Note, more especially in
respect of European unity and the Atlantic Alliance. It was noteworthy that
many speakers kept strictly to the pattern of the Note by treating the two
problems in conjunction-a procedure which was logical enough given that
39
the subjects could hardly be separated since they related not to separate
problems but, as the author of.the Note had explained, to different "schools of
thought". In the same sense, a similar procedure has been adopted in' the
following summary.
Most of the speakers expressed their preference for the second school:
while asse"ting that they favoured unification of the .Six P~wer Ei.trop'e-or
even an expanded Ei.trope:-they stressed the need for close soiidarity betwe~n
Europe and the United States, frequently alluding to the conceptofpartnership.
While certain speakers emphasised the military aspect (the functioning of
NATO) in dealing with this question, it was mostly th(! political aspect which
was underlined... ·
Especially at the beginning of the discussion, many sp~akers voiced their
uneasiness over the present general situation and while most of them specifi-
cally referred to the attitude of the French Government-which was energeti-
cally defended by a speaker from that country-others sought to analyse the
evolution of the international situation. A number. of factors such as the
persistent problem of German reunification, Europe's economic progress, the
China-USSR disp,ute, the specific position of certain Western countries, the
action of young nations of the unaligned group, etc., were thus highlighted.
Certain speakers alluded to the United States action in, Vietnam which was
the subject of a statement. by an American participant outside the framework
of the meeting (see annex). (Because of the unofficial i:iature of this statement,
the various comments which followed it have not been included in this sum-
mary). .,
Most speakers apparently considered it necessary to improve the existing
situation and, for this purpose, to make.furtJ:i.er advances towards European
unity and the reinforcement o.f Atlantic solid;irity. Various concrete sug-
gestions were put forward by some participants.
*
* *
Speaking at the outset of the discussion, a German participant postulated
the problem in the following terms: "What Europe and what sort of Com-
munity do we want?" He went on to say that, while there could be no Europe
without close Franco-German friendship, it was also impossible to envisage
European security without close co-operation between the Continent and the
United States and Canada. For this reason, great importance should be at-
tached to the preamble voted by the Bundestag at the same time as the Franco-
German Treaty which situated that Treaty within the framework of the
European Community and Atlantic solidarity. The Treaty could not be allo-
wed to lead to the joint isolation of France and Germany in respect of their
40
other partners. The Atlantic Alliance should be a bridge and European in-
tegration one of its pillars. In the militarx sphere; added the speaker, in-
tegration should encompass a larger geographical area than just Europe, if
only for financial and technical reasons. Europeans neede.d the United States
but the latter also needed Europe; every member of the Alliance should feel
it was protected. . · · . . . .
A British participant said that there were those who deliberately cr~ated
doubts as to the United States determination to intervene with their nuclear
power on behalf 9f Europe (although withput believiµg t}\at such incertitude
would become sufficient to encourage the USSR to attac;k.Western Europe).
But if any such doubts existed as to the determination.of,a uuclear power to
defend a no~-nuclear power, this applied equally to any European power
claiming to guarantee its neighbours! And those who,defended a "European
solution" in this regard were the same people who proclaimed that nuclear
strength could never be shared or delegated. Even supposing this problem to
be solved, Europe would never be in a position to develop as strong a deterrent
as that which the United States had already. But, said the speaker, ifthe Alli-
ance existed because of that support, material co-operation between its mem-
bers was essential and it was for that reason that the British Government had
decided to abandon national control over its own atomic power in favour of
Europe as such.
A Netherlands participant pointed out thf!.t there was a. close relationship
between the two major long-term processes which would determine the future
role of the West throughout the world, namely the creation of a healthy ~nd
prosperous European union and the formation of a strong, coherent and lasting
Atlantic Alliance. These processes should develop gradually.through po!itic;al,
decisions as and when results where achieved. Since no chaµges could.take
place overnight, many uncertain.ties remained (and there was· no 'guarantee
against such occurrences as the French veto against the United Kingdom's
admission to the Community of the Six). If there were a close relationship
between European unity and Atlantic partnership, the speaker felt that this
would be one way of avoiding the drawbacks inherent in the gradual cha-
racter of these two processes: we should be able to expect from the Alliance
whatever Europe was unable to achieve, more especially in regard to nuclear
defence. For this purpose, all should be ready to accept the necessary discipli-
nes and this applied equally to the United Kingdom in economic matters and
to France in the military sphere.
A Greek speaker highlighted the communist danger in Europe; the conflict
within communist parties between the "Russian" and "Chinese" approaches
was far from settled and it even seemed as if the Chinese party was making
41
•
progress and might influence the positions taken up by the Soviet Union in
Europe. In the fate of this threat, the only course was to maintain the broad
lines of Atlantic policy so far followed by relying on NATO's force.
Similarly, the speaker went on, while we all wanted a dialogue with the
Eastern countries so that peace might be established on solid and profitable
foundations by gradually solving thorny problems, any such dialogue should
be instituted on as equal a basis as possible and such equality only existed in
the eyes of the USSR in as far as Europe showed itself to be at one with the
United States. In any such dialogue, the.Kremlin leaders would choose the
party they considered most powerful and respected and isolated or uncoordin-
ated initiatives in this field could only weaken the main spokesman.
A similar theme was advanced in the subsequent discussion by an Italian
participant who said that the Atlantic partnership did not imply that all the
partners had the same concrete potential in all fields since the goal to be aimed
at was rather a distribution of the considerable ·Common tasks which con-
fronted us-not only defence but also aid to underdeveloped countries
through a positive joint policy of presence, investment, technical assistance
and equitable co-operation with those peoples which alone would enable us to
make world peace a stable reality.
The follow-up and the end of the discussion provided other participants
with an opportunity to clarify their concepts of Atlantic partnership. Their
comments on this point are given at a later stage along with the other details
of their statements.
The uneasinoos occasioned by the French' position was mentioned by the
German participant quoted above at the beginning of the discussion and
dealt with in greater detail ·shortly after by a French participant. The former
said that we were disturbed when told that we should draw closer i:o the East
while drawing further away from the West. And why was a conference on the
Vietnam issue considered so urgent when, on the contrary, everything had
to be clear before European problems could be discussed? The Common
Market was not solely a tecl1nical structure but also a political achievement
designed to bring about joint European views in respect of foreign policy and de-
fence within the framework ofAtlantic solidarity and not to eliminate American
influence in Europe, especially if the intention was to replace it with Soviet
influence!
The French speaker raised a certain number of points which he considered
disturbing:
- NATO's internal cohesion was weakened by such steps as the recent
withdrawal of a part of French naval forces;
- the Common Market had had some success but the political follow-up
42
:/
had not yet taken place and everything was happening as though its sole
purpose was to add to the international weight ofa single country, i.e. France;
- France's diplomatic recognition of communist China, even if thought to
be necessary, had been unilaterally given with no preliminary co-ordination;
- France had adopted a firm stand. in favour of neutralization of Vietnam
although one of its allies was militarily committed there. ·
The speaker thought that what was· still more serious was France's new
approach to German re-unification which had hitherto been regarded as a
basic objective of the Western world as such, an approach which led Germany
to think that ifit subscribed to the idea of a "European Europe", freed as far as
possible from the presence of American forces on the Continent, then new
horizons would be opened up through discussion with Russia. It was as if the
Germans were being offered a deal: "Break away from the United States, make
an independent Europe and you will acquire reunification through discus-
sion with the USSR".
All these facts combined, the speaker concluded, represented a decline in
Atlantic solidarity and a threat to its unity. The idea of the "Free World"
was less keen than a few years ago. The restoration of the notion of nationa-
lism had come into conflict with the notion of communities.
Along similar lines, an Italian speaker emphasised the danger of confusion
arising from the determination to obtain a joint Europeah policy and the
ever-increasing reliance on national policies.
A Norwegian participant stressed the unanimous agreement in his country
between Government and Opposition in favour of the third school of thought
outlined in the introductory Note. ·
Defending his Government's policy, a French speaker called on the meeting
to guard against three temptations: ·
- to say, "Nothing can be clone with France, it's a bad spell to be ·got
through, perhaps other political teams later on will enable us to achieve what
we can't achieve just now";
- to say something even more dangerous, namely, "Since we can't do
something with France, let's do it without France or even against France".
France was of such consequence, said the speaker, that any structure of the
kind would be artificial, doomed to failure and harmful to future relationships.
Moreover France could find alternative solutions;
- the third temptation was to say, "Everything's finished, no Europe is
possible, one can't reach agreement with France and so we'll do nothing at all".
European progress and the maintenance of Atlantic cohesion were possible
so long as allowance was made for the existing situation. For his own part, the
speaker suggested various bases for practical progress:
43
On the European level, the Common Market had made giant strides and,
without pausing for theoretical discussions, further progress could be made in
co-ordinating fiscal systems, social burdens, foreign investments, etc., apart
from the merging of executive bodies to which France had already agreed.
Many things could still be done, said the speaker, by moving gradually ahead
without an agreement on any supranational institution. France was not
opposed to the building of Europe but to a certain concept of political Europe·
That was why it had asked that the next Venice Conference be postponed
and not cancelled because it had to be carefully prepared, there must be no
improvisation which would lead to disagreement harmful to Europe-such as
that already displayed towards the "Fouchet Plan".
In regard to Europe's position vis-a-vis the United States, the speaker
stressed that there was no thought of throwing the Americans out of Europe
but that, conversely, it should not be assumed that Europe could not exist
without the United States.
In the course of the subsequent discussion, an Italian speaker said that he
did not understand the French position very well. If the French Government's
insistence on "European Europe" meant that Europe should recognise its own
responsibilities, all well and good; perhaps that position was equally ac-
ceptable ifit was France's intention to emphasise that America should recognise
Europe's importance to a greater extent and agree to a broader discussion of
the international situation. But the rejection of NATO as a permanent organi-
zation of the Alliance and such activities as the creation of an independent
strike force were no longer understandable. The present danger lay not in an
encirclement of France, an inconceivable event, but rather in an encirclement
of the Western world by the rest of the world which could only be met by a
joint policy of presence, unity, aid and trade {and "credibility", the current
term for atomic prestige). None of the real advances already made should lead
us to forget that, unless there was agreement on this basic point, no progress in
respect of Europe could be made in either the immediate or distant future:
Otherwise, the danger of a double game would be created, the danger of
division between European countries linked with the United States and one
country wishing to act alone with the East. This was an exceedingly dangerous
situation, concluded the speaker who wondered how such a political approach
could be in France's interests.
Another Italian participant expressed the hope that some clarification
might be forthcoming taking the French position as an established fact. The
hopes placed in a resumption of the construction of Europe seemed to be
postponed to some future date which was apparently related to a new phase in
the evolution of European and Atlantic relations. He considered it would be
44
desirable to re-open the dialogue on a broader basis, including the EFTA
countries. The E.E.C. should not constitute a frontier between the Six and the
other states of the Atlantic community, more especially as far as defence and
policy was concerned.
In this regard, the speaker concurred with a British participant who had
just pointed out that the countries of the European Free Trade Association
(EFTA), not excluding the United Kingdo111, were just as much a part of
Europe as the six Common Market countries and who had voiced the hope
that the two would grow steadily closer together; The question which then arose
was, "What sort of political Europe can be created?''. The British speaker
considered that much time had been lost in discussion of supranational in-
stitutions which he argued were not appropriate and were even harmful
unless an adequate agreement on the political problems already existed. At
this point there were many disagreements in Europe and even within the
E.E.C., such as the relations with the U.S.S.R, Another problem was that of
certain responsibilities outside Europe which were borne by the United
States and Great Britain not shared by other European countries and which
involved the security and prosperity of Europe, whether in the Persian Gulf,
Malaysia or Vietnam. The time had come, said the speaker, to take account of
this in NATO, more particularly in regard to the sharing of defence costs. In the
political and economic spheres, he concluded, Europe might develop a separate
identity but it was undeniable that this was no alternative to our joint security.
Referring to the introductory Note, an international participant took the
view that any form of European union was compatible with the Atlantic
Alliance and NATO so long as it was conceived in a political spirit of soli-
darity and close cooperation with the other allies and espi;cially the United
States. There was no objection, he said to a united Europe having its own
foreign or defence policy so long as it remained in NATO as was already the
case for several potential regional groupings. Such regroupment would rather
help to strengthen the Alliance. But it was naturally essential that political
determination should remain and that the ultimate organization of joint
defence should be left to NATO.
Current discussion of the different European models, of Europe's independ-
ence, seemed somewhat premature, he added, to the point that one sometimes
wondered "what all the fuss was about". But such discussion was a political
reality in itself. The main danger lay in the discontent which would result
from a failure of attempts to achieve union and which might have repercus-
sions on the Alliance. It was therefore desirable from the NATO viewpoint
that "Europe should be built without further ado" rather than that there
should be a return to nationalism. The speaker concluded by voicing his per-
45
I
sonal preference for a federal democratic Europe, as far-reaching as possible,
linked to the United States by the Atlantic Alliance.
An American participant stressed the act of faith implicit in his country's
support for a united Europe from the outset. Such faith had been justified by·
the Europeans themselves, especially in their refusal to accept General de
Gaulle's leadership which was erected on purely national bases. The Common
Market, this speaker said, demonstrated the possibilities of union and of co-
operation with the United States and the final act would be the outcome rather
than the cause of growing unity in the political and military spheres. Nonethe-
less, too much time should not be lost since the forces of disruption were
also at work, principally. through the internal action of communist parties and
the external action of the U.S.S.R. In this connection, the speaker recognised
that the United States itself could .exercise a certain degree of c~ntrifugal
force (particularly through their special relationships with the United
Kingdom and Germany). Europe must unite, he said, particularly in order to
present a strong front to a united Russia and thereby exercise a power of
attraction in respect of the East bloc countries as well as to be able to con-
centrate its efforts on the peaceful tasks of assisting underdeveloped countries.
Finally, such union could in several ways facilitate the reunification ofGermany:
those who were apprehensive of the addition of 18 million Germans to 50
million other Germans would be less disturbed by the addition of those 18
million to 200 million Europeans or by the absorption of the German army in
a European army. And if Germany, having become ready to be part of Europe,
were discouraged from participating it would be one of the greatest disasters
of our time.
The speaker likewise reminded his audience that the United States had
already indicated its willingness to review its position in regard to the nuclear
question if Europe succeeded in uniting and that the Secretary of State, Mr.
Rusk, had only recently said that his country desired tQ see Europe deal as an
entity with NATO.
Speaking for the second time, a French participant who had spoken at the
beginning of the meeting, recommended various concrete orientations. Like
the above-mentioned international participant, he pointed out that Europe
felt a need to exercise a political influence commensurate with its economic
development and that most Europeans wished neither to be satellites of the
Americans nor to constitute an independent entity of the "third force" kind.
This had given rise to the concept of Europe as an equal partner of the United
States: even if equality of resources was not achieved, it would run counter to
Europe's impulse towards unity to refuse it equality of rights.
Allowing for the realities referred to by another French participant, what,
46
asked the speaker, could we do to move forward and put an end to the present
disintegration of Europe? First of all, he replied, it was necessary to safeguard
the key elements of the European community institutions whic;h had proved
their effectiveness over recent years. But, at a given point, it would also be
necessary to undertake political action as a follow-up to economic action. And
while one might hope that the postponed Venice Conference would lead to
conclusions, it was as well to remember that the basic problem was that of
relations between Europe and the United States and it was impossible to be
too firm concerning the maintenance of such solidarity.
On its side, either Europe would become a community or it would be no
more than an alliance like so many others, i.e. precarious, revocable and ca-
pable of self-destruction.
A Netherlands participant who said he favoured the second of the schools
described in the introductory Note emphasised that his country was strongly
desirous of seeing an open Europe with no protectionist barriers and with
new ties of co-operation with the Atlantic world. At the same time, he said,
it was erroneous to say that it was necessary to develop economic integration
first and wait and see whether it was possible gradually to integrate our foreign
policies. The speaker summed up his views by means of five postulates:
- European integration was continuing and increasingly implied joint
decisions;
- political discussions between the Six were fruitful and even essential,
allowing for existing divergencies, but, while it might not be possible for the
United Kingdom to participate in such discussions in the near future, it was
to be hoped that such participation would take place at a later stage;
- the goals were a federal structure for Europe in partnership with the
United States;
- the European community should be open and based on a liberal economic
approach;
- the Europe of the Six was not the Europe of the future. We should extend
its bases and, in particular, the EFTA countries should be welcomed if they
accepted the principles of existing treaties. In this connection, the speaker
expressed the hope that the Labour Party or the Conservative Party in Great
Britain-or, better still, both together-would publish a statement of intention
proclaiming that, notwithstanding the French rejection, Great Britain con-
tinued to believe that its future would be as an integral part of Europe, both
politically and economically.
Replying forthwith to this latter point, a British speaker considered that any
such commitment should not imply a weakening of Atlantic ties. Additionally,
the moment should be carefully chosen and should call for a positive reaction
47
l
,!
''I
.,
i
l
i
i
i
;
!I
I
l
,I
since public opinion in the United Kingdom could not accept another rebuff
in this field.
(The same point was taken up towards the end of the discussion by a French
participant and another British participant and their comments are summaris-
ed at a later point).
Continuing his statement, the above-mentioned British speaker analy~ed
the past and present situation of NATO in the face of the international situa-
tion. He observed that it was not enough to criticise a single country in seeking
solutions to the problems confronting the organization. He recalled that when
NATO came into being there was a military tlireat within Europe itself but,
over the last decade, it was not within Europe that the most serious or im-
mediate danger lay. At the present time it was to be found in South East Asia
but it might likewise arise in Africa or elsewhere before long. Moreover, there
was perhaps a tendency in the West to over-simplify current problems by
dividing the world between that part dominated by communism and the
remainder. There were, in fact, however, other hostile forces which some of us
had to confront. It was high time, therefore, that the Western powers coordi-
nated their policies in the various parts of the globe and the speaker ended by
citing various examples in support of his argument.
An Italian participant already quoted said that he, too, was in favour of a
united and democratic Europe closely linked to the United States and in-
cluding Great B,ritain. It should further be capable in due course of rallying
Spain and even the East. bloc countries themselves, .The speaker raised a
series of questions:
Did any communist danger still exist? There was a t!!ndency in certain
sectors to think that the dispute between China. and the USSR had relegated
any such danger to the past but this view was not shared by the speaker who, on
the contrary, believed that that conflict involved increased risks of outbidding.
Did any danger of war still exist? Here again, the speaker felt that the
balance of terror had not automatically excluded the danger of total war and
that, in addition, the situation was propitious to the outbreak of limited con-
flicts at various points of the globe, more especially in view of the increased
number of centres of power and ambition represented by the new countries.
In the face of this increasingly complicated over-all situation, the speaker
said, a united Europe was necessary along with a "united United States". It
was possible that, in this field, America did not adequately recognise the
implications of certain situations (e.g. Suez) as far as its European allies were
concerned. It should guard against a certain feeling of self-sufficiency created
by its own power and associate its allies more closely with its own decisions.
Speaking a second time, the American participant who had initiated the
48
discussion emphasised his country's anxiety in the face of various develop-
ments-or, in a certain sense, the lack of development-which had taken
place in Europe over recent years and speculated as to whether the French
position as outlined by a participant from that country might not be sum-
marized as: "Don't behave towards France as France behaves towards you".
The speaker stressed that his country had never apprehended that a united
Europe would separate itself from America. What the United States was
afraid of, he said, was a fragmented Europe, reverting to the bad habits of the
past with the principle of equality replaced by rivalry and competition be-
tween the nations for individual advantages, which would make any Atlantic
partnership very difficult. This return to the pursuance of national and tem-
porary advantages represented a very alarming trend which highlighted the
need for mutual consultation. True enough, one and all could be criticised in
this respect and the United States itself had perhaps failed to set up0
the neces-
sary machinery for consultation; but it had matle a consistent effort along such
lines as witness not only certain bilateral discussions (e.g. with the British
Government on the subject of Africa) but also exchanges of views which had
only recently taken place within NATO. It should further be pointed out,
said the speaker, that the experience of the United States in regard to con-
sultations had not always proved either highly encouraging or highly pro-
ductive. Even if we did not always .do what was required for our European
friends, he concluded, we were .nonetheless determined to do so.
*
* *
At this point in the discussion, the Chairman suggested that comments be
concentrated on the negotiations between the six countries for political union
and the organization of nuclear defence so as not merely to take note ·of an
agreement on basic concepts but also to highlight possible divergences con-
cerning the methods required to reach our objectives.
The first statements during this session reverted to the problem of joint
defence from the viewpoint of the distribution of the burdens between the
allies which had already been raised by a British participant supported by an
American participant who stressed his country's determination to resist com-
munism throughout the world.
The international participant (the author of the introductory Note for the
first part of the agenda) emphasised the degree to which it was normal that the
question of distribution of burdens should be raised by the United States and
the United Kingdom since these countries had difficulties with their balance
of payments. He also recalled that in 1961 NATO had set up a group ofex-
49
I
I
i!
1:
,,,
I
!
I
I ~1
'I
'l
iiI
1
I
I
:11
:
··1
1!
II
perts to examine the problems of balance of payments resulting from the joint
military effort. That group's work could usefully be taken up by Working
Party No. 3. .
In this connection, a German participant pointed out that an improved
distribution of responsibilities could only be achieved by joint deliberations in
which one and all took part. Two complementary sides of the same coin were
involved: no country could take a decision by itself and expect its partners to
support the consequences but, conversely, no country could demand to parti-
cipate in drawing up a joint policy ~fit intended to dodge the financial burdens
such a policy implied. Indicating his agreement with the two previous speakers,
the British participant already cited stressed this interdependence and said
that it was exceedingly difficult to persuade public opinion in his country to
accept an increase in its burdens in Germany-and hence an increase in its
deficit-unless the latter country concurrently made an increased effort-all
the more so, he repeated, since his country's efforts in Malaysia and the Persian
Gulf were being made on behalf of the free world as a whole.
Reverting to the position of the French government, the same speaker sug-
gested two important spheres of NATO strategy in which France could co-
operate without thereby forfeiting any of its particular doctrines, namely
examination of allied forces deployed in Europe, on the one hand, and, on the
other, in consultation with the "non-nuclear" allies and in the framework of
NATO, examination of the best use which could be made of atomic power for
joint defence.
A Turkish participant put forward the suggestion that certain problems
relating to nuclear weapons might become less acute in the course of time
because the Increasingly prohibitive cost of nuclear equipment might set a
limit to the ambitions of all concerned. Expressing his concurrence with the
two previous speakers as to the necessity of preserving existing institutions
without sterile discussion, this participant likewise urged that NATO should
not become hypnotised by current difficulties but should revive the conclusions
embodied earlier in the "report of the three wise men" which contained a
whole series of excellent suggestions designed to inject fresh vigour into the
organization.
At this point in the discussion, various American participants reverted to
their country's position in the Atlantic Alliance. One of them asked whether
sufficient recognition had been given to the extraordinary innovation rep-
resented by America's commitment to NATO and the extent of his country's
subsequent strategic effort. In the circumstances, he said, it was difficult to
want the Americans to defend Europe and to get out of it. In this context, it
was worthwhile recalling that the United States itself was the object of ap-
50
proaches by the Russians who held out as a lure the considerable advantages
which America would obtain by suppressing their military bases, withdrawing
from NATO and agreeing to the denuclearization of Europe. It might be
asked, added this speaker, how the free world would gain from seeing each
nation go its own way with its own nuclear weapons! And, together with
another American, he asked, "What does France expect from the United
States?".
Going beyond the limits of this discussion, another American participant
stressed the part played by ordinary people (and the scientists) in the evolution
of the modern world. Two notions, he said, were unrealistic: the idea existing
in Europe that the deployment of American strength in the world was eternal
and the idea existing in America that Europe would not ultimately demand
absolute equality with America in the nuclear field. The time had perhaps
come for the United States, therefore, to offer once again to Europe, on con-
dition that it united, the equal partnership outlined by President Kennedy.
A great idea had perhaps more chances ofsucceeding at the present time than
the innumerable small speculations arising from the situation in a given
country.
Apart from the above ideas concerning the Atlantic Alliance, current
prospects in Europe were discussed at this stage by several speakers. While
stating that he adhered to the second school, an Italian participant (sup-
ported by several other speakers) expressed his doubts as to the notion that the
adjournment of the Venice Conference was designed to ensure its complete
success at a later stage thanks to more thorough preparation. He believed that
such a conference could not succeed with conclusions reached in advance and
preliminaries already defined. What was needed was confidence in the partner
and this did not seem to exist nor would it be promoted by ultimatums.
Moreover, the Europe to be created should be democratic with full par-
liamentary control, failing which there would be no purpose in creating it.
Recalling his country's consistent line towards both the United States and
Canada and a democratic federal Europe, a Netherlands participant stressed
the essential part which should be played by both England and France in
creating European unity. Any nationalism was dangerous and that was why
the Netherlands was pleased with the ties of friendship established between
France and Germany; but he strongly emphasised that the current danger lay
in stopping the building of Europe. Existing achievements could not be allow-
ed to suffer from the current political deterioration. If the desire for or the
possibility of political integration was lacking, progress could still be main-
tained, e.g. in a common agricultural policy, customs dues, etc. On the other
hand, progress towards political union required a certain identity between
51
•
national policies which did not at present exist. We should therefore move
cautiously in this sphere. But inactivity was hard to endure, especially for the
young and hence, the speaker concluded, the Netherlands was always prepared
to move forward in concert wit its five partners but on condition that this did
not threaten Atlantic solidarity and allowed for the fact that the Europe of the
Six did not constitute ''.Europe". .
The same participant likewise emphasised the consistent support which the
United States had given since the war to its allies in Europe-an attitude which
was in contrast with that post 1g18-and he regretted, that America was sub-
ject to so much criticism, sometimes· to the extent, or so it seemed, of wishing to
see it quit the Continent. . .
An American participant put forward some suggestions which he considered
might inject some drive into the Alliance without thereby coming into conflict
with the national feelings expressed by the French Government. He said that
it was essential to evolve towards a sort of free world community without
thereby shifting away from the principle of sovereignties. There was already
one institution which had proved itself and which met these requirements-the
O.E.C.D. It could serve as a rallying point for all innovating ideas connected
with aid to development, full employment, expansion of trade, foreign in-
vestments, East-West trade, etc. Heads of State could meet. within its frame
work and a "Committee of Wise Men" without supranational powers might
be appointed. The O.E.C.D. might likewise be supplemented by an advisory
parliamentary body.
Additionally, the West could act jointly, first for the reconciliation of
Germany with Poland and then of the West as a whole with part of Eastern
Europe which might even have a favou~able effect on the USSR, given that
country's difficulties with China, and thereby open the way to German reuni- .
fication. This required that specific actions be undertaken, e.g. an increase in
trade (by the United States as well as the others) and cultural relations, which
would represent modest but real stages towards greater liberalization.
A British participant who said he belonged to the third school of thought
expressed the hope that the Atlantic Alliance would move forward towards
nuclear integration in a form to be discussed and, if need be, doing without
French participation. The speaker did not wish to underestimate the im-
portance of the geographical position of France in any ground war using con-
ventional weapons but he excluded any such possibility in the nuclear era
and this also applied to the possibility of a conventional war after an initial
exchange of nuclear hostilities. The speaker did not believe in these possibili-
ties. If, therefore, nuclear integration came about, France would have no
alternative but to join in or remain the only power which foresaw an egotisti-
52
cal national solution. In this way, two birds would be killed with one stone in
that the Alliance would acquire structural unity and Great Britain would also
perhaps be assisted to enter the Common Market. In the speaker's opinion, the
1963 French veto was motivated by the unduly close links between Great
Britain and the United States in the field of defence (the finnous Trojan
Horse). If this reason were to be eliminated, France would hence forward
be in a minority and could not impose a veto and, moreover, the British
Government would be encouraged to agree to abandon its so;vereignty in other
fields as well. This, however, implied: .,
- as far as Great Britain was concerned, the surrender. of a particular
nuclear status in E~rope for the sake of a status of equality (which the present
Government seemed inclined to accept);
- as far as Germany was concerned, an option after the forthcoming elec-
tions between this solution and the French solution in the field of defence
since failure to choose would amount to choosing France; .
- as far as the United States was concerned, a firm leadership whicl;i had
been somewhat lacking in Europe over the last six months since their preoc~
cupations seemed to lie more in Asia.
A Swedish participant stressed that his country had no wish to be isolated
but wanted to be treated as an associate in European policy and that it was
ready to accept the burdens this implied. Since 1962, he observed, much
progress had b,een made, especially in regard to economic growth and in-
creased trade, both as far as the EEC was concerned and in respect of EFTA.
True, paths had been blocked but there were still fields in which advances were
possible and, for his part,.the speaker saw three such fields:
- the Kennedy Round should be able to demonstrate the possibility of a·
"practical partnership";
- the EEC and EFTA could continue to progress on present lines; "·
- even outside the Kennedy Round, it should be possible to bring the EEC
and EFTA closer together especially if, as a Netherlands participant had
stated, the latter adopted a liberal outside approach.
A French participant already quoted spoke again in defence of his Govern-
ment's position and replied to the observations made on this subject by various
speakers. He began by stressing that there was no question of throwing the
Americans out of Europe. The Americans should play their part but without
exceeding it. He went on to say that it would be desirable to put an end to the
over-easy trial of French "nationalism", the "policy of grandeur" and the
"dissembling" of French diplomacy and admit that reservations could be ex-
pressed in the free world or opinions differing from those of the majority.
Positive criticisms were useful to everybody. What was especially needed was to
53
I
i
1\
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
..
bear in mind the change which had taken place in Europe over the last 20
years and which made it a major partner. This problem was psychological.
Today, Europe, like the whole world, needed consideration and dignity and
this was especially true of France. This change had led France to practice a
different policy, a new policy, but, the speaker pointed out, Great Britain
itself had already adopted positions in the past which could be regarded as
midway between those of the Alliance an,d those of the U.S.S.R. (e.g. in
regard to the Rapacki Plan and even Berlin).
The essential thing was to try and reduc'e the margin of disagreement by
going beyond doctrinal and dogmatic discussions, said the speaker, who, for
his own part, considered that four points might be borne in mind:
- what united us was stronger than what divided us;
- relations between Europe ancl the United States should be considered not
only in terms of the Alliance's interests in Europe but also on a worldwide level
(e.g. the Congo, South-East Asia, Latin America) and purely regional strate-
gies should be avoided;
- the French did not wish to destroy the Atlantic Alliance so long as any
threat existed; what we wanted was to improve, transform and modernise
whatever could be;
- an economic Europe existed which consisted of six countries because, at a
certain stage,· a seventh had not. wished to participate. It should be strength-
ened and France had done its part by putting forward concrete proposals.
But the speaker also cited various other points which should not be over-
looked: ' "
- in regard to the building of political Europe, he said, the only constructive
proposal for political union had come from France (the "Fouchet Plan")
and nobody had proposed anything else concrete. This plan was undoubtedly
insufficient and imperfect but it represented an improvement over the earlit>.r
situation;
- the building of Europe was based not only on political institutions but
also on a concept of Europe's relations with the United States which were the
subject of pronounced disagreement.
In regard to institutions, the speaker, answering an Netherlands partici-
pant quoted above, said he considered that there was a contradiction involved
in simultaneously demanding a supranational organization and Great Brit-
ain's entry into such an organization since that country would not soon accept
it. Additionally-and here the speaker was answering an Italian participant-
there was not only the Rome Treaty; consideration should also be given to
the Franco-German Treaty which contained the seeds of a possible Europe.
In regard to the European Parliament, said the speaker, France was not oppos-
54
ed to an extension of its powers; the problem lay in how it would be elected
because there was a danger of finding that it comprised 25 to 30% of
communists.
.The speaker went on to say that he was optimistic concerning the ultimate
creation of an institutionalized Europe because of the possibility of proceeding
by stages and making compromises. On the other hand, he emphasised that the
most serious disagreement concerned its position in relation to the United
States, especially in respect of defence. It would be a heavy responsibility to
give up all hope of European defence guaranteed by Europeans themselves.
A new balance should be sought in the Alliance by ensuring that those who
shared. the supreme risk should also participate in the supreme responsibilities
since it was inconceivable that a single great ally should decide on everything
and carry the others in its train without asking their.advice. Why cling to an
outmoded atomic monopoly? It was in this regard, said the speaker, that we
expected something from the Americans. How could there be an equal part-
nership while one member retained atomic leadership? On the other hand, if
the Americans were to change their relationship with the Europeans, it would·
be possible to do a great many things, with the French among others, since the
latter had no systematic desire to reject or sabotage. But it was important to
draw back from such dubious and ineffective combinations as the M.L.F.
In regard to the "Nation State" concept, the speaker argued that Europe
would only exist when a transfer took place on the basis of the old national
feeling towards a national European feeling.
The foregoing statement impelled a number of participants either to clarify
certain passages in their own earlier declarations or to contest certain of the
views just put forward. An American participant again recalled that his coun-
try had stated its readiness to review its position on the nuclear question once
Europe was united. An Italian participant considered that a European parlia-
ment of the Six elected by universal suffrage would not contain more than
15% of communists (10% ifGreat Britain and Scandinavia joined). A Nether"
lands participant pointed out that while he favoured a supranational Europe
over the long run, this also applied to Great Britain, without whom co-
operation would have to continue between the Six. Another Netherlands
participant already quoted recalled that on 23 April 1963 during the last
Conference of the Six which had almost led to a political treaty, the only
opposition came from France which refused, even in the future, to consider
that it might one day be possible to achieve supranational unity, notwith-
standing the fact that Great Britain, which had been kept informed, was
ready to accept such a prospect. A German participant, in turn, put forward
various observations:
55
- the Rome Treaty expressly provided for a liberal external policy on the part
of the Community;
- what were the changes in behaviour (and in the "nuclear structure")
which the French Government expected from its American allies? A three-
power "Troika"?
- the Franco-German Treaty contained no innovation which might form the
"seed" of a broader Europe; the only thing specified therein was that regular
consultations should take place and these already existed in the Europe of
Six and in W.E.U.; . . .
General de Gaulle had expressly stated that any. ~olution of the German
problem should include a solution of the problem of German rearmament.
The speaker said that he preferred the statements by the British Prime
Minister who considered that a special solution for a single country was
inconceivable and that any solution should also cover nuclear weapons
deployed in a given region-all of which was more reassuring from the
viewpoint of German security than the French declarations.
Concerning the changes referred to by the above-mentioned French speaker,
an American participant took the view that, apart from the recovery of Europe,
the problems were still the same while fresh problems had simultaneously
arisen (the Middle East, the Far East, Africa); What was to be apprehended,
he said, was that the present atmosphere of defiance and suspicion might lead
the Western world to drift, even though the U.S.S.R. had not yet chosen
between a policy of co-existence and its far left tendencies.
The French speaker took the floor again to reply to certain comments and
clarify his thought and enlarged on several points. Neither the spirit nor the
foundations of the Alliance were being called into question, he repeated. And
France did not consider there was any present possibility of its overturning
alliances as an Italian participant had suggested. What France hoped to see
was the reorganization of certain structures so as to allow for progress made, a
reorganization which should cover not merely the nuclear sector but also the
conventional sector. Additionally, he repeated, the present fault of the NATO
pact was that it was essentially regional and its field of application should be
extended. As to the Franco-German Treaty, it could provide a useful basis if
applied somewhat more thoroughly in regard to co-ordination. The problem
of German reunification was doubtless the most difficult to solve and it would be
well to consider it with the maximum degree of realism and to recognise that
the key lay somewhere rather than somewhere else.
The speaker concluded by arguing that Great Britain's and the United
States' place naturally lay in the Atlantic entity. For the present, he said, the
essential thing was to build a continental Europe which might one day perhaps
56
be open to the United Kingdom. Moreover, such a continental Europe,
with its own concerns and responsibilities should be a pillar of the Alliance.
The United States' place was that of a partner separated by an ocean from its
allies which should take account of Europe just as Europe, naturally, should
take account of the United S.tates.
* * *
At the begiiming of the Su~day morning session, the author of the intro-
ductory Note put forward various observations on the earlfer discussions. He
observed that, while the discussions of the first item on the agenda had covered
both concepts and lines c:if practical action, disc~ssion of the. second item had
been mainly concentrated o~ principles and in~ufficient attention had been
paid-even if there was a danger of serio~s disagreements emerging-to the
practical steps required in the years immediately ahead. .
Methods were important, said the speaker, since if the methods were bad
the ultimate objectives of the Alliance might be endangered. For instance,
if it were contended that a certain type of European union was a pre-condition
of Atlantic partnership, as we saw it, and if such union was not forthwith
achieved, then a void would have to be recognised. The speaker alluded to the
concept of the M.L.F. which, while it allowed for the .unequal balance of
power existing between the United States and Europe, nonetheless took ac-
count of the changes which had taken place in relations between Western
countries. Rejection of the M.L.F., because it ~as no~ based on the unrealistic
concept of perfect equality, was equivalent t~ creating that void which the
speaker apprehended. Similarly, while it might be readily admitted that
there could be ~o perfect economic integration of Europe without poli,tical
unity, it was dangerous to assert that the Common Market would be jeop.ard-
ised unless such union were immediately attained in a specific form since this
would lead to denying any value to the successes obtained over recent years
by the Common Market, even though the Governments of its member coun-
tries disagreed strongly over certain questions of defence and foreign policy.
Another example: it was said that Great Britain should belong to the European
Economic Community, but, without waiting for that country's entry, that it
was important to develop political conversations within the Brussels institu-
tions. Such reasoning might lead to the conclusion that no country could
participate in such discussions unless it were a member of the Common
Market. This, however, meant discounting the situation as it really was,
particularly the fact that political union had to be discussed solely at govern-
mental level. This amounted to overlooking the only reason for the British
Government's absence, namely the veto of a single country. The speaker
57
•
concluded by saying that it would be better to concentrate on concrete pro-
blems arising in 1965 and 1966, and to avoid the confusion which would be
inevitable if attention were paid solely to the question, of concepts.
In the discussion following on this statement, most of the speakers sought to
highlight the practical aspects of current problems, even when their state-
ments were limited to analysing situations and stressing the objectives to be
aimed at. After various statements of this kind, an international participant
put forward a· certain number of suggestions which gave rise to numerous
questions and comments, sometimes accompanied by counter-proposals.
An American participant advanced the idea that the basic objective of the
arrangements to be instituted during the years ahead should be to induce
those who possessed the power to_ recognise their responsibilities so as to use
that power constructively. This applied to the USSR justifying all the pressure
that we had to maintain on that country. But it also applied, in a different way,
to the United States. The most prevalent fear was that the latter would retire
into isolation, but he thought that a much greater danger was that they
might give proof of excessive nationalism and pursue an audacious policy
inspired by its own exasperation. The speaker concluded, however, by saying
that it was remarkable how the younger generation of Americans were aspiring
to undertake constructive tasks and that they ought to be given the opportunity
of putting their ideals into practice, while at the same time defending Western
civilisation, instead of being provided with purely economic horizons.
A British speaker sought to disspate certain illusio_ns which, he considered,
were becoming evident.
The first consisted of thinking that, because or'the change in the economic
equilibrium between the United States and its allies which had occurred over
the last ten years, the NATO concept was necessarily outdated. A joint
strategy, or an integrated command, was still needed, inside but also outside
the area covered by the Treaty (especially in the Indian Ocean and the Far
East).
The second mistake consisted of thinking that Europe could defend itself
in the foreseeable future without United States assistance. This was not true
on a world-wide level, nor even at European level.
The third mistake consisted of considering American investments strictly
from the financial angle without allowing for the implicit introduction of
techniques and "know-how".
The fourth point concerned relations between Great Britain and the Euro-
pean Economic Community. It should be clear that the United Kingdom
wanted to join along with the EFTA countries, but that it could not confront
a third check. The important thing, therefore, was to look ahead and not to
58
revive old quarrels, and for this purpose, it was less vital to consider the
Rome Treaty as such than the important structures erected on the basis of
that treaty. Did we all have the same ideas in regard to economic policy? If,
as could be hoped, the Community wished to pursue a liberal policy, then a
greater degree of affinity than was implicit in the Treaty as such would be-
come apparent, and the difficulties would be reduced.
The speaker raised one final point: in the years ahead, we would have to
solve a number of political and military problems together. If we succeeded
in agreeing on these, signing of the Rome Treaty by the United Kingdom
would become of secondary importance and the difficulties would vanish.
On the other hand, if no such agreement could be reached, any formal ar-
rangement would be meaningless, and Europe's position would indeed be
very serious.
Incidentally emphasising the benefit which his country derived from its
proximity to the United States and the investments which that country made
there, along with the advantages of European immigration in Canada, a
Canadian participant contended that if the United Kingdom participated fo.
or was closely associated with the Common Market, Canada would also
profit, but only if the Community was as liberal as possible.
An American participant, who said he favoured the third school of thought
described in the introductory Note, expressed the hope that, in face of the
difficulties highlighted during the previous day's discussions, the Alliance
would adopt a global attitude towards major problems rather than concern
itself primarily with uniting Europe and then drawing up arrangements
between a united Europe and the United States. In this connection, the
speaker bitterly regretted that the proposals put forward in Paris in
January 1962 for an executive, an advisory assembly and a high court ofjustice
for the Alliance had not been taken up by any government, including his own.
There was an undue trend to think of partnership as bein-g like a pair of
equal weights, he said, whereas it would be better to rely on the federal
principle, on the American legal concept of senior and junior partners which·
included methods for settling differences between both parties.
Addressing the meeting again, a "European" participant voiced a number of
criticisms of the third concept outlined in the introductory Note, particularly
in regard to the "Atlantic" nature of foreign and military policies and its
rejection of the concept of equal partnership. The speaker explained that the
"Europeans" considered their continent should arrive at a single concept in
the political and military spheres and that some degree of unity in those
spheres should be achieved forthwith or in the very near future if economic
integration was to make progress. Such unification would have to be uncondi-
59
tional: Europe's continued membership in the Atliantic Alliance should not
be raised in advance, said the speaker, who, however, expressed his profound
conviction that Europe would remain within the Alliance in view of the many
ties linking the two continents. Po.litical unity might begin on a very modest
scale and on the basis of various projects, even limited ones, which had been
put forward, but it should very rapidly lead to a Federal structure. Referring
to views previously advanced by a French participant, the speaker said that
there could be. no question of waiting ten or twenty years since this would
mean that we were not equipped to establish political unity representing a
counter-balance. to the power of the United States and leading to a genuine
partnership. He added that England was an integral part of Europe and that
sooner or later it would necessarily join the Six and the sooner the better.
Nonetheless, while this might be confronted with a "French obstacle" there
was also a "British obstacle", as demonstrated by a recent declaration by that
country's Prime Minister treating such adherence as a long-term objective.
The speaker expressed the hope that Great Britain would indicate its readiness
to accept all .the implications of European unity, not only economic but also
political, so as to be able to enter the Common Market.
This statement led to a question from a Turkish participant, who asked the
previous speaker whether by rejecting any pre-condition to European unity,
he implied that .there was a possible contradiction between achievement of
European unity and preservation of the Atlantic Allian~e, a contradiction
which he personally did not believe in.
A British participant, referring both to the foregoing statement and the
earlier comments by another British speaker, made several observations:
political union, he said, was inseparable from unity of policies, unless certain
countries were ready to have a policy decided in their name by others, which
did not seem to be the case. Considerable differences existed, for example,
even between the Six, concerning as important a problem as German reunifi-
cation. Similarly, what should Great Britian do in such circumstances as far
as its influence and responsibilities outside Europe were concerned? Was
Europe ready to share these, or did it expect Great Britain to begin by giving
them up? The speaker concluded by saying that, if we wished to achieve
European political unity, we would have to concentrate our efforts on ob-
taining a real unity of political views, both immediately and for the future, in
respect of all major problems. To ignore these in our discussions would present
grave dangers, not only for the unity of the West as a whole but even for the
future of the European Economic Community.
At this point in the discussion, a Greek participant intervened to say that,
although he did not defend every aspect of the third school of thought, it did
60
(
not involve any question of subordinating a European policy to an Atlantic
policy but was concerned rather with the problem of priority, allowing for the
fact that no international policy could be other than Atlantic without ignoring
the realities.
An Italian participant supp·orted the above-mentioned European ~peaker
and questioned whether the economic union of Europe could be carried
through in the absence of some sort of political agreement. He also ,said that
partnership should be regarded as a sharing of tasks between the United
States and Europe. ·
A German participant conside~ed that Europe's adherence to the Atlantic
Alliance should be regarded not so much as a condition but as an existing fact
and a future goal. At the same time, however, he said that it was ill-advised to
set such pre-conditions for the creation of European unity as complete unity
of political views. Citing the experience of the EEC, he observed that what
was needed was to create a framework in which such a policy could be drawn
up through the activities of Community bodies. This framework should make
it possible to concert Community interest and national interests.
A French participant pointed out that those who favoured the second
school of thought mentioned in the introductory Note considered that Europe's
future was linked to that of America and that there could be no overthrowing
of alliances. At the same time, however, it was impossible to accept the idea
that such European unity could be dissolved in or absorbed by a vague
"Atlanticism" which would not provide it with any solidity. It was therefore
essential to achieve partnership of the kind proposed by President Kennedy.
Faced with the real ·risk 6f nationalism and disintegration, a revival was
needed, and this should not come solely from France, said the speaker, who,
for his own part, saw three possibilities: .
- the other five partners in the Community should tactfully insist tl~at the
Community be provided with the strongest political content that France
could accept;
- the British Government should make a declaration of intent going beyond
the comments so far proferred by Mr. Wilson;
- the United States should realise that Europe sought firmer guarantees in
the nuclear sphere. It should therefor offer Europeans the means required for
their nuclear development, linking any such offer to a strengthening of the
European structure.
A Netherlands participant made three observations on the statement of the
above-mentioned European speaker:
- if one accepted the argument that the Common Market should unite
politically in the near future so as to advance economically, there was a
61
lw
m
~
ll
II
~
l~
I
danger that things would come to a halt because of the serious political di-
vergencies existing among the Six;
- if one were convinced that United Europe would always be linked with
the United States, criticism of the third thesis lost much of its force;
- if it were accepted that the concept of an integrated democratic and
federal Europe was rejected by one ofits members, then there was no reason to
reject admission of Great Britain to the Common Market.
According to an Italian participant, what was lacking was any possibility
of frank discussion whereby Europeans could communicate to America their
views on certain major problems of common interest-such as that of Viet-
nam-in which America had the primary responsibility. The United States
should recognise that the respective situations of Europe and America had
changed over the last fifteen years. It was this feeling and not merely the
development ofFrench internal policy which could bring about an aggravation
of the malady known as "Gaullist nationalism", and this in other countries
besides France.
A Canadian participant expressed agreement with the other Canadian
speaker already quoted and asked that those concerned should cease to think of
NATO in the same terms as in 1955, when the Alliance consisted of weak
states with one strong state. The same speaker appealed for tolerance on both
sides of the Atlantic so as to facilitate the search for a common field of action.
Addressing himselfto the above-mentioned French speaker, a British partici-
pant asked him what reaction he would anticipate if his Government made the
gesture which he had recommended. In reply, this participant expressed the
view that, if Great Britain was ready to state that it accepted the rules of the
Common Market (with its time limits and stages), it could, so to speak, put
France "on the "spot" by demanding that France make a declaration of
Atlantic solidarity. In other words, the situation would be reversed, since it
would be impossible to reject a country which was ready to accept the Com-
munity rules on the grounds that the said country would insist on main-
taining a unity of Atlantic views.
The author of the introductory Note then took the floor again and put two
questions to the above-mentioned European participant:
- Why did he think that there would be a greater affinity between the Six
regarding basic problems than there was between those Six countries indivi-
dually and their other NATO partners?
- What did he anticipate would be the content of a foreign policy of
the Six?
The same speaker expressed disagreement with the view previously voiced
by a German participant and contended that the relation which the latter
62
saw between the early stages of the Rome Treaty and a possible political union
was not valid. The Rome Treaty provided something more than a framework,
while leaving policy to be filled in later, since there was already agreement on
basic principles between the contracting parties. No similar agreement at
present existed regarding foreign and defence policy; and it could reasonably
be apprehended that ultimately the only way in which the Six could achieve
clear identity in this field lay in adopting a attitude different to that of the
United States.
A Belgian participant put forward certain considerations on the political
follow-up which he considered would be made necessary by further integration
of the Six in the economic, financial and currency spheres: the advances made
in these fields, he said, would always be uncertain if, despite the rules laid
down in the Treaty, they were forever being called into question by the
participating countries, for more or less genuine reasons.
Additionally, only political union would make it possible to solve certain
problems such as that of the necessary monetary unity necessary for the
creation of a common currency or at any rate a common monetary system. In
connection with the problem of British membership, the same speaker said he
thought it desirable that this should come about before political integration
was achieved so as to avoid additional difficulties. Political integration would
be the subsequent stage, designed to enable the Common Market, in its new
and larger form, to achieve its true aims and to consolidate them once and for
all. This would facilitate achievement of a genuine partnership with the
United States.
In reply to various comments relating to his earlier statement, the European
speaker already mentioned said he agreed with most of them, and, more
especially, with several of the views expressed by the German participant
already quoted on a number of occasions. In connection with the possibility of
a contradiction between a United Europe and the Atlantic Alliance, he
emphasised that there was now a complete identity between the two but added
that we did not know what the situation would be in five or ten years, which
made it impossible for him in this respect to go along with the third school of
thought. Similarly, recognition of specific affinities between some EEC coun-
tries and Great Britain should not mean giving up the EEC in favour of some
new political structure. As to the content of a United Europe's foreign policy,
the speaker thought it would be premature to try and define this beyond
saying that in the foreseeable future it would be incorporated in the Atlantic
Alliance.
In connection with observations made on the position of Great Britain, a
participant from that country emphasised that his Government was aware of
63
r"'""
the fact that its entry into the Common Market would be of major economic
interest and that the links between Great Britain and its European neighbours
were as important as those it had with its other "neighbours" across the Atlan-
tic. But the British Government would never agree to be placed in a position
where it would have to choose between the two, and the same applied to its
ties with the Commonwealth. In regard to acceptance of the rules of the Paris
Treaty, the whole problem lay in the content of the transitional measures to
be taken, and, the speaker pointed out, there was a difference here in the
psychological attitude of the English and that of their neighbours on the
Continent. In our view, he said, total commitment was a starting point to be
accepted with the idea of carrying it through with all its implications; on
the other hand, continental Europeans would rather take the view that it was
a point of arrival, without always being concerned as to how such a commit-
ment could be achieved. It was to be hoped, the speaker went on, that this
obstacle could be overcome. There was, however, another point of very great
importance: in discussing Great Britain's entry into the European Community,
there was an excessive tendency to look inwards, in other words, to consider
only the relationship between Great Britain and the Six, whereas it was
necessary to be genuinely aware of the extent and the paramountcy of British
commitments on a world-wide level-in Africa, East Asia and Latin America-
in order to enable the United Kingdom Government to link itself once and
for all with the Community.
A Finnish participant put forward several observations on the dispute
between Russia and China, and its implications for the West. He said that
China did not accept Russian nuclear protection and simultaneously Russia
refused to let China have "a finger on the trigger". At the same time, there
was a conflict between the two countries for leadership of the Communist
World. China accused Russia of weakness and was committed to a very ag-
gressive and dangerous policy of support to "wars of liberation". In order not
to lose its influence, Russia likewise supported such wars, while simultaneously
talking of "peaceful coexistence", a policy violently attacked by China as a
"double game". In fact, the Chinese threat was increasingly great as far as
Russia itself was concerned. It would therefore be very dangerous for one and
all if there were to be any slackening of American firmness towards China,
especially in Vietnam. On the other hand, the speaker considered that the
West should see what Russia might be prepared to do in order to play its
historic stabilising part in Asia.
*
* *
At the end of the meeting, several participants voiced general opinions
64
deriving from the discussions which had taken place. An American participant,
for instance, considered that the position of the Alliance was not all that bad
and that some speakers had been perhaps excessively pessimistic. The United
States' objectives after the second world war had largely been achieved, and
what had been accomplished in Europe was encouraging. The most dangerous
problems remaining were those connected with the West's relations with the
unaligned nations. Another American speaker emphasised the extent to
which the United States was anxious to exercise its influence as a factor of
unity and not of disco.rd. The partnership should be the result of a voluntary
adherence he said. A third American participant emphasised that the period
of vitality through which the West had passed was clue to the number of great
ideals which had inspired it: United Europe, Atlantic ties, peaceful coexist-
ence with the USSR, availability of new instruments in the political and
economic spheres, etc.. It was the emergence ofiesser and possibly contagious
ideals which constituted the greatest danger and which might lead all con-
cerned towards isolationism and internal regression. In order to combat this
threat, the West would have to recognise the growing community of interests
existing in more and more varied fields: trade, agriculture, communications,
education, science and even religion. A Belgian participant further expressed
the hope that, while taking a realistic view of things, those involved would
display imagination and not seek to be logical at all costs. This participant
cited several examples in support of his contention that there were, after all, a·
number of encouraging signs which were "illogical" and contended that we
should be able to go ahead in several sectors.
Referring to the views expressed by other speakers, an American participant
suggested that the discussions had perhaps been unduly concentrated on
problems within the Alliance, and he hoped that the next conference would
pay greater attention to examining joint activity by members of the Alliance
in regard to the outside world, together with such subjects as the develop-
ment of technological and scientific exchanges between NATO countries,
which had been mentioned by a previous speaker.
The last speaker was an American participant who said that the Sunday
morning discussions had been much more encouraging than those which had
taken place previously, not only because the various speakers had followed the
suggestion made by the Author of the Note and concentrated on the next two
or three years rather than on a distant future, but also because attention had
been unduly concentrated on a single individual during the Saturday discus-
sions. He said that there was perhaps an excessive tendency to think of General
de Gaulle as a solid wall rather than as a tree which could be by-passed if, as
was the case, a dialogue with him seemed too difficult. For his own part, the
65
speaker could see no possibility whatever of worthwhile discussions with the
General, such as a French speaker had suggested.
The speaker also considered that supporters of the second school described
in the introductory Note over-emphasised the differences between themselves
and adherents of the third school. In actual fact, he said, the two schools
were looking towards the future and were not encouraging those "small
ideals" to which the first school could not but lead. Some sort of dialogue was
possible between members of the second and third schools, but the speaker
saw no value in any exchange of ideas with the first.
In conclusion, the speaker expressed the view that the Government of his
own country had not yet found ways, in the circumstances prevailing since
January l 963, of asserting such a leadership as it had been able to exercise in
cooperation with its Allies prior to that time. He added that he sometimes had
the impression that there was not much eagerness on the European side to
assume such leadership either, unless on the part ofthe French Head ofGovern-
ment. It was to be hoped that by seriously applying ourselves to the problem
we would. soon once again achieve a leadership acceptable to all.
* * *
Before declaring the meeting closed, His Royal Highness expressed the
gratitude of the meeting to all those who had contributed to its complete
success, more especially, to the Italian hosts who were to be congratulated on
the admirable arrangements which had been made, the linguistic service, and
the various members of the Secretariat.
66
ANNEX
Independently of the meeting, an American participant submitted a
statement on his Government's policy in Vietnam. The speaker began by
recalling that, in 1961, when President Kennedy came into responsibility,
there was a very troubled situation in South East Asia; at that time, under
the direction of the new President, after a very serious examination of the
situation, two decisions had been taken.
For some time past, in LAOS, there had been. an increase in desultory
fighting, interrupted by temporary truces. The Pathet-Lao troops were sup-
ported by Hanoi with men and equipment. Even though the hostilities were
still relatively "civilized", it was clear that the difficulties were due to Com-
munist elements and that this represented a problem which might become
very serious for the peace of the region. An end had to be put to this situation.
When President Kennedy met Mr. Krushchev in Vienna in 1961, they both
agreed that the Laotians should be left to settle their own problems and that
the military elements and advisors which both sides had sent to the country
should be withdrawn. This was followed by the long Geneva Conference
which led in 1962 to an arrangement whereby the United States proceeded
to withdraw 600 military advisers from the country. Pekin and Hanoi were
signatories to this agreement along with the USSR, but it was violated
from the outset by North Vietnam whose effectives in Laos never fell below
6,ooo men, and this violation had been maintained and even aggravated
since that time.
Since 1954, following on a specific request from President Diem, the United
States had provided assistance to SOUTH VIETNAM in the form of advice,
equipment, substantial economic aid, teachers, etc.. At the end of l 959, following
on a Communist Party Congress in North Vietnam, Hanoi decided to launch
an intensive campaign in the South, with the aim of overthrowing President
Diem and setting up a Communist regime. Systematic infiltration of equip-
ment and men was carried out (beginning at this time and up to 1963, those
concerned were primarily young people born in South Vietnam who had
received special instruction in the North) and eventually this had led to an
intensification of the guerilla war in the South. In the autumn of 1961 it was
67
)
clear that the struggle had acquired a new dimension and that if the Diem
regime was to be maintained in power, American aid on a much greater scale
would be needed; after extensive discussion and reflection, a decision was
taken on these lines.
It was equally clear that the United States, by introducing larger units of
advisors and by increasing its aid, was assuming a responsibility which it
could not subsequently abandon and that the road it had taken would be a
long one and full of hazards. But, within the framework of the SEATO Treaty,
the United States had undertaken to protect South Vietnam and this decision
led to a special protocol of assistance at the express request of that
country.
Since that time, Communist infiltration into South Vietnam had steadily
increased and reached a figure of 40,000, which, as from January 1963,
included many men who had always lived in North Vietnam and had never
seen the South before, but who had been trained for the carrying out ofspecial
tasks and who formed a very close-knit network of leadership. It was clear
that the whole command .structure thereby established was controlled and
directed from the North. Today, its domination was widespread, more especi-
ally in certain areas with a lower population density. At the present time, it
was safe to say that 25% of South Vietnam's population and an even larger
proportion ofits area were dominated by the Vietcong. This did not mean that
governmental forces could not enter those regions if properly protected but,
on the other hand, it did mean that the people living there were permanently
subject to terrorist tactics by the Vietcong.
The speaker emphasised that there should be no doubt about this: the
Communists were doing their best to portray the fighting as a revolt of the
indigenous population of the country, and this idea was gaining a certain
amount of credence in the West. Of course, the North Vietnamese were just
as much Vietnamese as those of the South, but so were the North Koreans
inhabitants of Korea. And if the Federal Republic of Germany were to take
military action against East Germany, the Communist bloc would not pretend
that that was a purely indigenous affair! It was necessary to emphasise this
point because it involved a systematic tactic on the part of the Communists
who, since the beginning of the cold war, had been everywhere frustrated in
their efforts to extend domination through direct military action. They had
always been thrown back by the free world, and it was this frustration which
had led them towards what they now called "wars of liberation". What
was happening in Vietnam was a "test case" for their world action. The
United States, however, considered that aggression was aggression whatever
name might be given it and no matter what form it might take, and America
68
would endeavour to fight such wars wherever it was obliged to, including on
the moral level.
Another cliche which was widespread in the West-and even in the United
States itself-was that the struggle in Vietnam was not a war to be fought by
military means and that the United States had made a mistake in handling
it in such a way. The speaker could. not see very clearly what was meant by
that. He said that it could certainly not be won solely by such methods and
this the United States had fully understood. America must also conduct it by
political, economic and social methods, by raising the population's standard of
living and increasing its will to resist. Be asked, however, whether such an
assertion meant that only the Communists were entitled to win wars by military
methods. It was clear that there was no substantial body of opinion in South
Vietnam, apart f~om the Vietcong itself, which looked towards Hanoi for a
solution ofits problems. And the methods employed by the Vietcong to control
the population (since persuasion had not succeeded) consisted of terror and
intimidation (attacks on isolated villages, the murder of local officials and of
people refusing to help the Vietcong, the forced enlistment of young people,
and so on).
It was certain that this was not an easy situation for the United States but,
said the speaker, experience prior to 1939-in Manchuria, Ethiopia, Austria,
etc., not to mention the Hitlerian victories-demonstrated that the appetite
of aggressors was never satisfied. The situation, moreover, had several im-
plications. The most immediate· concerned the whole of South-East Asia,
and it was unnecessary to emphasise the strategic importance of that area.
If the United States were to withdraw, the psychological and political effects
of such a decision would be immeasurable. The Philippines and Australia
would be directly threatened via Indonesia. And what would become of the
credibility of American determination in other regions, e.g. in India or Berlin,
to mention only two places? After all, what was at stake in Vietnam was the
possibility for small countries to live in peace and preserve their independence.
The speaker went on to say that the United States did not accept another
idea which was advanced in Europe and certain American circles, namely
that this part of the world would sooner or later be wholely dominated by
China because of historic inevitability. This was very dangerous nonsence,
which amounted to saying that no small country could live in freedom on
the edge of the Communist world. What would European countries which
were in the same situation think then? There was, moreover, the pre-
cedent of Greece, which had been able in the past to win a "war of national
liberation" through the support of the United Kingdom and the United
States.
69
Another cliche was that white men had no place in Asia and therefore
should not be fighting there. In this connection, the speaker emphasised that
the United States had no direct interest, economic or political, in that area
other than to preserve the free world. Its aim was not to establish a base to
threaten Communist China or to destroy the Hanoi regime; its acts had no
colonialist tinse. It was not a question of white men against Asians but of an
attempt by white men to help free Asians to remain free.
Again, it was claimed that this was a hopeless war because of the political
instability in Saigon. But instability was not unknown in situations where men
were fighting for their lives while simultaneously introducing social changes.
Naturally, the United States did not deny that this was a subject of concern.
Here again, mention might be made ofthe example of Greece, a country which
was more and more vigorous and politically important now, but which had
nonetheless changed its government on several occasions while fighting
against rebellion.
The question of a "political solution" was frequently raised, but this involved
a misunderstanding, since the United States had always sought one. It might
consist, for example, of a return to the 1954. situation, which was disrupted by
the Communists. But whatever the solution, it should safeguard the security
and independence of South Vietnam as long as that country wanted it. It
was fair, then, to ask those who were urging the United States to negotiate:
"What sort of solution do you want?", "What do you seek to achieve?''. If
it was a question of obtaining a "graceful exit" by the American forces, this
was not an aim. The United States could withdraw at any moment, and
would undoubtedly do so in a more dignified way without negotiations than
with them. But its only interest was to maintain and carry out the promises
it had given. It was ready to negotiate if its minimum objective, the inde-
pendence of the South Vietnam people, could thereby be achieved. But it
could not participate in negotiations doomed to failure, since a still more
dangerous situation would then arise.
Post-war experience demonstrated that those negotiations which had suc-
ceeded were those which had a chance of succeeding from the outset (e.g. the
raising of the Berlin blockade in 1948, the end of the Korean War, the agree-
ment on nuclear tests and the 1962 agreement on Laos). In the absence of any
indication that Hanoi was ready to change its attitude on this point, however,
the United States had no other option but to go ahead. Hanoi must be persu-
aded that it, too, would benefit from halting its aggression. One way of achiev-
ing this consisted of proving to North Vietnam that it could not continue its
aggression without paying a heavy price-hence the present bombing,
which would continue until there was some indication that Hanoi was ready
70
to stop its aggression. A real political solution could only emerge from a
decision already taken on those lines by North Vietnam.
In conclusion, the speaker said that the United States was well aware of
the risks involved, but it also knew that these would be even greater if it
withdrew and abandoned its responsibilities and the agreements it had
reached. In the final analysis, it was a question of deciding whether the
Communists should be allowed to achieve their goals through guerilla war-
fare, sabotage and terror. Should this be the path of the future? A halt must
be called to this sort of war, said the speaker, who also referred to the example
of the Cong<J. Since the end of the second world war, the United States had
sacrificed 160,000 of its soldiers to this purpose, not to mention the tremendous
financial effort involved: the military budget of the United States, estimated
at $ 1o billion in 1947, had now reached a figure of $ -650 billion!
The Americans had enormous unfinished business at home, and every
country, however rich it might be, could claim to be under-developed in
this sense. There had, however, to be an order ofpriority governing the actions
of free-world countries, and the first priority was to avoid being faced with
another world war, which would be inevitable if aggression were not stopped
when it first began.
71
i
I
i~
i
I
\
