....
....
OCI>
3J:m
I
....
Ol>
m-
(,)
m'
.....
c
s:
z•
_m
z
:Jl
m
.,,-1
'<
elm
....
mCI>
Cl>m
<D
:Jl
co
c..
C)
.i::.
:Do-
m·
zm
o»mC
m
z
\
,
l
r
I
1
1
·~
~ ~.~
I
r.y·
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
..
SALTSJOBADEN
CONFE.RENCE
11-13 May 1984
NOT FOR QUOTATION
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.........................................................................................................5
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................,....................................,............ 9
I. WESTERN POWER AND THE MIDDLE EAST:
A CASE STUDY IN ATLANTIC RELATIONSHIPS
British Working Paper ...................................................................................................11
French Working Paper ...................................................................................................13
American Working Paper ...............................................................................................15
Discussion ............................................................,....................................................... 20
II. THE STATE OF ARMS CONTROL NEGOTIATIONS
American Working Paper ...............................................................................................25
German Working Paper ...................................,,., .'"'"'-' ............................................,........ 27
British Working Paper ...................................................................................................31
Discussion ....................................................................................................................32
Ill. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT TRENDS IN THE
INDUSTRIALIZED DEMOCRACIES
Dutch Working Paper ....................................................................................................37
American Working Paper ............................................................................................... 50
Discussion ................................................................,................................................... 53
IV. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS...............................................................................59
V. THE SOVIET UNION, THE WEST AND THE THIRD WORLD -
A CASE STUDY: CENTRAL AMERICA
Spanish Working Paper ................................................................................................. 67
Information Sheet on U.S. National Bipartisan Commission Report .................................... 70
Discussion .................................................................................................................... 74
CLOSING REMARKS .................................................. ····································· 78
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
WALTER SCHEEL•
Former President of the Federal Republic of Germany
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT'
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.'
Dean, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University
HONORARY TREASURER:
CONRAD J. OORT'
Member of the Board, Algemene Bank Nederland N.V.
NOR HENRll< AASAR0D President, Norwegian Seamen's Union
USA KENNETH L. ADELMAN Director, U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency, Department of State
ITA GIOVANNI AGNELLI" President, FIAT S.p.A.
TUR YILDIRIM AKTURK Former Under Secretary of State, Planning
Organization
USA DWAYME 0. ANDREAS Chairman of the Board, Archer-Daniels ~idland
Co. Inc.
AUS HANNES ANDROSCH' Chairman of the Managing Board,
Creditanstalt-Bankverein; Former
Vice-Chancellor and Minister of Finance
USA HANS H. ANGERMUELLER Vice Chairman of the Board, Citicorp
USA GEORGE W. BALL" Former Under Secretary of State
POR FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO Former Prime Minister; Director "Jornal
Expresso"
UK JOHN F.H. BARING Chairman, Baring Brothers & Co. Ltd.
NETH H.M. QUEEN BEATRIX OF THE
NETHERLANDS
USA JACK F. BENNETT' Director and Senior Vice President, Exxon
Corporation
USA C. FRED BERGSTEN Director, Institute for International Economics;
Former Assistant Secretary for International
Affairs, Department of the Treasury
FRG CHRISTOPH BERTRAM Political Editor, "Die Zeit"; Former Director,
International Institute for Strategic Studies,
London
NETH ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL" Professor of International Relations, Leyden
University; Director of Companies
TUR SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT' Director of Companies
ICE BJORN BJARNASON Political Editor, "Morgunbladid"
USA NICHOLAS BRADY Chairman, Dillon, Read & Co., Inc.; Former U'.S.
Senator (New Jersey)
CAN ALBERT A. BRETON Professor of Economics, Institute for Policy
Analysis, University of Toronto
USA WILLIAM P. BUNDY" Editor, "Foreign Affairs"
USA RICHARD R. BURT Assistant Secretary of State for European Affairs
USA LOUIS W. CABOT Chairman of the Board, The Cabot Corporation
GRE ANGELOS CANELLOPOULOS Vice President, "Titan" Cement Co., S.A.;
Member of the Board, Union of Greek Industries
GRE COSTA CARRAS* Member of the Board, Union of Greek
Shipowners
UK LORD CARRINGTON Secretary-General-designate NATO
SPA JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO' Chairman, Banco Hispano Industrial
5
FRA JEAN-PIERRE CHEVENEMENT Member of the National Assembly; President of INT MAX KOHNSTAMM.. Former President, European University Institute,
CERES; Former Minister of Industry Florence
NETH H.R.H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NOR KaRE KRISTIANSEN Minister of Petroleum and Energy
NETHERLANDS BEL BARON LAMBERT' Chairman, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert S.A.
CAN W. HARRIET CRITCHLEY Associate Professor, Faculty of Social Sciences. FRG Ono GRAF LAMBSDDRFF· Minister of Economic Affairs
Department of Political Science. University of INT EMILE VAN LENNEP Secretary-General, O.E.C.D.
Calgary USA FLORA LEWIS Foreign Affairs Columnist, The New York Times,
INT VICOMTE ETIENNE DAVIGNON Vice President, Commission of the European Paris Bureau .
Communities BEL ANDRE LEYSEN Chairman, Federation of Belgian Enterprises:
NETH W1ssE DEKKER President, Philips' Gloeilampenfabrieken N. V. Chairman, Agfa-Gevaert Group
CAN L.A. DELVOIE Chairman. Task Force Work Group. Prime SWE ASSAR LINDBECK Professor of International Economics, University
Minister's Task Force on East-West Relations of Stockholm
and International Security USA WINSTON LORD' President, The Council on Foreign Relations.
CAN DAVID A. DODGE Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic Planning, Inc.
Department of Employment and Immigration NETH AARNOUT A. LOUDON President Board of Management, AKZO NV
UK JAMES EBERLE Director, The Royal Institute of International INT JOSEPH M.A.H. LUNS Secretary-General, NATO
Affairs SWI FRANZ LOTOLF' General Manager and Member of the Executive
DEN UFFE ELLEMANN-JENSEN Minister of Foreign Affairs Board, Swiss Bank Corporation
USA THOMAS 0. ENDERS U.S. Ambassador to Spain CAN DONALD S. MACDONALD' Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy;
IRE GARRET FITZGERALD Prime Minister Chairman, Royal Commission on the Economic
LUX COLETTE FLESCH Minister of Foreign Affairs Union and Development Prospects for Canada
USA MURRAY H. FINLEY' President, Amalgamated Clothing and Textile USA BRUCE K. MAClAURY' President, The Brookings Institution
Workers Union AFL-CIO USA DAVID J. MAHONEY David Mahoney Ventures
NETH MAX GELOENS Director. McKinsey & Company Inc. SPA MIGUEL ANGEL MARTINEZ Member of Parliament and Vice President,
USA CHARLES GETCHELL• Partner, Gray & Wendell (Attorneys-at-Law); Foreign Affairs Committee
Rapporteur, Bilderberg Meetings USA CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR. United States Senator (Maryland)
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON' Chairman of the Board, Saab-Scania AB FRA THIERRY OE MONTBRIAL' Director, French Institute of International
ICE GEIR HALLGRIMSSON' Minister of Foreign Affairs i Relations; Professor of Economics. Ecole
CAN CHARLES H. HANTHO President and Chief Executive Officer, C-1-L Inc.
'
Polytechnique
NOR H.R.H. CROWN PRINCE HARALD OF ITA MARIO MONTI' Professor of Monetary Theory and Policy,
NORWAY i University of Bocconi, Milan; President, SUERF
UK DENIS W. HEALEY Member of Parliament ·swE CURT NICOLIN Chairman of the Swedish Employers'
USA HENRY J. HEINZ II" Chairman of the Board, H.J. Heinz Company, Confederation
Inc. DEN NIELS NORLUND' Editor-in-Chief, "Berlingske Tidende"
FRG ALFRED HERRHAUSEN' Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A.G. FRA CHRISTINE OcKRENT Editor-in-Chief, "Antenne II"
UK MICHAEL HESELTINE Secretary of State for Defence SWE CLAS-ERICK ODHNER Head of the Research Section of the Swedish
AUS GERALD HINTEREGGER Secretary-General, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Trade Union Confederation
USA JOHN J. HORAN Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Merck & INT ROBERT O'NEILL Director, International Institute for Strategic
Co., Inc. Studies
FIN JAAKKO ILONIEMI Member of the Management Board of the Union SWE 0LOF -PAllvl.~ Prime Minister
Bank of Finland; Former Ambassador of Finalnd POR ANDRE GON({ALVES PEREIRA Professor of International Law, University of
to the U.S. Lisbon; Former Minister of Foreign Affairs
BEL DANIEL E. JANSSEN' Chairman of the Executive Committee, U.C.B., USA WILLIAM B. QUANDT Senior Fellow, The Brookings Institution
S.A. UK JOHN M. RAISMAN Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
SWI ROBERT A. JEKER President of the Executive Board, Credit Suisse Shell U.K.
SWE LENNART JOHANSSON President and Group Executive, AB SKF; Vice USA ALICE M. RIVLIN Director Economic Studies Program, The
Chairman of the Federation of Swedish
' Brookings Institution; Former Director, the
I
Industries I Congressional Budget Office
USA VERNON E. JORDAN' Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER.. Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank International
(Attorneys-at-Law); Former President, National Advisory Committee
Urban League INT BERNARD W. ROGERS Supreme Allied Commander Europe
FRG KARLHEINZ KASKE President and Chief Executive Officer, Siemens UK LORD ROLL OF IPSOEN" Chairman, S.G. Warburg & Co.
A.G. UK SIR JOHN SAINSBURY' Chairman, J. Sainsbury PLC
GRE LOUKA T. KATSELI Scientific Director, Centre of Planning and SPA JUAN TOMAS OE SALAS Editor, Cambia 16 and Diario 16
Economic Research AUS WOLFGANG ScHOSSEL Secretary General, Austrian Economic
USA DAVID T. KEARNS President and Chief Executive Officer, Xerox Federation
Corporation FRA E. ANTOINE SEILLIERE' Director-General, Compagnie d'lndustrie et de
USA HENRY A. KISSINGER' Former Secretary of State; Professor, Center for Participations
Strategic and International Studies, Georgetown USA MARSHALL D. SHULMAN Director, W. Averell Harriman Institute for
University Advanced Study of the Soviet Union, Columbia
UK ANDREW KNIGHT' Editor, "The Economist" University
6 7
USA
FRG
DEN
SWE
TUR
FRG
SWE
NOR
POR
SWE
NOR
SWE
USA
FRG
JOSEPH J. Sisco
THEO SOMMER'
POUL J. SVANHOLM
STIG SYNNERGREN
SARIK TARA
HORST TELTSCHIK
ANDERS THUNBORG
Ono GRIEG T1DEMAND
EMILIO Ru1 VILAR
PETER WALLENBERG
NIELS WEARING, JR.'
HANS WERTHEN
JOHN C. WHITEHEAD
Ono WOLFF VON AMEAONGEN"
IN ATTENDANCE:
SWE
UK
NETH
USA
KAI HAMMERICH
JOHN HENNINGS
ANNE HOOGENDOORN
CHARLES MULLER
RAPPORTEURS:
USA CHARLES GETCHELL
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS:
AUS Austria
BEL Belgium
CAN Canada
DEN Denmark
FIN Finland
FRA France
FRG Fed. Republic of Germany
GRE Greece
ICE Iceland
INT International
IRE Ireland
• Member of the Steering Committee
"Member of the Advisory Group
8
Partner, .Sisco Associates; Former Under
Secretary of State for Political Affairs
Publisher, "Die Zeit"
President and Group Chief Executive, United
Breweries Ltd.
Principal Aide-de-Camp to the King; Former
Supreme Commander
Chairman, ENKA Group of Companies
Head of Department Foreign Affairs and
Security Policy, Chancellor's Office
Minister of Defense
Shipowner; Former Minister of Defense
Vice Governor, Bank of Portugal
Vice Chairman, Skandinaviska Enskilda Banken
Senior Partner, Wilh. Wilhelmsen
Chairman, AB Electrolux
Senior Partner, Goldman, Sachs & Co., Inc.
Chairman of the Board of Management, Otto
Wolff A.G.
Senior Vice President, Saab-Scania AB;
Supervisor Swedish Conference
Former High Commissioner in Singapore
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
Assistant Secretary, American Friends of
Bilderberg; President, Murden & Co.
Partner, Gray & Wendell (Attorneys-at-Law)
Communications and Public Relations
Consultant
IT
LUX
NETH
NOR
POR
SPA
SWE
SWI
TUR
UK
USA
Italy
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States of America
INTRODUCTION
This report was prepared by Charles Getchell and Grant F. Winthrop, joint rapporteurs. The various
individual interventions summarized in the. "Discussion" sections have been grouped according to
subject matter, and do not necessarily follow the exact chronological order of the discussions.
The tllirt~-second Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Grand Hotel, Saltsjiibaden, Sweden, on May
11, 12 and 13, 1984, under the chairmanship of Mr. Walter Scheel.
There were 116 participants from 19 Western European countries, the United States, Canada, and
several international organizations. They represented a variety of fields: government and politics,
industry, trade unions, diplomacy, the press, the military services, banking, the law, transportation,
education, and institutes specialized in national and international studies.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without in any way committing the organization or
government to which they belonged'. To enable participants to speak frankly, the discussions were
confidential, with no reporting being allowed.
The agenda was as follows:
Western Power and the Middle East:
A Case Study in Atlantic Relationships
II. The State of Arms Control Negotiations
Ill. Future Employment Trends in the Industrialized Democracies
IV. The Soviet Union, the West and the Third World -
A Case Study: Central America
In addition to this formal agenda, there was a session devoted to a discussion of current events,
concentrating on the topic "Continental Drift: Economic and Political."
In opening the conference, the Chairman expressed, on behalf of all the participants, their special
gratitude for the presence of their majesties King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden and Queen Beatrix of the
Netherlands, of their Royal Highnesses Crown Prince Harald and Prince Claus, and of Prime Minister
Palme. The Chairman noted that the Grand Hotel, Saltsj6baden, had been the setting for three
Bilderberg conferences, more than any other place, and that the meeting hall of the present confer-
ence had been named in honor of the late Marcus Wallenberg, who for many years had been an
interested and active member of the Bilderberg Steering Committee.
The Chairman-went on to say that, in today's sharply polarized world, we needed understanding
among the members of the free world, particularly between the free part of Europe and North
America. For many reasons, there was a marked tendency among Europeans to seek friendship with
their North American partners. Western Europeans attached great value to that understanding and
were sensitive to developments across the Atlantic. A glance at the newspapers or television prog-
rams on either side of the Atlantic would illustrate that sensitivity.
Europeans were paying increased attention to the relationships of the U.S. with countries of the
Pacific basin. Some Europeans likened U.S.-Atlantic and U.S.-Pacific relationships to a hyperbola in a
coordinate system, and were concerned-not for economic reasons alone-about a movement along
the hyperbola toward the Pacific. Indeed, the fast-growing economies of the Pacific had overtaken
Western Europe about four years ago as the main trading partner of the U.S.
The Chairman felt that the shape of future developments, both economic and political, would
depend primarily on Europe. He was also convinced that, given the political competition between the
differing social systems in East and West, there was no alternative to the firmly-established part-
nership between North America and Western Europe.
I. WESTERN POWER AND THE MIDDLE EAST:
A CASE STUDY IN ATLANTIC RELATIONSHIPS
Working Paper Prepared by The Rt. Hon. Denis W. Healey,
Member of Parliament, (UK)
"Decisive action in the hour of need
Denotes the hero, but does not succeed".
-Hilaire Belloc
The recent fiasco of President Reagan's policy in the Lebanon is not the first failure of Western
power in the Middle East. In 1956 Britain and France were even more drastically humiliated at Suez.
Nor is official doubletalk an American monopoly. Many of the Near East's present problems spring
from contradictory commitments made during the First World War by the British Government to the
Arabs, the French, and the Jews.
Plain ignorance has been responsible for many Western blunders; Foreign Secretary Herbert
Morrison thought Kuwait was an island in the Persian Gulf. But President Reagan has added a new
dimension to misunderstanding by claiming that "the Soviet Union underlies all the unrest that is
going on. If they were not engaged in this game of dominoes, there would not be any hot-spots in the
world." So it was America's "duty to stop the cancerous spread of Soviet influence" in the Middle
East, and the continued presence of American troops in Lebanon was "central to our credibility on a
world scale."
The background. In fact the Middle East has been ravaged by war and revolution for three thousand
years long before the Bolsheviks stormed the Winter Palace. Religion has played a major role in the
Middle East for the second half of that period. Like the Christians in Europe, the Moslims were often
more cruel to those who espoused another sect of their own religion than to the Christian and Jewish
minorities among them. The Christians themselves in the Middle East often shared the prevailing
savagery. When Warren Austin appealed at the United Nations to the Jews and Arabs to behave like
Christians, did he foresee the massacre at Chatila camp?
Since the Crusades, Western attempts to establish a physical presence in the Middle East have
never lasted long. The collapse of the Ottoman Empire gave Britain and France the opportunity to
create new states to serve their national objectives. But the frontiers of the new states have always
been disputed, and sometimes divide peoples, like the Kurds and Syrians, who have a strong sense of
national identity.
By the end of the Second World War loyalty to these artificial states was being challenged by the
new concept of pan-Arab unity. Oddly enough this concept wai:nirst developed by American mis-
sionaries in Nineteenth Century Beirut, and derived new impetus in the late Thirties from the writings
of Christian Arabs. For 20 years President Nasser inflamed the imagination of the Arab masses
throughout the Middle East with his appeal to "Arabiya". But he failed to make a reality even of Egypt's
union with Syria. The Arab League today is torn by internal strife; only the fight against Israel provides
a narrow basis for unity.
The new Muslim fundamentalism. In 1984 both the traditional monarchies and the military dicta-
torships in the Middle East are threatened by a new form of Muslim fundamentalism which has gained
massive reinforcement from the revolution in Iran. Small conspiracies of Muslim fundamentalists had
already produced the bloody uprising in Hama against the Assad regime in Syria, had assasinated
Sadat, and had captured the Grand Mosque in Mecca. The new type of fundamentalism, which looks
to the Ayatollah Khomeini, may well become a mass movement of social revolt in many Muslim
countries since it appeals to the Shi'a Muslims, who, though numbering only 90 million as against the
650 million Sunni, form a majority in Iran, Iraq, Bahrein and Lebanon. It was the Shi'a who provided
the most effective terrorists in Lebanon, and in the end took over Southern Beirut with their Amal
militia-who wear Khomeini badges although their leader is a Westernised moderate. So far the Shi'a
in Iraq seem loyal to the regime, but if Iran looked like winning the Gulf war they might well change
sides, and the effects would be felt in most of the Gulf states, including Saudi Arabia.
Muslim fundamentalism is already absorbing pan-Arab nationalism in much of the Middle East; but
it spreads far beyond the Arab world, witness the recent riots in Eastern Nigeria and the burning of the
American Embassy in Pakistan. It is profoundly xenophobic, hates the Soviet Union as much as the
U.S., and has a curiously mixed attitude to Israel, which it treats on the one hand as an outpost of
ungodly Western imperialism, on the other as an example of what can be achieved by a politicised
religion which can mobilise the masses.
11
The impotence of external powers. This brief caricature of the Middle East, past and present, may
serve at least to explain why Western policy has had so many defeats there since the war. But Soviet
policy has fared no better. Russia's alliance with Egypt collapsed like the Western alliances with Iraq
and Iran. Soviet influence in Damascus is no more absolute than American influence in Jordan-or in
Israel. Moreover the ability of the Middle Eastern states themselves to exert effective power beyond
their own frontiers is severely limited. Syria has been unable to produce an internal settlement in
Lebanon. Israel's attempt to control Lebanon by force has reduced her security and cost her nearly
600 dead, compared with nine killed in cross border raids in the previous three years. The idea that
Moscow could "incorporate the region into the Soviet bloc" is as fanciful as the idea that America
could incorporate the Middle East into NATO.
The most that external powers can hope to achieve is to prevent the instability endemic in the area
from jeopardising their major interests. For the West those interests include continued access to oil
from the Gulf and the security of Israel behind recognised frontiers. Neither of these interests is
shared by the Soviet Union. But Russia has one major interest in the Middle East which she shares
with the West: to ensure that the superpowers are not dragged into direct conflict with one another by
the action of Middle Eastern states which they cannot control. And she has one major interest which
the West does not share: to prevent a victorious Muslim fundamentalism from rousing the Muslim
peoples of Soviet Central Asia and Afghanistan. I believe these shared interests could form the basis
of limited cooperation between Russia and the West at least in the Gulf area if not, immediately, in the
Near East.
The Threat to Gulf Oil. The war between Iraq and Iran could lead to the interruption of oil supplies
from the Gulf at any moment. The West might survive an interruption of some weeks by drawing on
existing stocks, including America's strategic reserve. If the interruption lasted some months, it
would be a disaster, not only for the countries which need Gulf oil, particularly Japan, but for the
whole economic and financial system of the Western world. The debtor countries could not survive
the consequent increase in the price of oil to some $100 a barrel, and a further rise in the value of the
dollar. Widespread default could then bring down the whole of the private banking system. The West
would have to take physical action at some stage before that to reopen the Gulf. But the Gulf is part of
Russia's backyard. Bah rein, like Beirut, is only half as far from the Soviet frontier as Grenada from the
American. It would be essential to secure Moscow's understanding and at least her acquiescence in
advance of any Western use of force. Otherwise fighting between Russia and the West could not be
excluded. It is by no means inconceivable that Russia would give the necessary understanding. In
principle she has a major interest in freedom of passage through inland seas, since her access to the
oceans depends largely on passage through the Baltic and Mediterranean.
Controlling the arms traffic. Talks between the West and Russia on keeping the Gulf open might
well be broadened to consider other aspects of great power policy in the Middle East. If neutralisation
of the region was too difficult to start with, the great powers should at least discuss the possibility of
controlling arms supplies. All the dangers presented by instability in the Middle East are increased by
the recent unbridled competition between the external powers in supplying arms. Russia, America
and China have supplied both sides in the Gulf War. The most likely scenario for closure of the Gulf
assumes that Iraq fires French Exocets from French SuperEtendard aircraft to destroy the Iranian oil
terminals on Kargh Island and that Iran retaliated by sowing French mines in the Gulf from French
torpedo boats. There are already signs that Western powers may be supplying Middle Eastern states
with what they need to produce chemical and nuclear weapons.
In an area so unstable, where loyalties are so fragile, the political,damage caused by such behaviour
must outweigh any economic gain. Soviet cooperation in controlling arms supplies is a sensible
objective for the West. Russia did not attempt to overturn the postwar Tripartite agreement between
Britain, France and the U.S. to limit arms supplies to Israel and her Arab neighbours until the West
challenged Soviet security by bringing Iraq and Iran into the Baghdad Pact.
The need for Soviet cooperation. In 1977 Secretary Vance offered Gromyko the prospect of
cooperation in the Middle East. The Russians were ready to accept until the Camp David agreement
undermined the basis of their understanding.
Perhaps now is the time to try again. With the multinational forces finally withdrawn from Lebanon,
a greater United Nations' role is highly desirable. But that requires support from the Soviet Union.
King Hussein may be right in believing that the forthcoming elections in Israel could create a window
of opportunity for a new attempt to achieve a Palestinian settlement. Such a settlement too would be
far easier with Soviet understanding than without it. Experience should have taught Russia as well as
the West that the application of external power in the Middle East is rarely succesful and never for
long-particularly while ttie region is the theatre for competition between the superpowers. The
collapse of existing policies should give us all a chance to think again about the scope for coopera-
tion rather than confrontation as a means of securing our interests.
12
"The West, The Gulf and The Iraqi-Iranian War"
Working Paper Prepared by Eric Rouleau, Editor, "Le Monde" (FR)
The interests defended by the West in the Gulf are, of course, both strategic and economic in
character. The region, which contains over half the world's oil reserves and enormous deposits of
gas, provides Western ~urope with half its crude and a quarter of its gas. It contributes equally to the
prosperity of the industries and to the balance of payments of the Western powers.
The countries of the Gulf differ from the other petroleum producers because of the marked contrast
between their financial resources and their small populations; this phenomenon enables them to
devote a relatively high proportion of their investments to imports of consumer and capital goods, as
well as to the purchase of almost exclusively Western-made armaments. Their surpluses, which are
almost entirely invested in the U.S. and Europe, are a factor making for monetary stability.
The Gulf has the reputation of being the biggest market for armaments in the Third World and
absorbs roughly half of all the West's exports to the whole of Africa, Asia and South America. In world
terms, five Gulf states are among the first seven in military expenditure per head. In descending order,
these states are: Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Israel, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, Brunel, Kuwait, the U.S.,
the USSR and France.
The main suppliers-the U.S., the USSR, France and the United Kingdom-thereby keep their
armaments industries going, hold down unemployment, improve their balance of payments by
recycling a proportion of the petrodollars and, as a bonus, are able to wield a sometimes decisive
political influence in their client-states. Deliveries of armaments are accompanied by technicians and
advisers, sometimes numbered in their thousands, who install themselves in the nerve centres of their
host countries.
Soviet interests in the Gulf are different in character from those of the Western powers, at least in
the medium term. According to a report by the Defense Intelligence Agency published in the autumn
of 1981, the USSR is still the world's leading oil producer and will remain a net exporter well into the
foreseeable future. Should this forecast be borne out, for example through tapping a giant new field
in Siberia and developing other sources of energy, access to the Gulf would not become a vital
objective for Moscow.
Nevertheless, the Gulf is on the southern periphery of the USSR, which has a frontier with Iran 1,250
miles long. The Kremlin's ambition is clearly to be able to defend this "front" in the event of a war, to
prevent hostile bases being established in the region and thereby loosen the links between the
countries of the region and the Western powers.
The efforts of the USSR in this direction have not been outstandingly successful. Of course, its
presence in Afghanistan and Southern Yemen provides it with useful strategic positions, but they are
far from being of decisive im-porffi.nce. And of course, the fall of the Shah has deprived the U.S. of a
first-rate operational base, but even so the USSR has not thereby secured a willing partner, let alone
an ally. Paradoxically, the Khomeinyite republic is an even greater ideological and political obstacle
to the growth of Soviet influence than the Iran of the Pahlevis.
All in all, the USSR has a weak hand in the Gulf. It is not very familiar with the region, not having the
historical links possessed by Great Britain and unlike the U.S., it has not managed to obtain afoothold
in most of the countries there. With the exception of Iraq, Iran and Kuwait, all the other Gulf states
refuse to maintain diplomatic relations with the USSR. Nevertheless, Moscow has hitherto been a
model of caution and-as far as is known-has not made the slightest subversive move in any of the
Gulf states. It is true, however, that it cannot rely on any local communist party and is not in a position
to enlist the support of the Islamic movements, which for the most part are just as anti-Soviet as they
are anti-Western.
Most of the rulers of the Gulf states have declared repeatedly both in private and in public, that they
are not conscious of any Soviet threat, whether political or military. They do not believe that the
invasion of Afghanistan, which they regard as a very special case, will be repeated elsewhere in the
region, unless there is a third world war in the making.
They are far more concerned over two regional conflicts: in the medium term, they fear that the
deterioration of the Palestinian problem will have repercussions in the Gulf, where 600,000 of Mr.
Yasser Arafat's fellow-countrymen are living and serving in key posts in the civil service, education,
business and the professions; in the view of many observers, the failure to solve this problem amounts
to a time-bomb the explosive power of which is not properly appreciated in Washington.
However, the Gulf rulers are mainly anxious in the short term about the outcome of the Gulf war.
Even though they doubt whether the Iranians can win a military victory, they are afraid that the Iraqi
government will be worn down, which would amount to a victory for the Islamic republic. If that were
to happen, it would probably be a mistake to worry about the "Persian expansionism" that the
Baathist republic is constantly denouncing. A change of regime in Bagdad will not lead to the
13
annexation of Iraq by Iran, and it is not even certain that an exclusively Islamic government would
replace that of Mr. Saddam Hussein.
The threat facing the other Gulf States would in all likelihood come from within, i.e., avictory for the
Khomeinyite republic would give a strong new impulse to the Islamic movements throughout out the
Arab world. The Shiites in the Gulf states, whether of Persian origin or not, are regarded as potential
carriers of revolution. Treated everywhere as members of a minority and discriminated against, they
are usually on the side of change and provide the left-wing or Islamic organisations with their leaders
and organisers. This is the case in Bahrein, where about half the population is Shiite. The three
opposition movements in the country, the Islamic Liberation Front, the National Liberation Front and
the People's Front (the last two lay, left-wing movements) are largely dominated by Shiites.
The same is true of the Eastern province of Saudi Arabia, where the Shiite towns are in the middle of
the oil fields. In the United Arab Emirates, some 100,000 inhabitants (out of a population of 1.2 million)
are co-religionists of the Imam Khomeiny. Roughly 10 per cent of the population of Kuwait also
belong to this branch of Islam.
But over and above these religious affinities and political links with Iran in the Gulf, there is a more
serious consideration-the forces making for destabilisation of the established political and eco-
nomic systems. Ambitious, over-hasty modernisation projects have undermined these traditional
societies, projected nomads and peasants into the electronic age and weakened the values confer-
ring authority upon the sheiks and emirs. Given the political vacuum as well, Iran offers an attractive
alternative to peoples who have been traumatised by imported "progress"-a cultural identity derived
from their history and traditions; a puritanism that will stamp out the corruption of their governments;
an egalitarianism that will put an end to social inequalities; and mistrust of the "infidels", who are
regarded as the cause of all the ills afflicting Islamic society.
In order to cope with the challenge of the petrodollars, the region's governments have decided to
form a Gulf Co-operation Council to preserve the established order. The joint-essentially policing-
arrangements they have made have proved effective. But will they last? The case of the Shah should
help to make the West more cautious and realistic. Some Western powers behave as if any change is
bound to be a mortal threat to their interests. Of course, this reasoning is not always wrong, and it
becomes self-fulfilling if the normal course of events is opposed too long and by every means.
The U.S. is making the two-fold mistake of simplifying the nature of the threat by laying stress on the
Soviet peril, and of concentrating its efforts on the security aspect. As a result, it has met with
scepticism from the rulers, who have refused, for example, to endorse the "strategic consensus" put
forward by Alexander Haig. It is true that this scepticism is sometimes displayed in public by men who,
in private, welcome American activism. However, it is significant that it is the line taken to avoid
upsetting sections of the educated classes which are genuinely mistrustful of the U.S.' motives and
power to act.
It is politically unrewarding, in the Arab world, to appear to be under the wing of a power that is so
closely bound to Israel and has moreover forfeited a good deal of its credibility. The failure to
implement the Reagan Plan for a settlement in.the Near East and the inglorious withdrawal of the
marines from Lebanon have caused concern among those who were relying on the U.S. to enforcl'!
peace and stability in the region. As a result, the ostentatious movements of the Seventh Fleet in the
·vicinity of the Gulf to safeguard the Strait of Ormuz, while necessary, were not exactly well timed.
More generally, the attitude of the U.S. towards the Gulf war has been sufficiently equivocal to raise
questions. A declared policy of neutrality is in itself suspect in that a great power claiming to
discharge world-wide responsibilities can hardly remain indifferent to a war that has caused hun-
dreds of thousands of casualties and endangered the stability of one of.the most vital regions of the
world. It is also fair to ask-and the question has in fact often been asked in the Gulf press-how Iran
has managed to obtain supplies of American-made arms and spare'parts. The claim that Teheran has
bought them on the open market is only half convincing. It is known that the direct or indirect
suppliers include South Korea, Taiwan, Spain, Turkey, Brazil, Japan and Israel. Was it really beyond
Washington's power to prevent Israel-to mention only one country-from delivering military equip-
ment to the Islamic republic?
The same questions might be raised about Soviet behaviour. Is it conceivable that countries such as
Poland, the German Democratic Republic, Syria, Libya and North Korea could have supplied arms to
Iran without Moscow being involved?
Two assumptions are worth considering. Either the two superpowers are helping Iran along in the
interests of future good relations with a country in a vitally important strategic position. Or else they
are trying to bring about a "drawn game" which would have the advantage of not upsetting the
political map of the Middle East one way or the other. These two assumptions could complement each
other.
For political and commercial reasons, most of the European allies are well represented in the
Iranian market. The Federal Republic of Germany delivers Mercedes trucks and tank transporters;
14
Belgium produces rifles under licence there; Italy maintains the fleet and delivers spare parts for Bell
helicopters; and Great Britain supplies spares for the Centurion and Chieftain tanks. This is probably
only a small part of the deliveries being made to the Islamic republic.
France appears to be Iraq's sole ally. Naturally, she would have preferred to follow a more evenly
balanced policy enabling her to act as a conciliator if not as a mediator. But its dispute with Iran and
the sums owed her by Iraq have forced her to take a very different line. The debts incurred by Bagdad,
amounting to between three and eight billion dollars, depending on the estimate, of which one billion
are gtiaranteed by the State (the COFACE), leave France with virtually no alternative but to back its
principal debtor up to the hilt, especially since a number of Gulf states are increasingly grateful to her
on thaf account.
Between 1980 and 1983, the countries of the region purchased arms from France at an annual rate
of 32-42 billion francs ($4-5 billion) and in return supplied her with an appreciable proportion of her oil
imports. In all, the Gulf countries absorbed over 80 per cent of French arms exports last year. Early
this year, Saudi Arabia signed a contract for its air defence amounting to 35 billion francs, i.e., more
than the total French sales to the region in the whole of 1983.
Over and above these commercial considerations, political concerns are at work. France, to a
greater extent than its Atlantic allies, considers that the defeat of Iraq would set off a chain reaction
that might endanger stability and peace throughout the region. These fears are perhaps exaggerated,
but they are real enough. On the other hand, it is probably pointless to bank on an Iraqi victory or even
on a compromise between the two apparently irreconcilable enemies.
What then should be done? At the time of writing-the second half of March 1984-the wise course
would be for the Western powers to take joint economic, political and diplomatic measures to put an
end to the Gulf war, the most cruel and devastating conflict the world has known since the end of the
Second World War, and whose outcome and consequences are liable to make a mockery of the
apparently most logical calculations and forecasts.
Working Paper Prepared by Joseph J. Sisco
Former Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs (USA)
Major Developments. Three major developments in the Middle East and the Gulf are affecting
Western interests. First, sectarian violence continues to dominate within a Lebanon largely ungov-
erned, unreconciled, fractionalized, and occupied by Syrian and Israeli forces. A fundamental solu-
tion and unity is most improbable in the foreseeable future, and Lebanon will be under increased
Syrian influence. Secondly, the broader peace process has become moribund with no prospect for
early renewal. Third, the Iran-Iraq war remains stalemated; see-sawing on the ground tactically, each
side focussing incr.easingly on the other side's economic infrastructure, bringing about widespread
concern of a possible stoppage or slowdown of the flow of oil from this critical area. How much longer
can Iraq hold out against a stronger, more populous and zealous foe? A decisive Iranian victory over
Iraq and a collapse of the Saddam Hussein regime cannot be excluded, despite Western military
intelligence predictions of a continuing stalemate.
Another Mid East war resulting from violence and disunity in Lebanon and a defunct peace process
would seriously threaten Western interests. In the Gulf, Western interests could be adversely im-
pacted by an Iranian victory in two ways: by radical regimes, which are anti-legitimacy and anti-
nationalist, eroding or replacing moderate structures; and the shift in the balance of power which
would make regular access to oil unacceptably uncertain.
The key thrust ofthis paper can be summarized succinctly; trends in the area are worrisome, but do
not call for new U.S. initiatives at this time as much as for careful preparatory diplomatic efforts in
close collaboration with our allies. At the same time, the U.S. and its allies must be ready to move
quickly to defuse and/or exploit crises if they become dangerous. This is not a prescription for
passivity, but for lowering expectations that the U.S. has solutions to offer to intractable problems.
Sober Resignation In The Area. Many of the Middle Eastern regimes in the area seem to be marking
time with a deep sense of foreboding as to what time might bring. We face a prolonged period of
malaise, despondency, uncertainty, and instability in the area in which drift and intractability intensify
and sober resignation becomes even more widespread.
The temptation to let events largely run their own course and to disengage from Middle East
diplomacy for at least a period of time, by necessity if not by choice, is considerable. The frustration
level in Washington is high these days in recognition that its credibility in the area has been shaken as
a result of the reversal in Lebanon, the frozen diplomatic landscape, the environment of continuing
distrust and animosity, the enhanced opportunities for the USSR, and the sober realization that the
15
West's leverage to bring a satisfactory end to the Iran-Iraq war is marginal, at best. On the U.S.
domestic front, the recent Lebanese experience has re-ignited a debate focussing on whether, how,
and in what circumstances the U.S. should involve itself in unstable Third World countries. While the
focus is on Central America, the U.S. peacekeeping role has added fuel to the executive-legislative
disharmony. However, U.S. disengagement is not to be expected since it is broadly understood that
this would add to demoralization in the area, further dampening hope, and leave a vacuum for the
Soviet Union.
Familiar Patterns. In the short run familiar courses of action are apt to prevail-Lebanese fighting
rather than reconciling; Syria flexing its muscles, but brinkmanship within limits and with its eyes
primarily on its own internal situation; Egypt adhering to the treaty with Israel while reducing its
isolation in the Arab world, preoccupied with its own economic development, and with security
measures to keep Islamic fundamentalist and opposition forces in check, and at the same time
launching a delicate democratic experiment in allowing opposition parties to contest seats in a
parliamentary election; Jordan hunkering down; Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states discussing ways
under the umbrella of the Gulf Cooperation Council to cooperate in mutual security measures in the
face of the Khomeini threat; Israel scarred by the Lebanese debacle and in difficulty economically,
even more skeptical that any further diplomatic solutions are possible with its neighbors; a weaker
and more divided PLO with no independent base seeking to keep politically alive its separate identity
by perpetrating terrorist attacks; a U.S. that has backed off for the time being diplomatically, but
seeking quiet commitments from Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states that their facilities can be used in
the event of a Gulf crisis; Western Europe and the U.S. slowly tilting toward Iraq hoping, but not
confident, this will prevent a Khomeini victory; the USSR pursuing a limited policy of tactical
exploitation, insisting upon being included in any future Mideast diplomacy, but remaining essential-
ly cautious because it has found the Arabs unreliable, Israel too frequently the military victor, and
because it is preoccupied with a Soviet orbit in acute difficulty.
Lebanon: "Too Crumbly A Cookie To Hold Together." The failure in Lebanon was in policy and
peacemaking, not peacekeeping. The multinational force in its first phase was key in achieving the
peaceful exodus of the PLO. In the second phase, after the massacres in the Shatilla and Sabra
refugee camps, the peacekeeping force gave time for diplomacy to work. The conventional wisdom
that the Lebanese would unite if the PLO was removed proved erroneous.
In addition, two key policy mistakes were made. First, there was insufficient pressure on Gemayelto
put forward a reasonable reconciliation plan or alternatively the U.S. failed to press one of its own.
While strong Christian opposition would have had to be overcome, such a diplomatic effort would
have put the Western powers on the side of a more equitable sharing of power and be seen by the
Moslems and the Druze as a serious political move to bring about fair and peaceful change in
circumstances where Syria could exercise little influence since it was still reeling from the Israeli
mauling in 1982.
Second, the Lebanese-Israeli withdrawal agreement was also a factor. A Syrian-Israeli-PLO with-
drawal was a sound objective. The weakness of the agreement was three-fold: it took too long to
negotiate, giving Syria time to recover; it miscalculated Syrian intentions; and it went too far by
including provisions for normalization and trade, which predictably gave the Syrians an opening to
exploit Moslem-Druze opposition. In these circumstances, Syria achieved the exodus of Western
force and has allowed a Gemayel government to remain formally in place as long as it is under its
influence.
Major Syrian Influence Over Lebanon, Not Total Control. The short-run outlook is for the current
military equilibrium to be maintained largely because Syria seems to want and need a period of
relative stability due to a serious power struggle which has begun following President Assad's illness.
Currently Assad is not seeking a fundamental solution in Lebanon for two reasons: it cannot be fully
imposed and maintained by Damascus; and the principal parties are not ready. The existing fragile
political and military equilibrium in Lebanon is sufficient for Assad for the time being, allowing him to
continue to apply pressure for unilateral Israeli withdrawal. Syria is likely to keep the PLO in the Bekaa
valley away from southern Lebanon, while at the same time to aid or not to interfere with the strategy
of PLO guerrillas to carry out terrorist attacks inside Israel itself; there is a some hope that under
Israeli threat the Shiites in southern Lebanon will not actively assist PLO terrorists, though they will
continue to attack the Israelis from time to time; and Israel will have made some progress towards
developing a local buffer using the core of Haddad's forces under a new commander. Assad may be
helped inadvertently by Israeli public opinion, which increasingly favors an early total withdrawal
provided its northern borders are free of threat. This issue will become a focal point of the July 1984
Israeli elections.
Syrian influence is likely to be consolidated, but within limits. The West is going to have to live with
this situation for the foreseeable future. This is a loss for Western interests, important but not
necessarily vital, nor should it be assumed to be apermanent state of affairs. The cycle of violence and
16
counter-violence is apt to continue, mercifully perhaps with less frequency and intensity. While a
united Lebanon is even less of a potential reality than in times past, the situation is fluid, the
alignments fragile and already shifting. Both Lebanese and Syrians have begun to change emphasis
in their relations with various factions as evidenced at the recently concluded Lausanne Conference.
Syria's internal problems need attention. It was not in Syria's interest to press matters at Lausanne to
the kind of breaking point which could have caused a disintegration of the current constitutional
structure in Lebanon with nothing to replace it.
There is no Western diplomatic involvement in the Lebanese situation at this juncture that offers the
prospect of early resolution. However, the U.S. has continuing interests and influence, despite the
Mal'iM withdrawal. A change of emphasis and priorities in policy would be helpful: Lebanese
reconciliation over withdrawal of extraneous forces; diplomacy over use of force; on local and
regional trends over U.S.-USSR strategic preoccupation. While in the end no real progress can be
made until the principal factions in Lebanon give priority to reconciliation over violence, the U.S. and
its allies can encourage trends to this end.
Internal Difficulties In Syria. Assad's number one priority is survival and sustaining the legitimacy of
his minority Alawite regime. Support for the Moslems and Druze in Lebanon has been viewed by
Assad as a way to strengthen Syria's role as defender of Arab interests against lsraeJ. Two basic
tensions are at work in the potential internal power struggle in Syria. First, the Alawite-Sunni rivalry
has been a long-standing source of difficulty in Syria. Vice President Khaddam and Chief of Staff
Hikmat Shihabi are Sunnis. Second, there are also tensions and different aspirants within the Alawite
group itself. Facing its own religious and tribal feuds, Syria may well like to see at least a temporary
easing of warfare in Lebanon. This in part helps to explain Assad's temporary embrace of Gemayel
and helped catalyze some of the tactical shifts between Lebanese at Lausanne.
A major Soviet inroad in Lebanon is not likely, though the opportunities remain as long as the
country is divided and unstable. The Soviets will continue to bulwark Syria within the framework of
the Treaty of Understanding, whose formal terms do not go beyond Syria's borders. Syria is depen-
dent on the USSR, but is not its hostage, and it is making decisions regarding Lebanon in its own
perceived national interest, relatively free of Soviet influence.
Moreover, an early Syrian-Israeli war is impnbable despite the fact their respective forces confront
one another in Lebanon. The danger may well be further on the horizon. A fundamental reckoning
over the next several years between Israel and Syria could be the next phase in the convoluted history
of the Middle East, and the potential for direct and dangerous U.S.-USSR involvement cannot be
discounted. It is in the Western interest to influence the direction of any such reckoning in political-
diplomatic channels rather than a full scale bloodletting which could take place ultimately, despite
the fact that neither side wants this at this juncture.
Peace Process: Can It Be Revived? There is no prospect of meaningful negotiations on the
Arab-Israeli-Palestinian problem before 1985. The Presidential elections are only one factor. Of equal
importance is that the area needs time to adjust to the changes that have taken place. None of the
principal actors_<Jre ready to chance new departures.
American influence in the Middle East over the past decade has been based primarily on its
demonstrated capacity to produce political results. For more than 30 years following the creation of
Israel, there was no contact, no negotiation, no recognition between Israel and the Arab states. Then
in the 1970's, two Egyptian-Israeli disengagement agreements, one between Syria and Israel, the
Egyptian-Israeli Treaty, and the Camp David accords came about under the aegis of the U.S.
While no American diplomatic initiative is possible or desirable this year, a fresh coherent strategy
has to be developed for 1985 by whichever administration is in power if American influence is to be
rebuilt. Western Europe has a strong interest in such a strategy and a reassertion of effective U.S.
leadership in the area because in the end there is no adequate substitute for the third party role and
influence of the U.S.
Israeli Elections. Progress in the peace process between the two sides in the Middle East has been
in the past and remains dependent on close U.S.-lsraeli relationships, and Washington's capacity and
willingness to exercise influence. There have been shortcomings and successes in this regard. Israel
faces elections in July of this year. The economy will be the principal issue, but foreign policy will not
be unimportant. The results of that election could provide a possible opening for renewed U.S.
explorations.
Differences exist between the Labor party and the Shamir government. There is an overwhelming
majority in Israel today, transcending political parties, which insists that Jerusalem must remain
united and be the capital of Israel. There is also a large majority that opposes the establishment of an
independent Palestinian state. But the country is split between those favoring de facto annexation of
the West Bank and Gaza and those favoring territorial compromise with Jordan.
The Labor Party, under the leadership of Shimon Peres, has been more explicit in favor of
unilaterial withdrawal from Lebanon than the current government, though neither group will be able
17
to carry this out unless there are satisfactory arrangements assuring security of Israel's northern
borders. Moreover, Labor favors the "territory for peace" formula with Jordan. whereas the Shamir
government holds to the policy of de facto control of the West Bank and the Gaza. On the whole.
Labo'r is apt to be more openminded regarding the renewal of the peace process under U.S. aegis in
1985 than the current government.
Some Elements To Be Considered In Any New Strategy. Any future strategy. on which there should
be close consultations between the U.S., Western Europe. and Japan. will have to take into account
the changes which have occurred in the area. First, any American explorations will have to be pursued
quietly and privately through diplomatic channels. There are enough plans around: the proposals put
forward at the Arab summit conference in Fez, Morocco in September. 1982. the Reagan Plan. Camp
David, and various revised versions of UN Security Council resolution 242. There is no point to
elucidating new formal peace plans and launching them publicly to be shot down on all sides before
they get off the ground Any new diplomatic round must be prepared carefully. otherwise Washington
should stay out. There has been too much cosmetic diplomatic activity for its own sake.
Second, close U.S.-lsraeli relations helped achieve progress in the peace process over the last
decade. A substantial part of the Arab world long ago gave up on any notion of extinguishing Israel's
existence by military means once the U.S. had made clear its full commitment to Israel's security and
survival. But American-Israeli strategic cooperation cannot be limited to the military sphere and must
be broadened to include political components. For years. America has disagreed with Israel's
settlement of the occupied territories and its de facto annexation policy. preferring instead the
"territory for peace" formula. which is also favored by the Israeli Labor Party. There are continuing
differences in the American and Israeli approaches. and the coming year should be a time of deep
questioning and consultation. reminiscent of earlier years in order to harmonize positions consistent
with UN Security Council resolution 242. The new mood of sobriety in Israel offers the U.S. a fresh
opportunity.
Third. the focus of any future diplomacy must go beyond Jordan. Consideration should be given to
how best to test Syrian future intentions. Syria has spurned current Israeli overtures to work out a de
facto separation of forces in Lebanon. Is it satisfied to maintain the Syrian-Israeli confrontational
status or is there an interest in diplomatic negotiations with Israel aimed at coexistence and mutual
security between them? As for Israel, the Syrian position has taken on a more serious dimension in
view of Soviet assistance and support and could lead to a sober reevaluation. particularly under U.S.
nudging.
The Palestinian Question. Important changes have occurred. The PLO has lost its independent
base, but Palestinian nationalism is not dead. For a period of time the PLO had a conventional army.
but today scattered fragments (Democratic Front and Popular Front) are not under the control of the
PLO umbrella. Infiltration into Israel proper and terrorist attacks there will continue. Now that Israel
has destroyed the PLO superstructure)here is no longer any" return address" to which they can send
a retaliatory message. These guerrilla group attacks are also signals to Arafat and King Hussein.
The PLO is more divided then ever. Who represents the Palestinians? Is it Syria and Jordan on their
behalf? Is it Arafat who still has the loyalties of many Palestinians in the occupied territories and
throughout the world, but has no military clout, has been unable to unite the organization, and is
fighting to survive politically? Is it the West Bank Palestinians, who while professing loyalty to Arafat,
have their own independent interests with respect to the occupied territories and retain links to
Jordan? Or is it the PLO under the control of Syria? Is the Arab summit decision at Rabat. Morocco in
1974 designating the PLO as sole representatives as realistica)IY relevant as it might have been in the
past? Who in lhe Palestinian leadership can take the hard decision to give priority to negotiations
over the armed struggle?
A divided Arab world and Palestinian movement have been unable to resolve these issues, and the
burden has been put on the U.S. Atthe same time, U.S. insistence that the PLO must recognize Israel's
right to exist and accept SC resolution 242 is apt to be maintained either under a Republican or a
Democratic administration. There is no clear foreseeable break on this issue, but the best hope stiff is
West Bank Palestinian-Jordanian cooperation and representation with the tacit approval of the PLO.
The U.S. can be expected to work to this end.
U.S.-USSR Dialogue. Finally, there is the Soviet Union. Whichever administration emerges in
November is likely to make renewal of a serious overaff Soviet-American dialogue focussing primarily
on arms reductions, its number one priority. The Middle East and the Gulf will be secondary unless a
crisis develops. Nevertheless, informal exchanges between the U.S. and the USSR regarding the area
are inevitable as part of any renewed dialogue, if for no reason other than to reduce the risk of
confrontation, either by miscalculation or by design. It will be crucial to strike some delicate balance
between Syria's insistence that the Soviets and the PLO be included in a Geneva conference and past
U.S. and Israeli opposition to their participation. The U.S. success or failure to achieve a compromise
18
acceptable to both sides will have a decisive influence on whether the peace process can be renewed
at af/ sometime in 1985 or whether the area will drift towards another major bloodletting.
lran-lraw War: More Immediately Dangerous Than Other Mid-east Problems. Of more immediate
concern is the Gulf. While there has been much bluff and exaggeration in communiques, the fighting
between Iran and Iraq has increased sharply, and as this is written, a major Iranian spring offensive is
expected. The more populous Iran, with greater economic capacity, has a long range advantage in the
war of attrition. While most intelligence analysts predict a continuing stalemate, a major Iranian
breakthro1,1gh cannot be excluded, nor can the internal collapse of Saddam Hussein, who has not yet
paid th"e price for starting the war. But internal stress has become evident, increasing Saddam's
vulnerability markedly as the 40-month war has sputtered inconclusively and reached a new phase of
attacking one another's economic facilities.
The war has been difficult to terminate because for Khomeini, in particular, it is more ideological
than strategic. He must demonstrate that his brand ofIslamic fundamentalism can triumph in the first
test ofstrength outside Iran. He is insisting, therefore, on Saddam's resignation, pressing for ultimate
replacement of the regime with a friendly revolutionary Shiite fundamentalist leadership. Iranian
failure would have adverse repercussions internally and weaken the legitimization and raison d'etre
of his revolutionary regime. Strategically, both powers have aspired to regional leadership. Khomeini
has been able in large measure to insulate Iran's internal troubles from the war, Iraq has less capacity
to do so.
Up to now, it has been an Iran-Iraq war, it has not involved the Gulf states directly. The danger that
this next phase can embrace the entire Gulf has increased. Despite the escalation in the war, the
closure of the Strait of Hormuz remains unlikely. Not only is it technically difficult, but it would injure
Iran at least as much as the other. The psychological impact at this point is more immediate and
serious on Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, on insurance rates, and on dependentJapan and Western
Europe, even though conservation, availability of non-OPEC oil, reserve buildups, and a sluggish
world market have lessened Western vulnerability.
Washington and Moscow have responded to the war in similar ways because they find themselves
in strangely parallel positions. Neither side is deeply committed to either combatant, both powers
have limited influence or ability to control the course of the war or to end it. Neither superpower has
any particular desire to see one side win decisively, even though both the U.S. and the USSR see Iran
as the priority strategic prize. The economic capacity of the Persian Gulf and the Western depen-
dence on it provide Moscow with a potential political lever to promote a decline in Western influence
and an increase in its own, but Moscow has not been able to exploit the current situation: its
occupation of Afghanistan has been costly in the Arab world; the Tudeh Party has been outlawed by
Khomeini; internal problems at home are limiting factors.
If Iran should begin to hit oil facilities in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, or the Gulf states, the U.S. and certain
European powers would inevitably have to become involved in a supportive capacity to friendly
states. If naval force-15 required, it is near certain the U.S. would take the lead, if for no reason other
than to remind global and regional friends and foes that U.S. power is still relevant, despite the
setback in Lebanon.
Moscow is apt to act on the basis that it considers itself a party with regional interests as significant
as those of the U.S. If it should decide there is opportunity to undermine what has been the singular
Western guarantee of the Gulf, there could be a challenge, not necessarily a confrontation, but at
least Soviet naval involvement which would signal to Gulf states that Moscow has vital interests and
considers itself a party and guarantor.
The U.S. and Western powers, particularly France, have tilted somewhat to Iraq as its danger
increases and the Gulf states feel more threatened. This trend should be continued wherever feasible.
Moreover, the U.S. has counseled restraint on Israel and others in providing military assistance to
Iran. Trade between Japan and Western Europe with Iran has boomed.
No clear-cut overall Western strategy is evident or effectively feasible in the current situation. But
three things are clear: it is essential that in any crisis there be the closest consultation between the
U.S., Western Europe and Japan to arrive at a complementary and coordinated action and avoid
serious divisions; that the West act resolutely in support of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states; and that
contact be maintained with the USSR so to reduce the possibility of miscalculation by either side.
Consultations And Coordination. Common Western interests are vitally involved in the Middle East
and Gulf. There have been serious differences between allies. In light of the recent U.S. setback in
Lebanon, increasing instability and polarization in the area, and the potential threat to Western
energy sources, the case for closest possible coordination is ever more compelling. The dangers in
the Gulf and Middle East will be long and drawn out, and neither the U.S. nor the Western powers can
be found "short of breath" as Syria's Khaddam indicated in the Lebanese context. Neither NATO nor
the U.S.-Japanese security agreement deals with vital Mideast and Gulf interests. More needs to be
done to develop added Western military capacity for use in ~his vital area without drawing down
19
unduly on forces stRtioned in Europe. What is essential is a sustained involvement is essential and
less divisiveness, if not harmonization. If Western Europeans are dissatisfied with U.S. policy, the
most effective means to influence change is through confidential diplomatic channels, not public
initiatives which will strain relations further and may give the Arabs some temporary solace, but no
effective results. Moreover, Western Europe has paid its dues as peacekeepers, and it is entirely
understandable that, within the limits of its influence, it should play a significant role in any overall
strategy.
DISCUSSION
Moderator: Winston Lord
Participants in the discussion of the Middle East agreed that the situation was as volatile as ever and
that the likelihood of progress in the near future was minimal. We were faced with the challenge of
developing new policies to deal with two intractable situations-the Arab-Israeli conflict and the war
between Iran and Iraq. The U.S. and Europe had much at stake in the region, but lacked a cohesive,
effective approach to either situation. The dilemma was exacerbated by the need to find some
framework for consultation and cooperation with the Soviet Union, which had its own interests in the
Middle East.
It was a Frenchman's assessment that this was a "time of disillusionment and loss of control" in the
Middle East. Israel was in a deep, unprecedented moral crisis resulting from its failure in Lebanon.
The Palestinians were in a state of total disarray, having shown themselves to be incapable of solving
their own problems and with no prospect of doing so in the near future. The Western powers, too, had
failed to accomplish anything positive and had no new strategies.
Several speakers believed the West had lost considerable influence in the Middle East, and the
credibility of the U.S., in particular, as an intermediary and negotiator had been seriously under-
mined. A British participant argued that the problems in the region were largely internal, and outside
powers, even the superpowers, had little influence over the course of events. There would be a "fairly
long pause" before the West again attempted to produce any "grand designs" for the Middle East.
An American sought to provide a perspective on what was behind the current unsettled state of
affairs. No regime in the Arab world, including Syria, was today stronger or more self-confident then it
had been five years before. Why? The petrodollar era had ended, and the notion that dollars would be
translated into effective development and enhancement of Arab self-confidence had disappeared.
Inter-Arab divisions following Camp David had persistec;l and had eroded self-confidence. The
Lebanese crisis had proved to be a great blow to those Arab regimes that had hoped an era of relative
political moderation might emerge from the developments of the 1970's. For them, the situation in
Lebanon portended growing sectarianism and intensifying internal conflicts.
The implication of all this for the West, the speaker continued, was that the relatively stable Arab
system of the ?O's, in which regimes had been in power for several years and were starting to practice
pr2gmatic politics, would probably not remain intact all through the 80's. The regimes that survived
would be under pressure from two political trends. One was Islamic fundamentalism, wnose political
influence would be seen in two ways: a tendency of regimes to distance themselves from Western
values, and the re-emergence of opposition to Israel and to Jews on a religious basis. The other trend,
which the speaker viewed as positive in the long run but trouble':lome in the short run, was growing
agitation among the political and intellectual classes for democratization. They were becoming
increasingly disillusioned with the authoritarian regimes that had dominated the Arab world for so
long. This trend could be seen in Egypt, for example, where President Mubarak was taking certain
positions to demonstrate, as he sought to establish his legitimacy in the upcoming election, that he
was in touch with currents of opinion in his country, some of whic.h were anti-Western and anti-Israeli.
This sort of development did not bode well for near-term peace prospects. Initiatives would not be
forthcoming from the Arab world, and Western initiatives would be greeted with passivity, if not
hostility.
A Greek agreed that we had to take very seriously the phenomenon of Islamic fundamentalism. It
was not, he warned, confined to Shiites, but was increasing in strength in Sunni countries like Jordan,
Saudi Arabia, and Egypt. Its roo1s included a basic resentment of the West and a feeling of "mingled
envy and disgust" with Western consumerism and the corruption and inequality it had spawned. The
movement stemmed, in addition, from what was seen as the "Israeli insult" to Moslems and to Islam in
20
general. Its political force could be blunted only by Western support of political and economic
reforms and of democratic states in the region, combined with a major effort to seek a solution to the
Palestinian problem.
A German speaker supported the notion that some of the more moderate Arab states were
becoming increasingly neutral toward _the West. These regimes were particularly disillusioned by
Europe's failure to influence the U.S. to pressure Israel for a change in its policies. Europe needed to
"get its act together" and develop a common policy toward the Middle East.
It was widely acknowledged that the major immediate threat to stability in the Middle East arose
from the war in the Persian Gulf. The irony, said a British speaker, was that none of us in the West, nor
most of the Arab states, wanted to see either Iran or Iraq win. There were dangers both in a continuing
war and in decisive victory for one side or the other. The war posed a threat to Western oil supplies,
while defeat of either Iran or Iraq would likely lead to the collapse of the governing regime, which
would have grave implications for stability. But the West appeared powerless to bring the war to a
halt.
It was an American participant's opinion that the war had not been settled because, from the point
of view of Ayatollah Khomeini, it was more an ideological struggle than a strategic one. It was the first
test of his brand of Islamic fundamentalism outside Iran, and, as such, had great significance for the
future of the Iranian revolution. The speaker agreed that Western influence in persuading the two
antagonists to negotiate a settlement was marginal. From the Western point of view, the most
satisfactory outcome would be to have neither side win or lose decisively and to establish an
equilibrium in which the West's interests in the region's energy resources could be protected.
How vulnerable was the West to an interruption in the flow of oil from the Gulf? An International
speaker felt that, in the unlikely event that the Straits of Hormuz were closed, much of the impact
could be softened by tapping spare production outside the Gulf and by routing oil through the
underutilzied Saudi pipeline. While the dimensions of the supply shortfall-in the range of three
million barrels a day-would exceed that of 1979, the effects on the market would be lessened by the
fact the current energy consumption was increasing only moderately, and Western governments had
built up substantial reserves that could be committed.
A Briton considered it a more likely scenario that, if Iraq continued to attack tankers in the Gulf, Iran
might retaliate by bombing Kuwaiti or Saudi oil export terminals. But even in this situation, the net
effect on Western supplies would be bearable. More worrisome might be the effect of an early end to
the Gulf war. In this case, both Iran and Iraq could be expected to want to quickly increase oil exports,
thereby putting considerable strain on the cohesion of OPEC, which had, with difficulty, been holding
a ceiling on production. If Iran and Iraq increased production and pressed for larger quotas, it was
doubtful that OPEC could maintain the current price of oil.
A Norwegian fetithat it was unrealistic to expect a stalemate, with no winner or loser. The West had
to choose between two evils. The most severe threat to its interests, at least in the energy field, would
come from Iranian victory. OPEC had become "quite a responsible organization," holding a price
level that was in equilibrium to supply. But, if Iran should win, it was likely to become the dominant
force in OPEC and was not apt to be very cooperative. Oil prices might decline in the short run if Iran
won, but they would increase drastically in the long run. An American agreed, saying that victory
would give Iran "substantial control" over access to energy supplies in the Gulf and would allow it to
replace Saudi Arabia as the area's "swing state."
In addition to control over oil, Iran, in another American's view, had other incentives to keep the war
going. In terms of internal politics, it kept the army at the front and out of Teheran, where it might
become involved in political maneuverings. Other Iranian strategies were the destablization of
moderate regimes and the promotion of Islamic fundamentalism in the region. The West, while it was
not interested in Iraqi victory, could not afford to be neutral about Iraqi defeat. Iranian victory would
be the worst possible outcome.
A British speaker questioned even more directly the assumption that Iran should not be defeated.
To define the Western objective as maintaining a stalemate was "to fool ourselves." A stalemate was
unrealistic; it was better that a "respectable Moslem power" win, rather than a radical one. In any
event, Iran's defeat was not apt to cause any more internal disintegration and external destabilization
than was going on already.
A fellow Briton challenged the view that Iraq was a "responsible power." Five years ago, he argued,
it had posed the main danger in the Gulf. It was a country that had indulged in atrocities and had used
chemical weapons. This latter point was especially disturbing to a Swede. The tendency for some
Western countries like France and the U.S. to side with Iraq had dangerous implications for the use of
chemical weapons. Unless there was a srrong international condemnation of Iraq's using them, it
21
would be unavoidable, given their. relative cheapness and ease of manufacture, that they would be
used in future Third Wcirld conflicts.
If lra~were completely isolated, continued the Swedish speaker, a negotiated settlement should be
that much harder to achieve. Although Iran appeared at present to want to settle the conflict on the
battle field, it was still possible that a climate for negotiations might develop. Iran had problems of
internal stability and economic development that might ultimately force it to the bargaining table.
A Turk believed that the climate for negotiations was already improving. The political situation in
Iran was changing, he said. There had recently been elections, and Khomeini had indicated a desire to
leave more and mere decision making up to the parliament. The war had taken a terrible human toll,
and the people in both countries wanted an end to it. The opportunity for a settlement was getting
closer. Indeed, Turkey was uniquely qualified to play a major role in negotiating it. Turkey shared with
both Iran and Iraq borders, extensive trade, and historical, traditional, and religious ties.
Other participants wondered whether there was a role in the Gulf situation for Japan, with its heavy
dependency on the region's energy supplies. An international speaker pointed out that a military
response from Japan was out of the question, and that Prime Minister Nakasone's ability to take any
action was constrained at present by domestic political considerations. At best. some sort of eco-
nomic development involvement on Japan's part was a possibility.
Turning to the Arab-Israeli dimension in the Middle East, an American said that.in the case of
Lebanon, things would "continue to muddle along, with no fundamental solution." U.S. policy there
had been a."failure of pe:icemaking, not of peacekeeping." The U.S. had made mistakes in judgement
in thinking that Lebanon would unite once the PLO was removed and that the agreement between
Lebanon and Israel would work without Syria being included.
Lebanon would be, for the short term, under Syrian influence, but not domination, continued the
speaker. Syria had its own problems, notably a succession struggle. President Assad was trying to
preserve the Alawite regime. There was a contest going on within that regime and between the
Alawites and the Sunnis that limited Syria's freedom to act outside its own borders for the time being.
The problem of U.S. policy in Lebanon, in another American's opinion, was not that it was wrong,
but that it was "no policy at all." It was more a "reaction to an Israeli military adventure" that sought to
destroy the PLO as a political force and to establish some sort of partnership with the Maronites in
Lebanon. In pursuing the latter goal, the Israelis had hoped to help the Maronites establish their
dominance and to then make a peace treaty with them. These, the speaker went on, were incompati-
ble objectives inasmuch as the Maronites could never have consolidated their power if they had made
a treaty with Israel. The U.S. had followed this misbegotten Israeli policy without really knowing what
it was doing, and, after Israel gave up its "grand design," the U.S. kept blundering along.
A third American speaker took issue with his countryman's contention that the U.S. had supported
Israel's objective of destroying the PLO. The Multinational Force had in fact permitted the peaceful
withdrawal of the PLO from Lebanon and had saved the leadership of Yassir Arafat.
Looking ahead, a Greek participant felt that a solution in Lebanon was still possible. As Jong as
there was an Alawite regime in Damascus, the West had some common ground with Syria, which did
not want Lebanon to become a base for Islamic fundamentalist attacks on it. The Western goal should
be to foster a settlement in Lebanon involving less Maronite domination. What was needed was a new
constitutional arrangement with a more just internal balance among the various groups.
On the issue of Palestine, an American suggested that the Reagan Plan, put forward in 1982, was a
casualty of. the divisions within the Arab world over the Lebanese situation, the Gulf war, and the
Egyptian-Israeli treaty. The ,Jlan had required the support of King Hussein, who had backed off
because he had not gotten "a green light" from the other Arab countries.
The speaker agreed that the rest of 1984 would be a period of adjustment to new realities, with no
major new moves. But there was real hope for a revival of the peace process in 1985. This depended
on a Labor Party victory in the Israeli elections in July, 1984. Labor policies could be expected to be
quite different from those of the current regime. While a substantial majority of all Israelis wanted
Jerusalem to remain the capital and were opposed to creation of an independent Palestinian state,
there was a sharp difference of opinion as to whether the policy of de facto annexation of the West
Bank and Gaza should continue. Many Israelis favored some form of territorial compromise with
Jordan, allowing for Palestinian participation.
A British speaker felt that there was "at least a chance of progress" if Labor were to win, but he
worried that the "minimum Arab demand" might be greater than even the Labor Party would be
willing to accept. A Labor government wo1ild have to do more than make minor adjustments if there
was to be a possibility of a serious negotiation.
22
If, on the other hand, Ukud were to win, continued the speaker, there would be a "major test of
American will and prudence" in restraining Israel from another war. If the U.S. failed, the result would
be the end of all Western influence and possibly the collapse of those regimes that had been friendly
to the West. It was not unreasonable to question American willingness to pressure Israel. The Reagan
Plan had failed in part because there had never been any indication that the U.S. was willing to make
Israel do its part in seeking a solution. The speaker worried that the Reagan Administration saw the
domestic political price of getting Israel to accede to a settlement acceptable to the Arabs as too high.
An Austrian thought that there had been too little follow-up to !he Reagan Plan. The moderate Arabs
had a right to be frustrated and disillusioned. If negotiations were ever to resume, Israel had to send a
signaf1n lhe form of stopping its settlements policy, which increasingly looked like a policy of full
annexation.
An American worried that the "point of no return" on the settlements question was fast
approaching. Some in Israel were saying that it was already too late to change the policy because so
many Israelis had been settled. This suggested that even a Labor victory would make no real
difference and that there was no possibility of a settlement of the Palestinian issue that involved
giving land on the West Bank to Jordan or the Palestinians.
Others were more hopeful that asettlement could be achieved. An American felt it was not too late
for an interim solution involving a partial Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank. It would take a
substantial enough Labor victory so that a strong government could be formed, and it would require
the support of King Hussein. The plan would call for Israeli withdrawal from 60 per cent of the West
Bank, which would return 85 per cent of the Arab population therP. to Arab control. The speaker
believed the Israelis would insist only on demilitarization as a condition. Hussein might be interested
if he got Egyptian and Palestinian backing and strong U.S. support. Such an interim solution would
give the moderate Arabs more credibility and time to pursue a full diplomatic solution.
Another American pointed out that things had changed considerably since the Reagan plan was
introduced. Israel was now suffering from a "post-Vietnam syndrone," its strength and arrogance.
greatly diminished. The Israeli withdrawals from Lebanaon signalled to the Arabs that perhaps Israel
could not stand casualties. There had also been an erosion in confidence that the U.S. was capable of
achieving its objectives or even knew what it was doing. If the U.S. was to commit itself again to
seeking a solution, it first had to decide what it wanted to achieve and then secure Jordan's approval
and support. There was no point in the U.S. starting a new initiative without meeting these two
minimum requirements.
It was a Greek speaker's view that support for Israel was not a vital Western interest, but rather a
matter of principle-that of supporting legitimate, democratic states. If this was true for Israel, it had
to be true for the Palestinians, for they, too, had an identity. In the long run, the West could best secure
Israel's survival by prodding the Israelis to accept the emergence of Palestinian identity. Time was
indeed running short. The Islamic movement was gaining strength. One had to hope for a Labor
victory in Israel and, in the West, awillingness to prod the moderate Israelis and Arabs to get together.
Continuing on this line, an American said the balance in the U.S.-lsrael relationship had to be
broadened from the.Jnilitary sphere into the political sphere, with as much emphasis on securing a
peaceful settlement in the Middle East as on military strength as a means of guaranteeing Israel's
security and survival. But one had to acknowledge that the American-Israeli relationship had brought
about great progress in the last decade. It was only after it had become clear that the U.S. commitment
to Israel was firm that many Arabs had opted for the conference table over the battlefield.
A British speaker warned that the real danger posed by the various conflicts in the Middle East was
that the superpowers might be dragged into a confrontation resulting from the actions of other
countries over whom they had no control. Neither the Soviet Union nor the U.S. really controlled their
clients, Syria and Israel. It was essential that a dialogue be opened with the Soviet Union in order to
develop mutual confidence. A serious attempt by the U.S., Europe, and the Soviet Union was called
for to establish ground rules for dealing with instability in the Middle East, and to limit the supply of
arms to the region. Some participants expressed skepticism about the latter possibility, to which the
speaker replied that it could be done if the Americans and the Russians got together. It was in the
interest of neither of them to provide arms to unstable regimes which could become hostile at any
time.
An American pointed out that there was a basis for Soviet interest in preventing turmoil in the
Middle East. Though the Russians were not net energy importers, they did have an interest in oil and
gas purchases from the Gulf. They had shown "great caution" in not becoming involved in the war.
The Soviet Union wanted to be part of any settlement in the Middle East because of its general desire
to be seen as a superpower. But its influence in the area was limited. Its "capacity for making
mischief," however, was great, and it was more inclined to make trouble when it felt excluded.
23
24
Stabilization in the Middle East required Russian cooperation. In spite of their competitive rela-
tionship with the West, the Russians did not want an explosive situation in the Middle East any more
than we did.
A French participant agreed that there was a mutual East-West interest in preventing local crises
from spilling over into major confrontations. Certainly, the Russians had the capacity to undermine
any Western attempt at a solution. But we were wrong to think we could find a solution with the
Russians that we had been incapable of finding ourselves. We needed to "do our homework" about
what we expected from Soviet cooperation.
The question of how to involve the Russians was a hard one to solve, an American said. Did they
want a stable peace, or was uncontrolled tension acceptable to them? It was appropriate enough to
have a dialogue with them about the peace process, but the problem was that, in the Arab-Israeli
dispute, they always adopted the most radical version of the Arab position. The Geneva format was
doomed. There were other ways for the U.S. to establish a dialogue with the Russians without giving
them a "veto over progress."
A British speaker summed up the challenge that the West faced in seeking a solution in the Middle
East by saying that we had to deal with "a lot of very unpleasant people in a cruel and disorganized
part of the world." We needed to "apply reason" to the problems and avoid taking initiatives unless we
could reasonably expect they would succeed.
An American felt the correct approach was for the West to work together "quietly, within the
confines of diplomatic channels," and to avoid making public declarations. The situation in the
Middle East was neither as bad nor as good as it sometimes appeared. It was always "fluid and
changing." True, the West had suffered a setback in Lebanon, but not "permanent enfeeblement."
The Soviets were not the wave of the future. New opportunities were possible in the coming months. It
was essential that the West remain involved.
Note: Eric Rouleau, author of the French working paper, was unfortunately prevented from attending
the conference because of a journalistic assignment.
11. THE STATE OF ARMS CONTROL NEGOTIATIONS
"Forging Ideas for Effective Arms Control"
Working Paper Prepared by Kenneth L. Adelman,
Director, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (USA)
A standard saying in Washington runs something like this: "Negotiating with the Soviets is not
really all that bad compared to the ordeal of negotiating or, to be more accurate, battling within the
U.S. to get a position in the first place."
That is said only half in jest. The disagreements that take place over the bargaining table in Geneva
can sometimes pale compared to the debates over arms control purposes and policies that take place
in Washington. The Executive Branch, the Congress, the press, and the public all partake to varying
degrees, depending on the issue.
Having a general understanding of how the system works in the West, the Soviets frequently
assume that if they sit back and wait long enough, they can count on the West to negotiate with itself
and come up with new concessions to try to move them. It is an age-old strategy. Unfortunately,
experience has shown the Soviets that it is a safe and at times useful strategy for them to pursue.
This underlies the need for constancy and consensus, or at least a strong measure of support, if our
arms control efforts are to be successful. The Reagan Administration has put great effort into building
bipartisan support at home and greater consultation and coordination with U.S. allies. This underlies
the need to tryto·look ahead, farther down the road, to see how we can achieve our basic arms control
objectives and strengthen the public's confidence in them.
All of us here have a good grasp of where the different arms control negotiations stand today:
Before the Soviets walked out of the INF talks, we introduced a number of initiatives, working
closely with Allies. It is uncertain whether and when the Soviets will resume negotiations on these
weapon systems.
• The Soviets have indefinitely suspended the START talks, but I am confident we have not seen the
last of strategic arms negotiations. We have made a number of proposals there as well, to seek
significant reductions and trade-offs.
• The U.S. is actively reviewing issues in these areas to ensure that when the Soviets do come back,
we will be ready to meet them half-way.
Multilateral arms control negotiations will be where much of the action is this year-in the Confer-
ence on Disarmament with the new draft treaty for a total global ban on chemical weapons
proposed by-thetl.S.; in the MBFR negotiations with the West's recently tabled proposal offering
new flexibility on the data question, if the East will be flexible on verification issues; and in the CDE
where we have tabled several proposals aimed at reducing the possibility of surprise attack in
Europe and at increasing openness.
Rather than focus on specific issues in these negotiations, I would like today to discuss two
different approaches toward achieving our arms control objectives which I believe should be con-
sidered over the longer term.
Looking down the road is important. In arms control, as in other areas, deciding whereto go is often
just as difficult as howto get there. In this sense, arms control may be as similar to a Raskolnikov (who
took a lot of action without knowing what was right to do) as to a Hamlet (who knew what was right but
just could not do it).
I wish first to address the need to seek ways by which we can, over time, reduce dependence on
nuclear weapons in our defense posture while sustaining a balanced deterrent. Second, Iwish to offer
a few personal thoughts on the need to consider various ways by which we might advance arms
control objectives.
De-Emphasizing Nuclear Weapons. Nuclear deterrence will, for as far as we can see into the future,
need to be a central element in U.S. security policy. The U.S. commitment of that deterrent to the
protection of U.S. Allies in Europe is at the heart of NATO and Western security. Whatever else we do,
we must not cast doubt on the strength of that commitment and strategy, particularly in the face of the
Soviet military build-up. Such doubt only increases instability and the chances of miscalculation.
But a number of factors argue for examining further steps for strengthening our conventional
forces and thus reducing the extent to which we must rely on nuclear weapons in U.S. and Western
security strate'gy. For one, the U.S. no longer has the strategic nuclear superiority that it enjoyed up
25
until the late 1960's. In fact, the Soviets have advantages iri several aspects. For another, the prospect
that the effects of a nuclear war could be devastating beyond imagination is being driven home more
and more.
Finally, but not least, public confidence in our deterrent strategy will be undermined if we are
perceived as placing too much emphasis on nuclear weapons. While the overall U.S. nuclear
firepower has decreased over the past two decades, the nuclear firepower in the world today is still
some 5,000 times greater than the firepower used by all sides in World War II.
These factors highlight the need for a credible and balanced deterrent strategy. It is both reason-
able and possible to provide decision-makers with the necessary range of capabilities to counter
different levels of aggression. We need to present options other than the Hobson's choice either of
early use of nuclear weapons, with the danger of further escalation and annihilation-or inaction,
with the danger of surrender and loss of freedom.
New conventional weapons technologies offer one way to ensure a balanced deterrent and reduce
dependence on nuclear weapons. Effective nuclear arms control can also help.
Significant opportunities are opening up in conventional weapons systems that could enhance
security while decreasing reliance on nuclear weapons. Conventional weapons that could effectively
assume military roles that up until now have been achieveable only by nuclear weapons may not be far
away.
These systems are based on technologies for improved ways of finding and distinguishing targets
on the battlefield and in the rear; on more sophisticated command, control and communications
systems; and on more effective conventional munitions-the so-called smart weapons. They include,
for example, "self-horning" artillery munitions and infrared subrnunitions.
Our efforts in START and INF would reduce nuclear weapons to far lower and more stable levels.
Our proposals are consistent with our nuclear deterrence strategy, and reflect a willingness to reduce
the emphasis that has been placed to date on nuclear weapons.
The West has also taken several unilateral steps to reduce nuclear weapons, unilateral steps that we
hope the Soviets would in turn replicate. The U.S. nuclear stockpile today is a third below its 1967
peak and the rnegatonnage has been reduced 75 per cent over the last two decades.
In Europe, Alliance decisions over the last four years will result in a net decrease of 2.400 weapons
in the nuclear stockpile there. Even with full INF deployment, this would mean five nuclear warheads
withdrawn from Europe for every new one introduced.
These efforts, combined with improvements in our conventional capabilities, can help set the stage
for a security policy that provides a better balance between nuclear and non-nuclear alternatives.
Some of these conventional opportunities and programs are, admittedly, still in the early stages of
development. They will also cost some money. But we need to look at them now in terms of how they
can enhance our deterrent posture and public confidence in it.
Strengthening the conventional element of our defense posture does not argue for a change in
NATO's strategy of deterrence and flexible response. That doctrine, carefully crafted in the 1960's,
has served the Alliance well and remains valid today.
Moreover, conventional improvements should clearly not be entertained as a way to make possible
a policy of "no first-use" of nuclear weapons. Such a policy would be both unwise and dangerous. To
qualify the U.S. commitment to its own defense or to the defense of Europe with a "no first-use"
posture would lower the Soviet calculation of the risks and potential costs of aggression against
NATO. That clearly would not serve our fundamental policy objective of deterring war. The Euro-
peans, who have borne the overwhelming brunt of two large-scale conventional wars this century,
grasp this point better than we.
Flexible response-supplemented by an integrated policy for conventional force improvement that
would offer a better balance of options, including the option of no earlyfirst use of nuclear weapons-
would preserve an effective deterrent and go a long way to reasurring our publics. And, as Oxford
Professor Michael Howard has noted, "reassurance" of Western publics and political structures has
been as important in maintaining our freedom and security as has "deterrence" in its narrower sense.
Defacto And De Jure Arms Control. Looking down the road from another angle, I believe some
future arms control efforts might usefully take a slightly different shape. To date arms control has
been largely in the form of formal agreements establishing specific legal obligations binding on the
parties. We should, of course, continue to seek such arrangements where possible to reduce and
otherwise limit arms.
At the same time, we should be alert to possibilities for engaging in arms control by mutual
restraint, mutual example, or "mutually agreed unilateral policies." This could consist, for example,
of unilateral statements of national policy which may be negotiated and confirmed in exchanges.
These would in effect be reciprocal, not unilateral, undertakings.
These kinds of de facto arrangements would not, obviously, apply to all situations. In weighing the
relative merits of a de jure or de ~acto arrangement in any given case, certain considerations come to
mind.
26
Comprehensiveness is one of them. This is both a virtue and a problem. It is a virtue in the sense that
it is best to limit all critical categories of armed forces. Otherwise, systems that are not limited have a
tendency to be built up and exploited. Arms control in this respect is like wage-price controls, or other
controls for that matter. When squeezed in a. few areas, the other areas that are not so constrained
tend to grow excessively, thereby diminishing or even undercutting the overall impact of the controls.
While more comprehensive agreements are more likely to limit real military capability, they are by
definition more complex and difficult to negotiate. They are also, in many respects, much more
difficult to verify.
De factciarrangernents would have a tendency to be less comprehensive, and to focus on areas or
systems where verification presents fewer problems. They should, in theory, be easier to negotiate
and possibly quicker to attain. By being less formal, de facto arrangements would also be more easily
modified if circumstances changed than would legally-binding treaties or agreements. That, as well,
can cut both ways depending on the circumstances.
I am not suggesting that we should turn our attention away from the long and arduous negotiations
on arms control agreements. That would not serve Western interests or likely be successful. But I am
suggesting that, as we look down the road at arms control, we should also not ignore the possibilities
of it advancing or achieving our objectives in some areas by other means.
Conclusion. Barbara Tuchman once observed that "a problem that strikes one in the study of
history, regardless of period, is why man makes a poorer performance of government than of almost
any other human activity."
In the advanced nuclear age, we cannot afford poor performance in our security and arms control
strategies-not to mention other fields. Nor can we afford not to try to look down the road to possible
new, or at least different, horizons. I have tried to outline a couple of those today. More obviously exist
and will warrant our attention.
Working Paper Prepared by Christoph Bertram
Political Editor, "Die Zeit" (FRG)
The present state of arms control is characterized by three disturbing features: the political
willingness is absent between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, the only countries which really count in
this respect; the technical problems for effective arms control are fast outstripping the traditionnal
instruments for limiting the arms competition and for verifying the agreed limits; and practically all
the proposals presented in the current debate, while often intelligent or well-meaning or even both,
offer no more than' higflly inadequate directions for how to emerge from the present deadlock. My
own proposal in these circumstances is two-fold: to do everything to maintain what agreed restric-
tions on arms competition exist, and to proceed, if necessary unilaterally, towards a more rational
concept and a more stable arsenal of nuclear weapons than we have at present.
I. The Political Environment. Compared to public rhetoric only a few month ago, it is amazing how
routine and tired the call for arms control has become in the Western political debates. To some
extent this is the product of emotional exhaustion, caused by the feverish controversy over NATO's
nuclear modernization programme in 1983; to some extent it follows from the realization that the
world is not on the brink of nuclear disaster.
Moreover, the successful implementation of the first stages of NATO's nuclear programme has had
a decelerating effect on the attitudes of the two major powers. The Soviet Union, by demanding up to
the last minute of the Geneva negotiations a de jure recognition of its monopoly in land-based
medium-range nuclear systems, has painted itself into a corner from which it will not emerge for a
long time.•
This might be different if the U.S. under its present leadership were willing to provide even modest
incentives to the Soviets, not in the sense of eager concessions (which would clearly be wrong) but in
that of offering to the Communist leaders in the Kremlin, embattled as they are by economic squeezes
and by the fear of being left behind in the technological race, some perspective for a mutually
acceptable agreement in the not too distant future. But the Reagan Administration has so far refused
to do just that. It has interpreted the firrness of most European governments over the NATO mod-
ernization programme as further proof that one needs' to be tough with the Soviets; it has dismissed
the SALT II Treaty in a cavalier fashion (although it has observed some of its stipulations); it is,
through its fascination with space-based anti-missile defences, signalling its disregard for the
ABM-Treaty (which forbids ballistic missile defence in space as elsewhere and is of indefinite
duration); it is adamantly opposed to any restrictions on American technological innovation, such as
27
anti-satellite warfare. Moreover, in all its proposals for strategic arms reductions (START), the Reagan
Administration has indicated that it seeks not a mere regulation of the nuclear arms race but a
restructuring of Soviet strategic forces-an objective which is understandably both attractive to the
West and unattractive, if not plainly unacceptable, to the Soviet Union. Whatever one may think of the
intrinsic merits of current American arms control proposals, they offer not much incentives to a
suspicious, diplomatically cornered and politically uncertain Soviet Union. What is more: the
Administration makes few bones about the fact that this is precisely the message they want to convey
to the Soviet leadership.
As a result of both attitudes, and despite the popular guessing-games about impending moves for
some kind of breakthrough in Soviet-American relations as well as the popular professions of West
European governments for a new initiative towards the Soviet Union, it is wise to assume that there
will be neither for a considerable time. Although it is difficult to imagine that Moscow and Washington
will never again sit down and negotiate in earnest over how to regulate the arms competition, this is
likely to be a matter of years rather than months. It is true that a change in the White House would also
produce a change in the official U.S. attitude towards a more constructive search for arms control
possibilities. But this is not very likely and, if it should occur, the new team would need until well into
1985 to define a considered negotiating position. And even then it is uncertain whether the Soviet
Union would be able (another succession crisis?) or willing (a bigger role for the military?) to respond
constructively. Arms control, clearly, is not for today, only possibly for tomorrow.
II. The Technological Dynamics. What arms control there may be will have to contend with the
trends in military technology visible today which are likely to complicate, regardless of political will,
the task of arms regulation and crisis prevention.
The first of these is the trend towards ever shorter reaction times. The flight-times of intercon-
tinental missiles from launch to target lies at about twenty minutes, that of intermediate ballistic
missiles at about ten minutes. The growing accuracy of delivery systems-towards a medium error of
zero in the 1990's-means that reaction times, too, are being shortened drastically: ii you want your
missiles to survive an attack, you must lire them before they are destroyed by the attacker. This
applies to nuclear as well as non-nuclear conflict. The main arms race today is less about numbers
than about speed: who can hit, who can react more quickly.
yet exist. '
Current speculations about a space-based anti-missile system underline this race for speed. II you
want to destroy an enemy missile from space before it has left the atmosphere and discharged its
separate warheads on ballistic trajectories, you currently have no more than a few hundred seconds
to identify, trace and destroy it; that boost-phase could be reduced to 40 seconds! And if you want to
destroy incoming warheads from the ground, you have to deal with an attack which approaches its
targets at the speed of 5 km per second. The risk that computers, not human beings, will take the
fateful decision of whether or not to launch a nuclear war, will become real, even if today it does not
The second trend is towards the interchangeability of military systems, particularly of nuclear and
non-nuclear weapons. To compensate for the low accuracy of delivery systems, nuclear warheads
were needed in the past to assure destruction of an enemy target. Now, precision-guided non-nuclear
missiles and rockets have attained an accuracy rate which makes it possible for non-nuclear war-
heads to have the intended effect. However, the delivery systems of both nuclear and non-nuclear
munitions look very much alike to the attacker, and they will be targeted not only against convention-
al, but also against nuclear, objectives. The modern cruise-missile is a case in point: the same missile
is envisaged both as a nuclear and as a non-nuclear carrier. And General Rogers' plans to deal more
effectively, in Europe, with the enemy's second-echelon forces are based on delivery systems which,
for the attacked, look very much like nuclear weapons before they explode. The Soviet Union is
known to have concentrated increasingly on non-nuclear options to destroy the theatre nuclear
potential in Western Europe-again through means which, before impact, look very similar to nuclear
delivery systems: missiles and aircraft. As a result one of the few threshholds of warfare, the
"fire-break" between non-nuclear and nuclear weapons, is rapidly turning from a relatively clear-cut
borderline into a fuzzy grey area. Will the defender take the risk of assuming that an attack which
could be nuclear is only going to be conventional?
The third trend is towards dependence on highly sophisticated but also highly vulnerable com-
mand, control and communication in the conduct of war. As the means of information-gathering
abound, and as modern weapon systems depend increasingly on sophisticated inputs of data to
perform their missions, the gathering, evaluation and decision points become the nerve centers of
warfare, not only for strategic but also for theatre and local conflict. This raises a new and trouble-
some problem of vulnerability, much more serious than that of major weapon systems: while even
missiles can hide behind the screen of mobility, major command centres are critically limited in their
ability to evade attack. Redundancy may make up in part for this deficiency, but the basic dilemma
28
ij,'
f.
persists: modern warfare is becoming increasingly dependent on the survival, in war, of highly
vulnerable command and control.
Ill. The Proposals. If these are the major qualitative developments-the reduction of time, the
disappearance of clear distinctions between nuclear and non-nuclear attack, and the dependance on
vulnerable command and control_:..then the arms control of the future must seek to address these
issues. However, most of the proposals debated today, among governments, experts and the media,
still refer more to the past than to the future. While they may have value in promoting agreement or in
raising particular problems in the public debate, this limitation has to be kept in mind.
Mg&t,of the current proposals concern nuclear weapons. They range from incremental approaches
such as merging the INF (Intermediate Nuclear Forces) negotiations with the talks on strategic forces
(START) and a build-down of nuclear arsenals through mutual agreement, to more radical sugges-
tions such as a nuclear freeze or even regional de-nuclearization by the creation of nuclear-free
zones. None of these proposals, I believe, can point the way to a more promising arms control future.
Linking INF and START is a popular idea for those who regard both strategic and long-range theatre
nuclear weapons as belonging to the same category. By the rules of geography, the advocates are
likely to be situated in Moscow and, possibly, in Western Europe-but they are not in the U.S.
Indeed, to link both types df negotiations would present the U.S. with a choice that the Western
Alliance has been determined in the past to avoid: that of a trade-off between strategic and theatre
nuclear forces which a joint ceiling for both would imply. To call for combining the two sets
of-currently inactive-negotiations would mean to invite the U.S. to decide whether the strategic
deterrence of attacks against the U.S. is more important than the strategic deterrence of attacks
against Western Europe. It would at best be an awkward and, in any event, a potentially highly
disruptive choice for the political cohesion in the West. In addition, the combination would not speed
up the negotiations but rather protract them further.
The "build-down" proposal which is now integrated in the American START position is an inge-
nious method to ensure that weapons modernization should not lead to ever larger nuclear arsenals,
and that weapon systems with many warheads are discouraged in favour of those with fewer
warheads. Each new warhead installed would oblige the parties to eliminate, at different ratios, more
than one warhead from their inventory. (For a full description of the concept see Alton Frye:
"Strategic Build-Down: A Context for Restraint?", Foreign Affairs, Winter 1983184, pp. 293-317.)
As a proposal for START, however, it is suffering from the deficiencies of earlier negotiating
positions presented by the Reagan Administration: the Soviet Union rightly regards it as a means to
impose on Soviet strategic forces a new and different structure. Because of the ratios favouring ashift
away from land-based missiles to submarine-based missiles, the Soviet Union would have to pay an
extraordinarily high price for its heavy reliance on /and-based missiles. It is conceivable that the ratios
might be revised to apply the same reduction factor across the board for all categories, and thus
become more negotiable for the Soviet Union. But the best the build-down would achieve under those
circumstanci;.s would be to correct one of the misguided developments of the past, namely the
multiplication of-Warheads on every missile.
The nuclear freeze, like all freezes, gambles on the future being worse than the present. It freezes
nuclear arsenals in their present, highly unsatisfactory configuration-of large, fixed, vulnerable
land-based weapons packed with nuclear warheads-and prevents any modernization, even mod-
ernization towards a more stable structure of nuclear forces. It is thus a desperate proposal and a
profoundly apolitical one: since things can only get worse, let us stick to what we have. There is no
doubt that what we have is more than what we need, but also that it is badly configured and in need of
reform if the mistakes of the past should not stay with us indefinitely. Moreover, a nuclear freeze, if it
wants to prevent any qualitative change, is simply not verifiable; to call for a fully-verifiable nuclear
freeze is simply a contradiction in terms.
Nuclear-free zones are, in the first and possibly only instance, a device not for arms control but for a
change of political affiliation. A Nordic nuclear-free zone, limited to the Scandinavian countries,
would have little military effect-unless it included the Soviet bases in Northern Europe as well, which
is totally unrealistic to expect. Instead, it would loosen the political links between the Nordic countries
that are members of the Western Alliance and their partners in NATO. A nuclear-free corridor of 150
km on both sides of the East-West devide, as proposed by the Palme Commission, would, above all,
serve to crystallize German nostalgia for a neutral zone in the center of Europe. Its desired military
effect would be much better served by unilateral withdrawal of short-range nuclear weapons from the
Western arsenal than by protracted and complex negotiations between East and West.
Omitted from this critical appraisal are three non-nuclear negotiations: The Vienna talks on the
reduction of conventional manpower in Europe, the Geneva negotiations on banning chemical
warfare, and the Conference for Disarmament and Confidence-Building Measures in Europe which is
taking place in Stockholm. All three have produced interesting approaches, such as the notion of
confidence-building and of verification-by-challenge, and progress has been made through Soviet
29
readiness to accept a measure of on-site inspection. However, even if one or all of them should
succeed in th11 near future, the effect will be measured more in terms of political symbolism tha·n of a
significant control of arms. However valuable it would be to be able to demonstrate, for the first time
since t974, that East and West can agree on certain measures of military detente, this would remain
peripheral to the major problem of regulating the nuclear competition.
IV. The Priorities. The description of the state of East-West arms control presented here is not a
cheerful one. The political will is absent for any major initiative, the dynamics of military technology
threaten to reduce the political control over events in war, and the set of current proposals are either
not promising or irrelevant to the new problems or both. What, in these circumstances, should be the
Western priorities in arms control?
First, we should try to maintain the treaties and agreements that have been negotiated in the past.
True, none of these agreements has been perfect. But each has been helpful-even the much
maligned SALT II Treaty has served to provide a basis for holding the other side accountable, so much
so that the U.S., which refused to ratify the Treaty is now accusing the Soviet Union, which was willing
to ratify, of having failed to observe some of its stipulations' The Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972
remains in force although both sides, in particular the U.S., are displaying signs of restlessness-and
yet it provides the only available yardstick for constraining the search for active missile defences.
But there is another, important reason why these agreements should not be dismissed by the West.
International order will only develop through the respect of open covenants arrived at by both sides; it
cannot build on broken contracts. And not even Soviet violations would justify an abrogation by the
West unless these violations were of such magnitude as to deprive the whole agreement of any sense;
this is not the case in any of the American claims made recently against the Soviet Union.
Second, the West must rethink the importance that it attributes to the verifiability of arms control
agreements. The trend in Washington at the moment seems to go in the direction of making the ability
to monitor perfectly the compliance by the other side the supreme criteria for even entering into arms
control negotiations; witness the recent refusal to talk to the Russians about controlling military
competition in space. This is a questionnable approach for two reasons. For one, it tends to
discourage the search for a mutually acceptable verification regime before negotiations even begin;
as the SALT II Treaty has shown, verification depends on the constraints agreed, and it would be
disturbing if verifiability became the alibi for rejecting the search tor such constraints in the first
place. For another, there is the danger of confusing verification and the response to non-compliance;
as the recent statements by the U.S. Defence Department on alleged Soviet violations have indicated,
the problem has not been to identify violations so much as to decide how to respond if the explanation
offered by the Soviets were deemed unsatisfactory.
The real questions about verification are different: what degree of uncertainty is tolerable? And
what response to non-compliance is warranted?
Third, it will be necessary to halt the trend towards shorter and shorter reaction time: arms control
must seek to regain time for crisis management. This can be done through the negotiation of arms
limitation: such as a regulation of military competition in space, agreements on lower warhead-
ceilings per missile, even through an agreed increase in the number of missiles permitted to each side
provided they carry no more than one warhead. It could also be done through the agreement of
certain crisis procedures between East and West: a more reliable hot-line as proposed by the Reagan
Administration; nuclear risk reduction centers in Washington and Moscow, as suggested by a group
of U.S. Senators; and permanent communication through Standing Commissions between the major
powers as well as in Europe.
But both these steps have to wait until the political climate between East and West has improved to
make such bilateral or multilateral agreements possible. In the meantime, there is no reason why the
West should not undertake unilaterally those steps that could lead to a more robust nuclear posture,
and that can be afforded in terms of security. Indeed, unilateral arms control is probably the most
promising approach that is left. After all, arms are designed and deployed by unilateral decision. It is
easier to decide oneself that one can do away with some weapon systems or do without some others,
than to negotiate about weapons limits with a military rival!
To reintroduce time into the military decision unilaterally can mean a number of things. It can mean
to strengthen conventional forces in Europe, capable of meeting but not conducting a surprise attack
in order to weaken dependence on the early use of nuclear weapons. It can mean to dispose of all but
a few short-range delivery-systems for nuclear weapons in Europe-regardless of whether the
Soviets follow suit. An American decision to forego the MX-missile programme of multi-warhead
fixed ICBM's and to speed up instead the "Midgetman" project of one-warhead, mobile missiles
would be a contribution to strategic stability even if the Soviets should persist in maintaining their
present nuclear programmes.
Would effective ballistic missile defence help to gain time? This is doubtful for two reasons. For
one, no such _system can be "leakproof", and offensive weapons can still, at much lower cost,
30
overcome the defences that are conceivable even in ihe more distant future (although some protec-
tion for command and control centers could be desirable). For another, ballistic missile defences,
such as the currently much-discussed space-based variety, depend themselves on such short reac-
tion times that they do not gain time for the defender but increase the pressure for ever faster and
more automated responses.
Would a unilateral undertaking by the West not to use nuclear weapons first·help to gain time?
Probably not, because such a commitment is inherently incredible in the nuclear age. Nuclear
weapons are weapons of last resort-and herein lies their deterrence value. Deterrence means
preciselyJ,ha( you cannot be sure that the other side will not use nuclear weapons if pushed, and no
formal undertaking will provide certainty to the contrary.
As these last two examples show, not every unilateral restraint helps to gain time. But there are
those that do. A Western effort to increase the margin of time for political control, evalution and crisis
communication would, I believe, be a major contribution to arms control in the 1980's and one that
does not have to wait until East-West agreements become possible again.
It would also contribute to rebuilding the much strained political consensus in the West over the
reliance on nuclear weapons for our security. One of the driving fears of the anti-nuclear movement
which also has affected many in our societies who used to be uncritical towards nuclear weapons is
precisely that political control over nuclear decisions could be replaced by computer control, that the
loss of time implied by modern technology leads to an abdication of politics in favour of automated
programmes. If we do nothing to halt the current trend, we risk not only losing the time we need to
deal responsibly with international crisis and nuclear deterrence, but also the public support we need
in order to maintain the credibility of deterrence itself.
Working Paper Prepared by The Rt. Hon. Michael Heseltine,
Secretary of State for Defence, Member of Parliament (UK)
I take as read the current position in the various arms control fora. Nor do I intend to state the
obvious on the immense value of effective and verifiable measures of arms control, and preferably of
arms reduction. Instead I wish to comment briefly on the context in which arms control negotiations
take place.
A decade ago, the arms control process was seen both as a major element in a more constructive
political relationship between East and West and, at least in the public perception, as exercising a
genuine restraint on the pace of weapons development and the scale of deployments on both sides.
The DEABM (Anti·BaH!1>.tic Missile) and SALT I Treaties were the cornerstones of this edifice: but there
were perceived successes elsewhere, particularly the NPT (Non-Proliferation Treaty). Ten years on
nearly all is gloom. It is tempting to look back to an earlier golden age. But perhaps success was
always limited.
The SALT process constrained launch vehicles but by then the focus of technological development
was switching to warheads and accuracy. The ABM Treaty represented a major step in maintaining
strategic stability: but it also reflected the realities of the effectiveness of defensive systems in the
early 1970's. As we now see, it did not eliminate aspirations in this area on both sides. The goal of a
comprehensive test ban treaty-which unlike the earlier PTBT (proposed test ban treaty) would have
constrained the weapon designers-has so far proved elusive (for well known reasons associated
with verification). It is perhaps naive even to make these points. We all recognise the weight of the
military, scientific and industrial interests driving forward the development and production of new
generations of equipment in the Soviet Union. We tend to play down the significance of such
pressures in our own societies. But it is the job of military planners the world over to make worst case
assumptions about their potential opponents, and of scientists and industrialists to push weapons
technology to the limit.
Where are the countervailing pressures?
There are certainly economic constraints at work on both sides but we should not exaggerate their
general significance. The arms control process has tended to focus on nuclear systems both because
of the consequences of their use and because counting problems are more manageable. For those in
the superpower league, or even for substantial medium powers, the reality is that nuclear systems are
not so expensive that costs are a crucial constraint. The resource costs involved in an arms race in
some high technology areas, and the Russian fear that they will lose out to a superior western-
especially U.S.-capability, may provide some incentive towards agreement.
31
Ultimately, in this area as elsewhere, the countervailing pressure to the interests involved rests
upon the exercise of political leader?hip. Within the Soviet Union, the evidence is of an obsessive
concern for national security which dominates both the party and the armed forces: but the party
leadership are not subordinate to the military interest. They will be ready to strike a bargain only if they
believe that they cannot obtain an equally good or better result without giving anything away. Western
unilateralist gestures will not be reciprocated. Perhaps because they have an unrealistic idea of the
influence of Western "peace movements" the Russians seem to put their faith in the ability of these
movements themselves to impose one-sided constraints. Maybe political developments in Western
Europe and hoped-for increased East-West contacts will lead them to put less faith in this. A major
unanswered question is whether they will draw the right lessons from the deployment of INF
(Intermediate Force weapons) on time in Britain, the F.R.G. and Italy, and from the outcome of last
year's elections.
But we should not ignore the institutional pressures in the West and their implications. We rarely
seek to analyse the world as it might be seen from Moscow. The need to engage in a public debate
with vocal groups wholly opposed to the needs of defense at all has its own over-simplifying and
distorting effects-as in the quite disproportionate attention given to the narrow question of the
SS20 versus Cruise/Pershing II. We should not underestimate the significance of the turnover in the
political leadership in the Western democracies and the "need" to take initiatives to retain public
support. These processes generate changes in the Western negotiating stance at a pace which the
slow moving, ultra-cautious Soviet leadership must find very difficult to assimilate. And the essential
overwhelming human, financial and industrial resources involved in the defence commitment dwarf
those devoted to the less tangible and definable quest for arms limitations.
Arms control is a seductive subject tor "think tank" solutions which are technically elegant and
would lead to a better and fairer world as we construe it. At this level it can be pursued in isolation from
the wider "political" question of the underlying relationship between East and West. The underlying
reality is that we have to seek agreements with the present political leadership in the Soviet Union on
terms which they can comprehend and on the basis of mutual accommodation and acceptance. The
crucial question of verification cannot be tackled without some basis of trust. A dialogue has to be
developed across a broad front, within which arms control discussions can play a part. But we cannot
put the cart before the horse.
DISCUSSION
Moderator: Donald S. Macdonald
Why arms control negotiations had become derailed, who was to blame, and what initiatives and
proposals should be put forward to get talks back on track were the subjects of this discussion. Some
participants despaired that the West had lost sight of what it wanted to achieve in arms control
negotiations. Others felt that the challenge of arms control had become greater than ever because of
the rapid pace of technological developments in the arms field. All speakers agreed that the Western
interest lay in returning to the negotiating table. But there were varying degrees of both pessimism
and optimism that this would happen any time soon.
A British participant observed that progress in arms control was difficult because there was no real
momentum in that direction in the general processes of government. The pressures on government
leaders in the West-and, he supposed, in the Soviet Union-were to go in the opposite direction.
Momentum was on the side of the "vast military apparatus that surrounds us." Most decisions of
government were directed toward enhancing the West's military capability, not cutting it back.
Progress in arms control, the speaker lamented, had never gone beyond limiting future expansion; it
had never brought about actual reductions. In spite of agreements like the ADM Treaty, SALT I, and
SALT II, the momentum of the arms race had never slowed down. It was unlikely that it ever would,
unless the negotiating initiative started at the top level of government.
An American participant agreed that the prospect for arms control progress in the near future was
not good. This was largely due to Soviet disincentives to act. First, they did not want to do anything
that might help President Reagan in the November election; they viewed any "high-level dialogue" as
potentially helpful to him. Second, there was an uncertainty in the decision-making process in the
Soviet Union due to the succession of leaders in the past three years. And third, the Russians still
hoped to divide the U.S. and Europe over the question of INF deployment.
32
This analysis, in one German's view, was not correct. The arms control problem was not only related
to Soviet action or inaction. Relations between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.were at a low ebb, and
nothing, not even the U.S. election, was going to. change that soon. There simply was no "climate of
accord." The speaker foresaw a "long hibernation period" before any major breakthrough could be
expected.
Another American argued that it was a mistake to think that arms control negotiations required as a
precondition a better atmosphere. The U.S., after all, had negotiated SALT I while bombing Hanoi. A
British speaker felt that a change of climate probably would make little difference anyway. The
democratic processes of the West were continually altering the negotiating climate. The "kaleido-
scopit 'c'hange of leadership in democracies" put the West in a difficult position when trying to
negotiate with the "monolithic permanency" of the Soviet Union.
Nevertheless, negotiate we must, said an American, or we would be faced with a higher level of
military competition and a lower level of stability. Current U.S. proposals were of a "public relations
nature " and did not ofter the basis for productive negotiations. Meanwhile, new weapons systems
were in various stages of development and deployment, which made for greater instability and
gloomier prospects for any kind of arms control agreement. On one side in the U.S. were those who
were "committed to confrontation," who believed that regaining Western military superiority was
more important than arms control negotiations. On the other side were those who foresaw increasing
political problems stemming from the relationship of confrontation. That relationship was creating in
the Soviet Union an" attitude of mobilization" that made it more intransigent internationally and more
repressive at home.
East-West tensions did make it hard to get back on the arms control track, agreed an International
participant. It was time for the U.S. to "cut the rhetoric" and press ahead with confidence-building
measures and crisis management techniques while there was still a degree of openness in Soviet
attitudes toward arms control. An Austrian supported the idea that there could be no agreement
without a minimum basis of confidence. This could be achieved by building confidence from below
through some kind of modest agreement, or from above, by a recognition of the principle of parity.
Neither side, an American added, had in practice accepted parity, stability of systems, or deterrent
balance. There was a "lack of rationality" in the defense planning of both sides.
On the U.S. side, said aGerman speaker, a major problem was that the Reagan Administration gave
the impression that it "didn't give a damn about arms control." It ought to be presenting itself as an
administration that considered arms control a high priority and was ready to do business with the
Soviet Union on the assumption that there were areas where agreement could be reached.
Specifically, continued the speaker, the U.S. should not continue development of the "Star Wars,"
or space-based, defense, which risked violating the ABM Treaty. Nor should it be so preoccupied with
the issue of verification. Verification was not the be-all and end-all of arms control. The view that there
was no point entSL.in.g into an arms control agreement when compliance could not be absolutely
verified was wrong.
Several other participants were critical of the "Star Wars" program. A Canadian called it "highly
destabilizing." A British speaker worried that the economic cost and the military opportunity of this
next step in the escalation of the arms race might be so great as to prevent its ever coming under
control. Development of space-based systems by both the U.S. and the Soviet Union would lead to
mutual apprehension that both sides were seeking to achieve a first-strike capability. The inevitable
result would be a new range of weapons that abrogated the ABM Treaty.
The U.S. plan to deploy a new generation of nuclear-armed, sea-launched cruise missiles was
another source of concern. This deployment, said an American, would make virtually impossible an
accounting of nuclear missiles and would mean an end to any effort to achieve verifiable arms
control. A compatriot agreed that the program might have "a fatal impact on the arms control
process." In addition, it made little sense to encourage the development of a weapons system that
exposed 75 per cent of the U.S. population and only 10 per cent of the Soviet population to attack.
Another American spoke in defense of the Reagan Administration's policies. Verification was not
that crucial an element for the U.S. Indeed, the American interim proposal in the INF negotations
would have presented significant verification problems. In the case of the ABM Treaty, the Soviets had
themselves jeopardized it by constructing a major radar installation in the central part of the Soviet
Union. fn any event, research was permissible under the terms of the ABM Treaty, and, indeed, the
percentage of the Pentagon budget allocated to the program was insignificant. In other areas, the
Reagan Administration had actually scaled back programs supported in earlier administrations. The
current MX missile proposal, tor example, was smaller and less complex than the Carter version. In
Europe, the administration was moving toward less reliance on nuclear weapons. There had been
33
reductions in both the number of missiles and in megatonnage. Finally, the various proposals aimed
at breaking the deadlock in the INF negotiations underscored the administration's seriousness about .
amis control. ·
Of the various alternative arms control proposals that had emerged in the West, a German was
concerned that none of them addressed the real challenge, which was, in his words, "the implosion of
time." The arms race was moving technologically to ever shorter reaction times. In ten years, political
control over military events might no longer be possible. This was especially disturbing in view of the
fact that future wars were not as likely to result from careful planning as from things going wrong.
Such proposals as no first use, nuclear freeze, and nuclear free zones were not useful, the speaker
went on. The notion that nuclear weapons would only be used in the last resort was "inherently
incredible." The mere fact that such a concept had been talked about in the West had "facilitated the
task of Soviet military planners." The Russians had increasingly enhanced their capacity to deal with
.Western military installations by non-nuclear means. Nuclear-free zones had a minimal impact on
reducing the chance of nuclear war. They were not nuclear-safe zones and would not change the
military situation. Their only relevance was political. An American added that most arms control
proposals today were significant only in tf1eir political or symbolic impact. They had lost their
relationship to strategy and had become almost an end in themselves. We needed a "new intellectual
framework for arms control" which would enable us to judge whether a proposal made any sense
beyond being acceptable to the Russians.
The German speaker thought that unilateral action offered the greatest hope for arms control in the
near term. Given the absence of agreer:ient and the worrisome technological trends, the West needed
to "look more courageously in this direction." We at least ought to put our own house in order. Had we
exhausted the possibilities of structuring our own military forces· in a rational way? Our heavy reliance
on short-range battlefield nuclear weapons suggested that we had not. Perhaps it was easier to make
arms control progress without negotiating with the other side. Reciprocity in the end was not so
important. What we did unilaterally, we could always undo unilaterally.
A Swede agreed that, given the present deadlock, the unilateral approach "had some attraction."
But we had to be careful how the Russians perceived unilateral actions on NATO's part. What was
intended in the West to be stabilizing might be perceived in the Soviet Union as threatening. As for no
first use, the speaker wondered if the NATO nuclear option was any more credible. A pledge of no first
use coupled with force planning might build confidence, enhance stability, and reassure domestic
constituencies.
A British speaker was reluctant to dismiss a nuclear freeze as an arms control option. The specter of
nuclear winter, in which all life in the Northern hemisphere might be wiped out by a single 100-
megaton blast, argued powerfully for a freeze. To contemplate using nuclear weapons was suicidal. A
freeze would give both sides time to plan more stable systems. If we in the West failed to seize the
initiative, public support for NATO would erode.
Two Germans endorsed the view that public support for the alliance depended on arms control
progress. One speaker warned that, if the alliance paid only lip service to arms control, it would lose
its political cohesion. We could rely on nuclear deterrence only if we made a "constant and credible"
effort to reduce the chance that nuclear weapons might be used.
The other German pointed out that arms control was a subject that "concerned and agitated"
millions of people. We needed to "brighten up the arms control horizon" if we expected to conduct
the necessary debate about our security and defense problems. We were going to have to address the
questions of force structures, weapons procurement, and changes and adjustments in our strategy-
such as conventionalizing our defense-in the coming decade. This would be impossible unless a
parallel effort in arms control was going on. The measures we needed to take were expensive and
politically awkward and required public support. Arms control had a "legitimizing function" for our
future security and defense programs. Public opinion would not support these programs unless we
legitimized them with a "sustained, studied, and serious effort in arms control."
Some participants were more optimistic about the prospects for a resumption of arms control
negotiations. An American felt there was "too much gloom" being expressed. There were consider-
able pressures on the Russians to return to the conference table. They were concerned about
Western defense efforts, their economy was "a mess," the technology gap with the West was
increasing, and they faced serious problems in Afghanistan and in East Europe. They had seen the
West stick together in the INF deployment and the election and re-election of conservative govern-
ments there. Regardless of what party won the U.S. election, the Russians would have to return to the
negotiations in 1985. The on,ly requisite on the West's part was unity and an intelligent policy.
34
i
I
<1'
Another incentive for the Russians to resume negotiations was, in a German's view, their desire to
have good relations with Europe. Clearly they viewed Europe and the U.S. differently. They had no
desire to cut off all ties with the West. In addition, they were being pressed by East Germany, Hungary,
and Rumania not to deploy more weapons in East Europe and to adopt a more flexible attitude toward
arms control.
In terms of a unified and intelligent policy, an American participant found it encouraging that both
the President and Congress had approved the recommendations of the Scowcro!t Commission. That
meant that the U.S. had one policy for the first time in many years. If the U.S. could stick to that policy,
there was hope for new negotiations that might "lead us out of this morass."
~""' , '·
35
111. FUTURE EMPLOYMENT TRENDS IN THE INDUSTRIALIZED DEMOCRACIES
Working Paper Prepared by Max Ge/dens,
Director, McKinsey & Company (NETH)
"Nothing could be more certain than the fact that every improvement in machinery contribu.ted to the
improvement in the conditions of the persons manufacturing the machines, there being in a very
short time after such improvements were introduqed, a greater demand tor labor than ever before."
The Earl of Lauderdale, House of Lords, 1811
Ever since Hephaestus, God of the mechanical arts~·c'r~ated "two female statues of pure gold which
assisted him and accompanied him wherever he went," the world has been going uphill or downhill
depending on: whether you view a glass of wine as half-full or half-empty; whether you believe in
R2D2 or Frankenstein's monster; or whether you study employment or unemployment statistics.
Unemployment and underemployment have become emotionally and politically charged words. A
clinical treatment of the matter is likely to be misunderstood or misquoted because it concerns
ideological differences and voters with widely varying interests. For example, to assert that many
people are voluntarily unemployed and subsidized by their deluded countrymen, will evoke a storm of
protest from both injured parties; to contend that automation and robotization can, in the long run,
create many more jobs than will be destroyed, surfaces waves of disbelief from everyone except the
inventors of such technology.
In theory there is employment opportunity for everyone who wants to be employed. Theory and
practice come apar.t because cultural and political barriers, imposed by society, retard or interrupt the
natural employment process. If people are not employed-or are underemployed-the causal factors
must be found in how society has trained, motivated, and priced labor; blaming advancing technol-
ogy as the reason for unemployment avoids realities, injects a scapegoat, and diverts attention from
what needs lo be done.
The demand for work is infinite but the supply of workers is restricted-not the other way around.
Workers are restricted, first, bl" natural and unavoidable constraints (i.e., age, health and sleep) and
second, by individual and collective choice (education, mobility, retirement, subsidized non-
participation, and leisure time preferences).
Consequently, ii large numbers of people are involuntarily unemployed or underemployed, the
constraints placed by society on the supply of workers must be studied, not the demand for work. The
demand for work is always there but not always at the levels of compensation the unemployed have
been persuaded to consider as either adequate or justified. Shoe-shine boys are hard to find in
Scandinavia and the Benelux but the demand is certainly there. Similarly, there is always demand for
skills that are not immediately available. Thus, the problem lies in the mis-match between clJ.anging
but ever-present demand and supply that cannot or will not refillond.
Focusing on half-empty glasses and unemployment levels is not likely to be as fruitful as eliminat-
ing or ameliorating the impediments and constraints on the employment process. Yet most elected
officials (politicians, union and industry association leaders, members of representative bodies,
elected members of boards of directors, and so forth) have pursued the paths of least resistance in
trying to solve unemployment problems. The paths selected include such programs as overly gener-
ous unemployment benefits, financial aid for inefficient industries and obsolete plants, reductions in
the number of hours worked each week (not as a way to raise the quality of life but to redistribute the
jobs still available), trade restrictions, production quotas, and similar schemes.
Work is a negotiable commodity. The time people can make available to work-to be a worker-is
measurable and finite: it is simply the population of a country (city or region) adjusted by the
unavoidable constraints on work imposed as signalled above. Human behavior, when confronted
with the choice of working or not working, is broadly predictable and can be influenced. The problem
is not that someone has been thrown out of work, but that circumstances prevail prohibiting the
immediate reemployment of that person. In a dynamic society, people will and should be "thrown out
of work" continually-simply because the nature of the work performed must fundamentally change
for standards of living to fundamentally improve.
FACTS AND FIGURES. Historical evidence for the assertions put forward above is quite persuasive.
However, the evidence-taken in the aggregate-does not do justice to the seriousness of unemploy-
ment problems faced by many countries and particularly many cities like Liverpool, Detroit, and
Rotterdam. There are currently 34.8 million people unemployed in the industrial democracies; there
are likely to be 39 million people registered as looking for work by 1985.
37
The half-full glass is this: employment has been rising steadily among the industrialized democra-
cies for at least the past 100 years-this is the period of history for which reasonably reliable statistics
are aV<iilable. Over this same period, employment as a per cent of population has increased-which is
a better way of saying that the percentage of the population not working has been decreasing. There
have been brief periods of discontinuity in the job formation process-particularly in some parts of
Europe-but these have generally been followed by periods of rapid expansion in employment.
Exhibit 1illustrates: (1) the steady growth in the U.S. labor force; (2) the steady growth of the labor
force as apercentage of population; and (3) the steady decline of the percentage of the population not
employed.
Employment participation rates in the OECD countries-which are primarily the industrialized
democracies-was stable in the 1970-1975 period, increased from 68.0 per cent in 1975 to 69.2 per
cent in 1979, and remained stable again till 1982. During this 13-year period. employment increased
steadily (by about 30 million) except in 1982, when total employment declined from 330 million
registered jobs to 328 million.
The Netherlands-together with Spain-has the highest unemployment rate in Europe-approx-
imately 17 per cent. More importantly, nearly half the registered unemployed have been unable to find
work for over a year. Yet today there are 267,000 more jobs in the Netherlands than in 1977-a five per
cent employment increase over a seven-year period. In contrast, Sweden has enjoyed one of the
lowest unemployment rates in Europe-3.5 per cent in 1983. However, total employment in Sweden
did not expand-in either absolute or relative terms-much faster than it did in the Netherlands
(120,000, or a three per cent employment increase). This fact suggests that unemployment and
employment statistics can be studied separately and are for a large part unrelated.
The aggregated statistics provided above mask a number of important positive and negative trends
among the individual countries that make up the industrialized democracies. At the same time, they
fail to highlight an important social change; unregistered work, a change that significantly distorts
the employment rate actually reported over the past decade. Both facts require some elaboration.
First, overall OECD statistics are flattered by the rate of employment growth in the U.S. and Japan,
and are depressed by substantial declines in the U.K. and Spain. Despite the statistical influence of
these four countries on the aggregate, the general conclusion may be drawn that the employment
creation process has succeeded in absorbing an increasing number of people in nine out of every 1O
years since the turn of the century and an increasing percentage of the total population in nearly every
five-year period except the early 1930's.
Second, the frequently cited unemployment statistics of the late 1970's and early 1980's fail to
recognize the growing number of unregistered workers. For purposes of clarity. it is useful to identify
three forms of employment; self-employment; unofficial employment; and official emloyment. Only
the latter is reported and registered. The self-employed and unofficially employed may account for as
much as one-third of all the work performed. If there was a convenient way to trace and register all
work performed and compensated (in one form or another), employment and unemployment statis-
tics would have looked quite different. It is, therefore, reasonable to conclude that the employment
process may have faltered in most industrialized democracies in the early 1980's but, in the aggre-
gate, it did not decline to the extent reported.
The unregistered worker is not necessarily idle; he or she could be the "do-it-yourselfer"-called
the "presumer" by Alvin Toffler (i.e., the producer-consumer). Prosumers are rapidly increasing their
share of the work that used to be registered, in the 1960's, as work performed by third parties for
monetary reimbursement.
In addition to prosumption, the unregistered barter transaction is becoming a significant but
unrecorded factor in the employment process (e.g., the carpenter who repairs the leaky roof of his
dentist in exchange for dental work for his son). The advantages of transactions consummated in this
form are obvious and the number of such transactions is likely to increase in the coming years. Based
on several studies on the subject, prosumer and barter transactions may already represent 1Oto 20
per cent of all the work performed in the industrialized democracies. The percentage is growing but
there is, of course, some overlap with prosumption data.
Unofficial employment is simply defined as untaxed or illegal transactions conducted on an
arm's-length basis for money. Depending on the country, unofficial employment probably represents
between 10 and 25 per cent of all the work performed.
The implication of the estimates put forward above is this: (1) the Gross Domestic Product of all
industrialized democracies is significantly understated; (2) the level of real unemployment is over-
stated; and (3) a larger percentage of the non-institutionalized population is currently working than
ever before-if all forms of work are counted; and (4) the possibility of enticing the unofficially
employed and self-employed to return to the registered economy, without a fundamental change in
the tax structure, is negligible.
38
j
I
REVOLUTIONS AND DISCONTINUITIES. When they were first observed, five important' employ-
ment revolutions and work structure discontinuities were predicted to have the effect of dislocating
massive numbers of workers; (1) the agricultural revolution; (2) the industrial revolution; (3) the entry
of women in the labor force; (4) the energy price revolution; and (5) the informational revolution. The
predictions were incorrect. The rate of increase in the number of jobs may have hesitated, causing
elected officials to rant, exonerate, and condemn, but at no time did the employment process really
suffer to the extent predicted.
Agriculture. Although data is obviously sketchy, marketable·employment (or paid-for work) has
been increasing ever since 3000 BC. The practical maximum man is physically able to work is about
5,000Pours per year or about 100 hours per week. Before 3000 BC, nearly everyone was employed
about 5,000 hours per year hunting, fishing, building shelters, weaving cloth, and harvesting
rudimentary crops. Those who did not or could not work did not survive unless they were provided for
by some unusually productive and magnanimous benefactor.
The invention of the ox plough. somewhere in Mesopotamia around 3000 BC, fundamentally
changed the prevailing concept of work; more could be produced than could be consumed by the
individual or the family, with the result that excesses were either saved or traded. Saving introduced
the concept of wealth and trading encouraged a division of labor that favored efficiency or talent. The
most rewarding form of work was farming and farmers quickly outnumbered hunters and producers
of goods or services.
Farming remained the dominant form of employment until about 1880, when advancing agricul-
tural technology began to significantly reduce the labor content of a ton of harvested produce. Today
less than five per cent of the labor force in the industrialized democracies are able to produce 20 to 30
per cent more agricultural products than can be consumed by these nations (Exhibit 2).
The critical lessons to be learned from the so-called agricultural revolution and th.e employment
discontinuities it provoked, are these; First, it was a relatively gradual and unpublicized change that
started in the early 1800's and stabilized in the 1970's. Second, the retraining necessary for most
factory jobs was clearly modest. Third, the incentive to be mobile-to leave the farms and move to the
cities or come from abroad-was apparently substantial. Fourth, it was not economically attractive to
most countries to import agricultural products from low-cost foreign suppliers. And most important-
ly-from the perspective of farmers-labor and capital remained together so that income could be
derived from both. In fact, income from farm work itself has probably remained relatively stable in
constant dollars, while the farmer's income from labor and capital together today exceeds national
averages for all forms of work.
Industry. The industrial economy began in the early 1700's but did not attract large numbers of
farmers, tradesmen, women and children until the mid-1800's. By the 1880's, industrial employment
exceeded all other forms of registered employment in what were then the industrialized democracies.
Unlike farming, which underwent only two fundamental changes (increasing farm size and increas-
ing output per worker through mechanization) industry introduced three additional and more thre-
atening changes; the separation of labor from capital; competition from foreign-made products; and
the introduction of organizational forms that centralized, specialized, synchronized, functionalized,
and institutionalizea·tabor while concentrating, maximizing, and standardizing output.
Instead of largely self-sufficient families or communities, the overwhelming bulk of foods, goods,
and services were made available for sale or exchange. Everyone became dependent on the produc-
tion of someone else. But, in so doing, a division of labor dramatically increased productivity and,
therefore, per capita income (Exhibit 3).
Despite frequent and widespread resistance, labor-saving technology has prevailed because, in the
long run, the beneficiaries of real advances in productivity will always outnumber the victims.
Although evidence is somewhat inconclusive as to when resistance breaks down, a factor of 5 to 1
seems not unreasonable. In other words, when a machine can replace at least five men, at an
investment of no more than the lifetime wages of one man, technology will ineluctably surmount
whatever forms of resistance may have been placed on its path.
Technology generally follows the same path of least resistance favored by elected officials. It takes
the form of gadgets, toys, and other strength-or mind-extension devices. Subsequently, ii will replace
unpleasant or hazardous work. Thus the pocket computer, video game, compact disc, sewage
disposal apparatus, and robots that spray toxic paints are as welcome today as the wedge, catapult,
wine press, lever and hoist were in the 17th century. But transfer lines, industrial robots, numeric
controls, and assembly lines are just as threatening as tower mills, Jacquard looms, water frames, and
steam pumps were at the birth of the industrial revolution.
Unfortunately, an orderly or evolutionary changeover from one technology to another technology
is seldom possible in a competitive world. And, if competition takes the form of foreign producers,
employment discontinuities, due to the delayed introduction of new technology, may never be
repaired.
39
The European steel industry, for example, has suffered serious and probably permanent damage
from what in hindsight appears to have been a singular lack of vision and resolve in the early 1960's. At ,
its peak in 1970, the European steel industry employed nearly 500,000 workers and operated through
more than 100 very profitable corporations. By 1980, only one or two of these companies are able to
make ends meet, the remainder are supported by the state and the EC is waging a heroic war to repair
the damage.
The rise of the Japanese steel industry and the dramatic impact their unfinished and fabricated
steel products (cars and ships) have had on the European steel industry, and Europe's traditional
export markets, is well known and need not be described again in this paper. What is less well known
is that it could all have been avoided for less money than will ultimately be invested in protecting jobs
in obsolete plants and charging buyers of steel premiums above "fair market" prices.
Using a large and powerful computer-based steel industry simulation model, it was possible to
determine the size and shape of a European steel industry that could not only satisfy internal
European demand and compete on a cost basis with the Far Eastern imports (despite higher
European wages), but could also provide an adequate return on invested capital.
In one particular configuration, the European steel industry would be structured around eight
(instead of 38) integrated plants. producing eight to 10 million tons of steel each; 20 (instead of 80)
cold rolling and coating facilities; and 90 (instead of 205) mini-mills for plates, profiles, bars, and
wires. By using the most modern technology available today, the industry would employ 150,000
ratherthan 470,000 workers to produce between 85 million and 100 million tons of steel, competitively
insulate Europe from imports, and provide lower-cost steel to the European metal fabricating
industries than they can purchase abroad. The capital required is $70 billion and the arrangement
promises $14 billion in annual cost improvements ($6 billion in labor and $8 billion in energy,
supplies, and maintenance) over the current method of production.
The important point. however, is that all the European countries together have already invested
roughly an equal sum· simply trying to keep the current, largely obsolete, production configuration in
operation. In view of the violent strikes organized in France, England, and Belgium to keep obsolete
mills and pits open, the decisions being taken by elected officials are expedient and therefore
understandable-but in the longer term severe damage will have been done to the shape of the
industry.
The labor-reduction opportunities in steel are pertinent, because various studies prepared by David
Birch, Marc Porat, and others estimate that only nine to 20 per cent of the population in industrialized
democracies are producing all the manufactured and industrial goods demanded by these nations.
By 1990, all the manufactured products needed by the U.S. will probably be produced by less than 20
million workers or about nine per cent of the population. Thus, it is not unreasonable to speculate that
by the year 2000, there will be as many workers in factories as there are on the farms. The remainder of
the labor force will be active in the service sector of the economy.
The lessons to be learned from the industrial revolution are these: First, the observations of the Earl
of Lauderdale, captured at the outset of this paper, were prophetic-technology has indeed created
many more jobs than it displaced. Second. not only were more jobs created and an ever-increasing
percentage of the population was involved, but per capita income rose steadily during the entire
period. Third, the separation of capital fmm labor and the failure to reallocate income to form a
community of interest. provoked the misunderstandings that sparked revolts and demonstrations.
Fourth and most important, the failure to apply new technology exposed many of the industrialized
democracies to imported goods for which the exporting nations did not enjoy natural advantages-
except entrepreneurial initiative-opening permanently circuits that had remained largely closed
during the agricultural revolution.
Women Workers. From the perspective of the male worker, women are labor-saving devices.
Women cost significantly less per hour to employ, confirming again that work is available if workers
are prepared to enter the labor force in an economically attractive fashion. Many new professions
(telephone operators, secretaries, teachers, and so forth) were added in a revolution that exploded
silently and did not directly displace male workers. The bulk of the female work force entering the
factories and mines did, however, reduce the number of opportunities for males but not to the extent
that male participation rates were impeded-at least not until the late 1970's.
Female participation rates in the OECD countries have risen to nearly 50 per cent and to nearly 56
per cent among the seven largest economies of the OECD. From 1870 to 1950, male participation
rates rose from 75 per cent to 87 per cent-the period when female participation grew the fastest-
from 14 per cent to 35 per cent.
• $33 billion has been provided in direct Article 54 & 56 subsidies, $25 billion in hidden subsidies for premiums above
the equilibrium price-or fair market price-and roughly $10 billion is currently being given in direct or indirect
subsidies granted to steel mill operation, coal and iron ore mines, transportation companies, and electricity
suppliers.
40
Recently, female partiGipation rates increased sharply, presumably because housewives are again
entering the labor force to supplement the earnings of families with unemployed males. For example,
in the Netherlands, the country with one of the highest unemployment rates in Europe, male
participation rates declined from 78 per cent to70 per cent between 1977 and 1982, while female
participation rates suddenly rose to 37 per cent after many years of stability at between 32 and 35 per
cent.
The primary lesson from the women worker revolution and the discontinuities described above is
that if changes in the employment structure are understandable and inarguable, they seem to take
place silently and without resistance.
E~rgy. Many economists have observed that the industrial revolution was fueled by cheap energy.
Until 1973, the world price of oil (in constant dollars) declined from $9.82 to $1.95 a barrel. In 1974, oil
prices rose to $7.92 and in 1980, they rose to $12.75 (Exhibit4). Between 1900 and 1973, the number of
hours needed to pay for a barrel oil declined steadily from 4.8 to 0.6 hours (Exhibit 5). Between 1973
and 1980, the trend was reversed. After the 1973 oil price increases, real wages in the U.S. declined
despite increases in employment. Between 1973 and 1982, average wages paid in constant dollars
were down by 16 per cent, suggesting that the first important effect of oil price increases was
declining per capita income, not a r.educed rate of employment. The second oil price increase in 1980
seems to have interrupted the employment rate which, in the U.S. at least, did not resume until 1984.
Since 1973 and 1980, industry has taken giant steps to reduce the energy content of finished goods.
Cars are lighter and use less fuel, houses are more effectively insulated, and consumers have become
energy-conscious. World consumption of oil has declined by 1,100 billion barrels and should stabilize
at 20,000 million barrels per annum till it is exhausted. The Mellon Institute estimates that the U.S. can
reduce the amount of energy used to produce a GNP dollar from 55,000 BTUs required in 1973 to
27,000 BTUs by the year 1980 and remain at that level as different forms of energy emerge.
The lessons learned from the oil price revolution are these. First, cheap energy has been the driving
force creating employment but even a 400 per cent increase in oil prices (oil represents 80 per cent of
all fuels used) failed to halt the job-creation process. (In contrast, the 1980 increase in oil prices of 60
per cent seems to have broken the camel's back momentarily.) Second, when prices of any part of a
business transaction rise disproportionately, technology is immediately applied to use significantly
less of that part of the transaction cost-whether it is labor, energy, raw materials, transportation, or
capital. Third, it has not been the application of new technology that has caused a job-formation
problem but the relative cost of energy and the relative cost of labor, which were permitted to
rise-often because new technology was not applied.
Information. The fifth revolution and discontinuity in work structure deserving consideration, is the
growth of the service sector of the economy and the displacement of cerebral instead of manual labor
by informational technology.
Until 1970, technology had only a modest impact on the employment rate in the service sector-an
observation equally applicable to the formative years of both the agricultural and industrial sectors.
After 1970, technology began to have a significant impact. To understand how, requires segregating
the service sector.l_nt_o two parts: the classic or traditional purveyor of consumer and industrial
services (retailers, utilities, wholesalers, hotels, travel agents, restaurants, and so forth) and a vaguely
classified part, loosely called, the "information worker" or the "information sector" (programmers,
teachers, accountants, stock and insurance brokers, lawyers, bureaucrats, and so forth).
The traditional part of the service sector has remained stable in terms of employment and may
even-depending on definitions-be declining together with industry. The informational part of the
service sector is growing very rapidly. According to Daniel Bell, the information or knowledge worker
accounted for 17 per cent 9f the labor force in 1950 and may have risen to 65 per cent in 1980.
Dr. Marc Porat in a well-known, but somewhat dated, study for the U.S. Department of Commerce,
using different definitions-he includes computer manufacturing, telecommunication, and print-
ing-concludes that 42.6 per cent of GNP and 53.0 per cent of personal income was developed by the
information worker. The informational worker probably represents 50 per cent of the U.S. and
European GNP today.
During the 1970's, 19 million new jobs were created in the U.S. Five per cent were in manufacturing,
11 per cent in goods producing, roughly 12 per cent in the traditional service sector, and possibly 72
per cent (:!: 14 million) in the informational sector of society, including 3 million persons employed by
state and local governments.
At the moment, the rapid decline of employment in the industrial sector-augmented by the
increase of imported products with a significant labor content-is being absorbed by the burgeoning
informational sector. However, the massive acquisition of computers will exact a toll on the employ-
ment rate. For example, prior to 1980, there were only one million programmable computers available
to knowledge workers. By 1983, nearly two million were sold annually. Dataquest estimates that
global sales in 1990-of computers with substantially greater power-will exceed 11.5 million a year.
41
·To date, however, displacement of knowledge workers by machines has been modest. A recent
Austrian study estimated that white collar workers in all industrial and service sectors were only
modestly impacted by automation, mechanization, or computer application. With the exception of
banks, insurance companies, and government agencies-where the percentage of jobs affected can
be compared with what was predicted for blue collar workers-white collar positions potentially
displaced by technology ranges between one and 22 per cent, depending on the industry (Exhibit 6).
The lessons to be learned are these. First, unlike the agricultural and industrial revolutions,
technology known today does not promise to massively displace information workers in the foresee-
able future-thus employment growth rates should remain unabated until at least the year 2000.
Second, in the informational sector capital and labor are coming somewhat together again, promis-
ing a less tumultuous close of the century. Third, the ability of the informational sector to quickly
absorb displaced industrial workers is far more limited than factories were able to absorb farmers
and, as a result, massive retrain.ing programs will be needed by all the industriailzed democracies.
CONSTRAINTS AND IMPEDIMENTS. In rough order of importance, the primary reasons underlying
employment demand and supply mismatches are these:
1. Functional skill 4. Status
2. Price 5. Counter-incentives
3. Mobility 6. Disillusionment
In April of 1983, the National Commission of Excellence in Education prepared a report entitled A
Nation at Risk and pointed out that the number of "functional illiterates" in the U.S., who will have
difficulty finding employment, ranges between 18 and 64 million people. Comparable estimates have
been prepared in Europe by various ministries of education. For example, various reports estimate
that 75 per cent of all administrative jobs in 1985 should be performed with the help of a computer but
no more than 25 per cent of the employees holding such jobs will be computer-literate.
Exhibit 7 illustrates the dramatic increase in gross wages per hour-actual and in constant 1980
guilders-in the Netherlands since 1895. While far more pronounced in the Netherlands, comparable
trends have been experienced in all industrialized democracies. The unemployment rate in the
Netherlands is also shown in Exhibit 7 and the correlation between price and demand is indicative.
It is broadly accepted that the price of labor-particularly the price of labor in many threatened
industries-is far too high. Not only is the employer persuaded to avoid taking on new workers but
transaction costs have risen to the point demand falters. For example, the demand for oil dropped
when prices escalated by 400 per cent; a comparable development can be detected with regard to
labor.
The industrial revolution attracted farmers from the country, immigrants from agricultural
societies, and commuters from neighboring townships. The term mobility also includes the flexibility
enjoyed by employers to separate redundant, incompetent or unwilling labor. In this regard, the U.S.
and Canada still enjoy a significant competitive advantage over the European democracies and the
inevitable restructuring of the work force .in Europe is likely to cost more, take longer, and culminate
in a less economically attractive palette of jobs than, for example, Japan and the U.S.
There is a disturbing correlation between unemployment allowances and benefits and the length of
time the unemployed remain inactive (Exhibit 8). Generous unemployment benefits permit the
inactive members of society to be more particular and selective about accepting a new position-
particularly ii wages and job status are less attractive than in a previously-held position. In Europe, the
job-seeker can remain a ward of the state for at least two years, and in some countries longer, before
economic pressures become really serious.
Finally: d.isillusionment. The majority of displaced workers are re-employed within 12 months and
cannot be classified as either disillusioned or disenfranchised. But an increasing number of unem-
ployed are becoming discouraged, hopeless and have lost self-confidence and self-respect. Although
there are many self-help arrangements and therapy centers, few long-term unemployed seek assis-
tance or participate in unpaid community service projects just to keep busy.
The partial elimination of the constraints and impediments described above would be beneficial in
boosting the employment rate. However, legislation in this regard would be enormously unpopular. In
fact, the most pronounced advantage of a democracy-elected representation-is working against
the formulation of the tough, unpopular, measures needed to regain momentum and competitive
success.
IDEAS AND SUGGESTIONS. It is obvious that many of the policies and programs instituted by the
industrial democracies to reindustrialize, preserve employment, and restrain the migration of indust-
rial activity to foreign countries, have been far less than satisfactory. Taken over the long term, many
of the policies adopted may have done more harm than good, although at the time they were applied
there may have been few practical alternatives. Enormous sums of money have been invested with no
return-either financially or in employment-and large numbers of workers have been frozen into
positions with limited prospect.
42
Possibly the most useful contribution a paper such as this can make is to put forward uninhibited
and unconventional thoughts that may stimulate further thinking and discussion with the expectation
that practical policies and programs will ultimately be conceptualized and implemented by the
industrialized democracies. The term "practical" is used in recognition of the fact that long periods of
time are necessary to change direction ami permit the adoption of what are fundamentally different
ideas on how to manage society.
1. Tax raw materials and energy-not people. Rather than taxing the incomes of most workers, the
idea would be to tax energy (fossil fuels), non-regenerable raw materials (iron ore, bauxite, clay,
certain (ypes of rare timber, and so forth), in addition to transaction values (sales taxes, value added
taxes·or other taxes on consumption), corporate profits, capital gains, high incomes (to redistribute
income), and property.
The advantages of the idea are obvious, but the implications are somewhat mind-boggilng. The
advantages would be a refocusing of technology on reducing raw material and energy content rather
than labor content. In other words, potatoes could become a raw material for semi-synthetic fibers
rather than petrochemicals. Tax avoidance and the administration of taxes would be significantly
reduced, individual incentives would be enhanced (the incremental effort to work would not be taxed
disproportionately), and many similar benefits.
The process of applying such an unconventional tax system is not too complicated-for example,
progressive tax application would start at possibly three times the existing national average wage
level. Excise taxes would be applied to imported and domestically extracted raw material and fossil
fuels; imported goods would be taxed on their raw material content, and exported products would be
tax-reimbursed.
There would obviously be the same level of confusion in pricing products as when oil prices
increased by 400 per cent and when European value added taxes ol 10 to 25 per cent were imposed
alter the Second World War. In most countries, after-tax income would increase by 25 to 50 per cent,
but the purchase price of goods would rise significantly while the price of services would remain
almost stable. If the system works effectively, workers would neither come out ahead nor behind, but
they would be given far greater freedom on whether to save or consume.
The U.S. government collects roughly $600 billion in taxes annually. Of that amount, $286 billion are
derived from individual income taxes. The remainder is broken down as follows: $61 billion corporate
taxes, $183 billion social security taxes, $41 billion excise taxes, and $29 billion in other taxes.
Assuming that progressive taxation would only begin at $40,000 to $50,000 a year, roughly $200
billion in tax revenues would be foregone. Approximately $220-250 billion was paid in the U.S. for
domestic and imported fossil fuels, minerals and other non-regenerable raw materials. Assuming the
import/export of raw material content is in balance, the excise tax on raw materials and fossil fuels
would amount to about 80 to 100 percent. This is obviously a significant increase, but in terms of the
final price of the end product somewhat less-about 40 per cent, because energy and raw materials
average 40 per cent of the cost of goods sold.
As industry seeks to reduce the cost of a transaction by minimizing energy and raw materials, tax
revenues will obvfo.usly decline. The same phenomenon occurred when labor prices increased:
unemployment rose, but with the added burden that unemployment allowances had to be paid.
Rather than continuing to increase taxes on raw materials and fossil fuels, the funds needed by
national and local governments will need to be obtained through increases in value-added taxes. In
the U.S., a 10 per cent sales tax would deliver between $100 billion and $150 billion, depending on
whether food is or is not subjected to taxation.
Excise taxes would not be imposed on regenerable raw materials such as agricultural or fishery
products, harvested timber, and so forth. Neither would taxes need to be levied on the price of
intermediates (electricity, synthetic fibers, and so forth).
While nearly all the tax reform bills in the U.S. (Bradley-Gephart, Hall-Rabuska, Kemp-Kasten, and
so forth) are designed to stimulate the economy, few proposals are focused on reducing the relative
cost of labor in the cost of goods sold. It is the labor part of the transaction, however, that requires
urgent attention.
2. Import duties based on wage differences and operating subsidies to industry. A variety of factors
have, over the years, determined the nature and amount of duties imposed on imported goods. The
primary factor has been to protect local industries, even though such industrles might have been
operated in an inefficient manner. Since the Tokyo Round of discussions aimed at reducing trade
restrictions, the number of restrictions has increased by 500 per cent.
The business strategy of many nations has been to exploit low-cost labor and heavily subsidize
certain industries to create export markets while at the same time insulate local consumption from
foreign-made goods. While any national development plan is the sole prerogative of the nation that
wishes to impose such aplan, it is questionable whether other nations should contribute to the cost of
such plans. In other words, an arrangement which results in the loss of jobs domestically through the
43
import of goods and services that are produced by significantly lower paid workers and subsidized by
a sponsoring government, will interrupt the employment process in the importing country. Some-
times import restrictions take that fact into consideration, but more often than not there is little
relation between the labor content of a product imported and the duty imposed. Thus, the current
arrangements also restrict goods made in an economically sound manner-steel from Japan is a
good example.
Consequently, a thorough review of the arrangements established under the GATT might be
considered within the context of the ideas put forward in this paper.
3. Restrict the availabilitty ofpeople under 25 years for employment purposes. To directly combat
the problem of unemployment among youth, the minimum school-leaving age should be raised to 18.
Many countries are considering such a step already. But more importantly, upon graduating or
dropping out of the education system, the youth should be given three options: (a) military service, (b)
community service, or (c) post-secondary school education. While they would not be forced to accept
one alternative or the other, the state would not be obliged to pay unemployment benefits ii they do
not make a selection.
All three forms of training would heavily accentuate the development of functional skills needed by
society. Thus, post-secondary educational programs would need to be dramatically restructured to
provide the practical skills and talents needed, particularly by the informational sector of the econ-
omy, and the more philosophical-job-unrelated-subjects provided in profusion by most universi-
ties in the industrialized democracies should be de-emphasized or at least not provided at the
expense of the taxpayer.
The military could provide not only the classic skills needed tor defense, civil order, health, and
behavioral discipline, but should locus primarily on teaching the mechanical skills to maintain and
operate equipment for the agricultural and industrial sectors of the economy. Community service
could permit "apprenticing" young men and women to the construction companies, hospitals, police
and security agencies, public utilities, local governments, and so forth. The purpose of such appren-
ticeships would be to learn the skills necessary to ultimately perform administrative and community
tasks as well as tasks in the nonprofit sector.
The idea put forward above makes maximum use of existing institutions-the military, the service
industries, and the universities. These institutions would need to be organized and funded to educate
the youth, bring them through the difficult years of adolescent life, and prepare them for the prime
employment years of 25 to 45. Further, ii implemented, the idea would reintroduce the more senior
members of society who would be called upon to act as teachers. Finally, the three forms of
employment provide an opportunity for the "disillusioned" workers who represent between one and
three per cent of the labor force. It is a way tor them to get started again.
4. The incentives to work must generously exceed the incentive to withdraw from the labor force.
While a dramatically changed individual income tax program should contribute to making work
financially more attractive, unemployment allowances-which remain important in a civilized socie-
ty-must be so restructured that they do not form a viable alternative to work (Exhibit 8). Whether
such a program includes a very rapid build-down of allowances, coupled with non-negotiable
arrangements such as food stamps (the U.S. approach), or far more rigorous policing of workers who
habitually refuse to either accept certain types of employment or move to centers of entrepreneurial
initiative where jobs are available needs analysis.
The problem has become very serious in many places and policies in this regard must become far
more effective than they have been. In certain countries, for example, there is little incentive to take on
part-time work when part-time work pays no more than unemployment allowances. In such countries,
income from part-time work must be deducted from unemployment allowances and the arrangement
obviously dilutes the incentive to even seek part-time employment, much less accept it if offered.
Employers must obtain far greater freedom in their ability to restructure the labor force-although
it seems only fair that employers primarily fund the cost of retraining technologically redundant
personnel. In fact, taking on a new employee should place an obligation on the employer to im-
mediately start a fund for the retraining that employee when the tasks performed are displaced by
advancing technology.
Similarly, employers should be given greater freedom to deal with employees who may be cautious-
ly classified as "unwilling" or "uncooperative." This should not be interpreted as a suggestion to
reintroduce the intolerable and inhuman social arrangements that existed at the peak of the Industrial
Revolution. At the same time, it is lair to point out that it will be difficult to regain momentum, worker
enthusiasm and pride in work, if too large a proportion of the population misuses the law and avoids
the spirit with which such laws were enacted in the first place.
5. The economic yield from labor and capital must be combined for the largest possible number of
workers. Although Ned Ludd found it necessary to smash his machine-it did not belong to him-
workers are not likely to destroy the robots they personally acquire to do their work. Certainly
44
!,'kl.·.·
~~
i1
housewives have not been known to smash their washing machines, mixers, and vacuum cleaners.
They might be inclined to do so, however, if such labor-saving devices tend to threaten their
livelihood.
The idea is to find a more acceptable way to compensate the employee directly for the incremental
yield delivered from investments in new technology. .
Since 192P per capita income has doubled, confirming that workers have benefitted from the
applic<J\ion of labor-saving devices. On the other hand, such indirect rewards are seldom as effective
as "instant" compensation paid with the monthly paycheck.
The idea is to establish an arrangement to allow the employees of a corporation to become
important co-owners (together with outside investors) of new technology. This does not suggest that
enterprises in the future should become necessarily either cooperatives, worker-owned, or union-
owned. Rather, it suggests a more balanced arrangement should be found which would result in
employees directly benefitting from the application of devices that significantly increase their pro-
ductivity. For example, paychecks could include a portion in cash ar.d a portion in common stock
issued to purchase labor-saving' devices. The income and the dividends from the shares together
should provide an adequate compensation level.
Through the ownership of substantial blocks of stock, employees should expect representation on
outside boards of directors. If this occurs, a community of interest would be formed encouraging the
acquisition of the labor-saving devices needed to secure an optimum blend of wages and dividends.
Interestingly enough, many of the 600,000 new enterprises popping up in the U.S. each year are
providing stock ownership options to their "knowledge workers". And all over Europe, legislation is
being proposed to increase employee representation on boards of directors. But few of these
proposals provide tor common ownership of new technology.
The introduction to the final section of this paper cautioned the reader about unconventional and
uninhibited ideas and suggestions. It is, of course, impossible to put forward ideas about national
economics that are really new or that have not been thought or written about by hundreds of
economists and political theorists.
What may be new is the notion this paper puts forward that the systems of employment in the
industrialized democracies must change to provide for the "informational society." Doing nothing is
clearly not the right answer because that is what happened to the U.S. and European steel industries.
Waiting for the problem to solve itself could result in a growth of employment with a concomitant
decline in the per capita standard of living. These are not predictions but suggestions about urgency.
45
Exhibit 1
U.S. LABOR POPULATION
1860-1983
No. of people (millions)
130.----------------------------------------.
120
110
100
90
80
70
=~~ ~ :;5>~~
30
20 c. -
10
1860 10 80 90 1900 10 20 30 40 50 60 10 80 1990 Year
- Total labor force
- Labor force as percent of non-Institutional population over 16 yrs
- Percent of non-Institutional population ~ employed
Source: St~!;~!;c.;i Aostract of the United States, U.S. Department of
Commerce
Exhibit 2
U.S. LABOR POPULATION
1820-1983
Percent of labor force
100 .----------------------------------------------.
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
1820 40 60 80 1900 20 40
Source: The Mechanization of Work, by Eli Cinzberg
46
60 80 2000
j
l
Exhibit 3
U.S. LABOR POPULATION
Gross domestic product per capita (constant dollars)
7,000 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
'6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
0 I ! I I I I 1 J l I 1 I
1870 80 90 1900 10 20 30 40 so 60 70 1980
Source:
Exhibit II
Statistical Abstract of the United States, U.S. Department of
Commerce
ENERGY PRICES
Dollars
15-
10
s
80 90 1900 10 30 40 so 60 70 1981
World price of oil (1967 constant dollars)
U.S. price {constant dollars)
Source: The Next Economy, by Paul Hawken
47
Exhibit 5
HOURS NEEDED TO PAY FOR A BARREL OF OIL
Hours/barrel
3
2
40 so 60 70 1982
Source: The Next Economy, by Paul Hawken
Exhibit 6
PROJECTED IMPACT OF MECHANIZATION ON AUSTRIAN ECONOMY
Percentage ot Jobs potentially affected
BLUE COLLAR
Tex tlJea, clothing
paper, pap.,
products
Basic metafa, metal
products, forest producta,
wood worlling
Mining machinery
•lectrlcal
Petroleum, glaaa,
food processing,
chemicals, trade
Transp, &qufpment.
ut11Jtte1,
Information Industry
>81
71-80
81-70
51-80
...50
WHITE COLLAR
Utlfltlee, banks,
Insurance,
siovernment
Petroleum
chemicala
trade
GI•••, basic metals
machin•ry, metal
products, electrical
transp. equipment,
paper, paper products,
wood working
Mining, Food
processlng,textllesr
forest products,
wood working
Agriculture
clothing,
construction
hotels, restaurants
>20
18-20
11-15
10
<10
Source: The Distribution of Work and Income, by Wassily W. Leontief
48
Exhibit 7
GROSS WAGES PER HOUR AND UNEMPLOYMENT RATES
NETHERLANDS
(Excluding social security premiums paid by employer)
20.------------------------------------
15
10
5
0 FI 3 I I I I I ., ± ,. I -5:f I T l I I I
1895 1905 15 25 35 45 55 65 75 1985
- Wages (current guilders)
- Wages (constant guilders)
- - Unemployment (percent), figures prior to 1920 not available
Source: Prijsindexcijfers: Nat. Rek. 1982 tab 61
Exhibit 8
RELATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS AND
LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYMENT
Percentage of working population
unemployed after two years
5 ..---------------------------------------..,.
4
3
2
1
Canada
0 10 20
U.K.
•
30
Germany
•
•
Netherlands
40 so 60 70 80 90 100
Percentage of last earned income
after two years of unemployment
Source: OECD, Employment Outlook, page 66; Statistical Abstract of
the United States, U.S. Department of Commerce; CBS.
49
"The Outlook For The Economy And Employment In The United States"
Working Paper Prepared by Alice M. Rivlin
Director, Economic Studies Program. The Brookings Institution (USA)
·This paper is an adaptation of the summary chapter of Economic Choices 1984 (Alice M. Rivlin.
Editor) to be published by the Brookings Institution in late May 1984. The author is indebted to the
other contributors to that volume: Henry Aaron, Barry Bosworth, Linda Cohen, Harvey Galper,
William Kaufmann, Lawrence Krause, Robert Lawrence, Robert Meyer and Louise Russell.
High deficits in the U.S. federal budget together with high interest rates are endangerinq the future
growth of the U.S. economy and undermining the ability of American industry to compete in world
markets. Change is needed. The federal deficit should be drastically reduced-indeed it should be
eliminated by the end of the decade-and interest rates should be lowered. Reducing the deficit will
increase the resources available for investment and improve the chances for healthy economic
growth. It will also allow interest rates to come down, reduce the value of the dollar in foreign
exchange markets and make American products more competitive with those of other countries.
Cutting the lederal deficit will be painful. Spending growth must be reduced and taxes raised. But
the need to reduce the deficit also creates an opportunity to reassess the priorities of the federal
goverment. The domestic spending programs of the federal government can be made more effective,
defense objectives can be attained at substantially lower cost and a thorough overhaul of the federal
tax system can make it both fairer and more favorable to economic growth than the present system.
The U.S. also needs new policies to facilitate economic change. In a growing economy, people and
resources must move from less productive to more productive pursuits. Public policy should make
these changes less painful, not retard them. It should foster innovation and help dislocated workers
find new jobs. It should help the poor and the less skilled to move into the mainstream of American
society.
Factors Favorable to Growth. The rate of growth in real output in the U.S. is currently strong as the
economy emerges from the deep recession of the early 1980's. Yet there are grave doubts that the
expansion can be sustained in future years and fears that the economy could return to the weak
growth and poor productivity that characterized the 1970's.
Actually, however, there were several factors that contributed t0 ~ccr aconomic performance in the
1970's that seem unlikely to recur in the near future. One such strain on the economy was the rapid
increase in the labor force which grew by about 50 per cent between 1965 and 1980. Most of the
newcomers were untrained young people-the baby boom generation growing up-and others were
married ·.vcmen w•~.'1 relatively little job experience entering the work force in increasing numbers.
The economy absorbed this influx but at some cost to productivity growth.
Two rounds of energy price increases in the 1970's raised costs and necessitated considerable
industrial retooling to save energy. The energy price rises precipitated rapid inflation as business
passed on costs to consumers and workers sought higher wages to compensate for rising prices.
Inflationary expectations caused consumers and businesses to act in ways that further aggravated
inflationary pressures and inflation proved extremely hard to control.
At the same time the economy was absorbing an explosion of regulation designed to protect the
health and safety of workers and consumers, to reduce enviromental pollution, to conserve energy
and promote equality of opportunity. The increased regulation accomplished many of the intended
objectives, but at the cost of some slowing of industrial growth and some aggravation of inflation.
These four factors-labor force increase, energy price shocks, increased regulation, and stubborn
inflation-are by no means the whole explanation for the slow increases in output and decline in
productivity growth that affected not only the U.S. but most of the major industrial countries of the
world in the 1970's. But they contributed and, fortunately, they seem unlikely to recur in the near
future. For the next few years, the U.S. will have an increasingly experienced labor force with relatively
small numbers of untrained new entrants. Energy prices seem unlikely to rise rapidly unless there is
all out war in the Middle East. Moreover, the U.S. now uses energy more efficiently than it did a decade
ago and is far less dependent on imported oil. No major increases in regulation are in sight; indeed,
regulation is being reduced in some areas. Inflation has been brought down from the double digit
levels of the late 1970's to moderate rates of 4-5 per cent a year. The reduction in inflation was
purchased at great cost in unemployment and lost income in the 1980-82 recession, but it did occur.
Barring outside shocks or accelerating economic growth, inflation seems likely to remain in the
moderate range at least for a couple.of years.
With respect to these four factors, the outlook for growth in the next few years is more favorable
than it was in the 1970's. Unfortunately, the favorable outlook is threatened by unfavorable policy:
high federal deficits that reduce national saving, put upward pressure on interest rates and prevent
the accumulation of private capital necessary to sustain the expansion of output in future years.
50
The Outlook: High Deficits and High Interest Rates. For the last several years, monetary and fiscal
policy-the two principal instruments by which the federal government affects the overall state of
economy-have worked at cross purposes.. Monetary policy has been predominantly restrictive;
fiscal policy, predominantly stimulatlve. The result has been high interest rates and high deficits
which will continue in the foreseeable future if policy is not changed.
Beginning in 1979, the monetary authorities, deeply concerned about the high inflation of the late
1970's, restricted the growth in the money supply assiduously. Interest rates rose to extremely high
levels and the economy went into a deep and lengthy recession from which it did not begin to recover
unttrih'e end of 1982. Not surprisingly, the interest rate sensitive sectors of the economy were
especially hard hit. Unemployment rose to over 10 per cent of the labor force, while inflation dropped
dramatically.
Meanwhile, fiscal policy, which had not been used to restrain inflation, was dominated by the major
reductions in personal and corporate income taxes enacted in 1981 and taking effect over the years
1981-83. The revenue cuts were not matched by spending cuts, although the mix of spending shifted
away from domestic programs and toward spending for defense and interest on the rising debt. As a
result both of the recession jlnd of the fact that taxes were cut without a corresponding cut in
spending, the federal deficit soared to $193 billion, or six per cent of the GNP.in fiscal year 1983.
Since the end of 1982 the economy has been experiencing a healthy recovery which has affected all
major sectors except net exports. This growth is expected to continue. The governnent is anticipating
a five per cent real increase in GNP in 1984 with declining unemployment and inflation remaining at a
moderate rate of four to five per cent.
Even if the economy continues to grow, however, the deficit in the federal budget will not decline.
Although revenues will rise as the economy expands, spending will rise even faster unless current
policies are changed, and the deficit will continue to grow. Even 'if the economy grew steadily through
1989, as assumed in the projections of the Congressional Budget Office, and unemployment fell to 6.5
per cent and interest rates declined, the deficit would still climb from about $300 billion in 1989 (5.7
per cent of GNP). This prospect of a rising deficit in an improving economy makes the situation very
different from any experienced in the past. High deficits since World War II have been associated with
recession.
These projected deficits are not attributable to the Social Security and Medicare trust funds, which,
taken together, are expected to be roughly in balance through 1989, thanks to recent increases in
payroll taxes. Rather, the problem is in the general fund. Spending for programs otherthan Medicare
and Social Security will total about 17.2 per cent of GNP in 1985 and will rise faster than GNP, with
defense and interest dominating the increase. The corresponding revenues, however, which were
sharply reduced by the income tax cuts passed in 1981, will be only about 12.7 per cent of GNP in 1985
and will rise more slowly than GNP. Hence, the large and widening gap.
Government borrowing to finance the deficit is contributing to the high level of interest rates and
can be expectedt() exert more upward pressure in the future. As workers and factories become more
fully employed, the monetary authorities will have to keep a tight rein on credit to avoid a reescalation
of inflation. The conflict between stimulative budget policy and restrictive monetary policy will
intensify and interest rates are likely to rise further.
Why Policy Must Be Changed. Budget deficits in the anticipated range will absorb about two-thirds
of the net private savings expected to be available leaving less for capital formation. To put the matter
slightly differently, federal government dissaving will offset a large part of the saving of other sectors
of the economy. While it is possible that increased saving of other sectors will offset the dissaving of
the federal government, private saving has been a remarkably constant fraction of GNP over several
decades. It is more likely that federal dissaving of such unprecedented magnitudes will diminish the
domestic resources available for investment in plant and equipment and housing and drive up
interest rates.
High deficits and high interest rates do not necessarily mean immediate disaster for the economy.
The deficits will continue to stimulate the economy generally while the high interest rates tend to slow
particular types of spending, especially housing and business investment. The result will be a shift in
the mix of total spending-more resources for consumption, less for investment and housing. A low
level of investment in plant and equipment is likely to reduce productivity increases and economic
growth in the longer run. Penalizing investment is borrowing from the future to increase consumption
now.
Moreover, high interest rates have already had devastating effects on the ability of U.S. industry to
compete in world markets. High rates have attracted a large inflow of capital from abroad. This
foreign capital has helped finance the federal deficit as well as private investment, but has added to
the demand for dollars on foreign exchange markets. The exchange value of the dollar has risen
sharply in the last several years, which makes U.S. exports expensive for foreigners and foreign goods
and services cheap for Americans. As a result, the U.S. has been running a huge deficit in its balance
51
of trade, and output and employment in industries facing foreign competition have suffered. Borrow-
ing from abroad is also borrowing from the future tor current consumption.
High interest rates in the U.S. lead to high interest rates around the world and greatly aggravate the
precarious international debt situation. As interest rates rise, Third World countries find it increasing-
ly difficult to meet the interest payments on their debts.
The Necessity for Political Compromise. The economy would greatly benefit from a major switch in
monetary and fiscal policy in which low deficits and low interest rates would replace high deficits and
high interest rates. Making the switch, however, will be asevere test of U.S. governmental institutions.
The painful actions necessary to cut the deficit will arouse strong political opposition. While concern
about the deficits.is widely expressed, specific proposals to raise taxes or cut domestic or defense
programs are likely to encounter far more vocal opposition than support. It will take political courage,
ingenuity, and vision to fashion a deficit-reduction plan which will be widely regarded as fair and
worthy of support even if specific elements are painful.
Moreover, making the policy switch will not only require compromise between the President and
the Congress, it will necessitate an unusual degree of coordination between monetary and fiscal
decision-makers. If the switch is to be made without slowing the economy unduly as the deficit falls,
the monetary authorities will have to allow a substantial reduction in interest rates and !he exchange
value of the dollar.
While astrong economic case can be made for reducing the deficit, the choices among ways to do it
depend on value judgments about federal spending priorities and the desirable size and role of
government. Moreover, the required changes are so large that approaching budget balance solely by
increasing taxes would require unprecedented tax rate increases, while accomplishing the goal
solely by cutting defense spending would threaten national security and attaining it solely by
reducing domestic spending would gut basic government programs on which millions of people
depend.
Hence, for political and practical reasons, reducing the deficit requires fashioning a compromise
that involves three elements: cuts in domestic and defense spending and increases in revenues. The
compromise should be seen as lair and evenhanded, requiring sacrifices from the broad range of
taxpayers and beneficiaries of government programs, but not bearing too heavily on any one group.
The necessity to cut the deficit should be an opportunity to reassess priorities and endeavor to
make government programs more effective. The requirement to raise more revenue creates a strong
impetus for reforming the federal tax system, since raising substantial additional revenue without
reform would exacerbate the inequities and inefficiencies of the present system. Nevertheless, reform
and reassessment take time, while action to reduce the deficit should be taken soon. Therefore, a
two-stage plan seems in order: a set of simple evenhanded measures should be taken quickly,
followed by more thorough efforts at reform.
A Compromise Plan. The plan offered here is an attempt by a group of Brookings economists to lay
out a blueprint for bringing the federal budget close to balance by 1989. It involves reduction in the
growth of both domestic and defense spending and increases in revenue. The proposals for domestic
spending and tax changes are in two stages. A short-run freeze on domestic spending to save money
quickly would be followed by more basic restructuring of domestic programs. Similarly, tax changes
designed to raise more revenue quickly through broadening the tax base and a surtax would be
followed by a thorough reform of the federal system. The defense spending proposals, while not
formally in two stages, also involve imnediate cuts in weapon systems deemed duplicative or related
to questionable objectives and a longer-run shift to a more moderate and sustainable pace of defense
investment.
The bare outlines of the plan are shown in the attached table. The Brookings economists who
worked on the plan regard it as an example of a feasible, lair way to balance the U.S. federal budget in
live years·. Some of the elements can be defended on their merits, others make sense only as part of a
compromise plan to cut the deficit. All the elements would face strong political opposition from some
quarter. But cutting the deficit is so important that normal political differences must be submerged in
a common effort to achieve a goal that will benefit not only the U.S. economy but other nations to
whom sustained growth in the U.S. is important.
52
Proposed Deficit Redu.ction Plan
(in billions of dollars)
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989
Baseline deficit' $ 197 217 246 272 308
Proposed Legislative Action 40 80 120 160 200
Cuts in .Spending Growth 17 41 59 77 92
Non-Defense 15 30 36 41 46
Short run (freeze) 15 21 22 23 23
Long run
9 14 18 23
Defense 2 11 23 36 46
Required Tax Increase 23 39 61 83 108
Interest Saving 12 28 42 66 88
Resulting Deficit $ 145 109 84 46 20
1. Congressional Budget Office, Baseline Budget Projections, 1985-1989 (Washington: GPO,
February 1984), and subsequent revisions.
DISCUSSION
Moderator: Sir John Sainsbury
After brief introductory comments from the authors of the working papers, discussion of this
agenda item began with a response from a Swedish speaker, whose intervention dealt especially with
the experience of his own country. The present level of unemployment in Western Europe-nearly 20
million-was a serious threat to social justice and to the entire democratic political system. It was a
terrible waste as well as a cause of human suffering. Therefore the speaker disagreed with his
inference from !l'ie !Allc.h paper, that if, say, 83 per cent of the work force were employed, we should
not be overly concerned with the 17 per cent who were not. But we could not return to short-sighted
pump-priming, which produced only temporary decreases in unemployment. For small countries
dependent on foreign trade, traditional one-sided expansion of domestic demand was bound to have
detrimental effects on the current account and the inflation rate, and thus on long-term competitive-
ness and employment. Some theorists recently in vogue had advocated a stringent "unemployment
bath" as the only way out of our structural ills, to squeeze out inflationary expectations and wage
claims. But this was based on an unrealistic model of perfect competition, in which unemployment
was seen simply as the result of too high wages. In fact, prices and wages in the modern economy
were generally inflexible downwards and in the short run. As Arthur Okun had put it, the "invisible
hand" of the market had been replaced by the "invisible handshake" between employers and skilled
career workers. Therefore the burden of demand contraction would fall mainly on the weaker people
in the labor market: women, youngsters, the uneducated, handicapped, minorities, etc. The mass
unemployment produced by demand-slashing policies risked producing an embittered, cynical and
despairing generation of outcasts. This problem was aggravated on an international scale when a
number of countries became locked in a "grotesque escalation of demand contraction," diminishing
each other's export markets and paving the way for protectionism.
To attain a lasting economic recovery with the possibility of full employment, the speaker foresaw
two tasks. First, each of our countries had to seek a "third way" between excessive restriction and
expansion, an intelligent combination of demand-management and supply-stimulating measures, of
fiscal and monetary policies. Discussion about this had already been going on in Sweden since the
late 1940's, when trade union economists had proposed a mix of fiscal restrictions to curb excess
demand and selective long-term supply-stimulants, mainly in the form of active labor market policies.
Other noninflationary supply-side st'1mulants could include tax credits, accelerated depreciation,
53
encouragement of research and development, training and retraining, profit-sharing, wider share
ownership, etc.
The second task was that of coordinating the individual national policy measures-particularly
among major countries-to stabilize global demand and promote investment activity. We should not
delude ourselves that the present economic recovery made such coordination unnecessary. Unless
we acted now, protectionist measures might be impossible to withstand in the next downturn.
Cooperation was also essential between governments, central banks and other institutions on the
international debt crisis.
This speaker concluded by describing Sweden's active labor market policy, which was conducted
along "employment lines" instead of "cash benefit lines," so as not to encourage the passive
preservation of unemployed people. Feeling that it was a disgrace for a society to have teenagers on
the dole, the Swedish government had recently radically restructured assistance to jobless youth.
"Youth teams" had been created through local government authorities to offer people under 20 four
hours of work a day, at a daily wage of 120 crowns vs. 100 crowns of unemployment benefits. Some
30,000 young people had joined these youth teams. Moreover, vocational training had been intro-
duced as an experiment in the defense forces for those between 18 and 24. This reflected a growing
recognition of the importance of education and training, especially in the light of new technology.
With regard to work-sharing as a response to unemployment, a study had shown that every cut in the
weekly work week in Sweden in this century had been preceded by years of marked rises in take-home
pay; therefore working hours would not likely be cut soon again. (This did not mean, however, that
workers were not choosing different schedules, including voluntary part-time work.) Instead of
looking to work-sharing as a cure-all, we should seek to create greater resources to meet unsatisfied
needs and improve social conditions.
An International participant, who agreed with the American author about the improved perfor-
mance of the world economy, discussed the prospects for consolidating this recovery into durable,
job-creating growth. The OECD countries in general had to reduce the substantial structural budget
deficits. In Europe, deficits were beginning to decline, but even so it was not clear that employment
would pick up. Compared with the U.S. and Japan, Europe had had a poor record of job-creation in
the 1970's, attributable in part to rigidity in labor markets. This was a complex and sensitive issue,
which touched directly on potential conflicts between social policy (with its aims of stable incomes
and employment) and economic policy (efficiency and innovation). Tackling the problem of labor
market inflexibility should not be seen as wage cutting or as a dismantling of the social welfare
system, but as seeking a better balance between social and economic policies, to generate more jobs
through increased investment and productivity.
Labor market flexibility had three dimensions: (1) the macroeconomic (general wage levels, and
their relation to capital costs); (2) the microeconomic (wage differentials, youth unemployment as
affected by inadequate minimum wage legislation); and (3) manpower flexibility (regulations inhibit-
ing layoffs, obstructing the movement of labor from less to more productive sectors). There was
general agreement on the need to tackle these issues, but progress could only be made with a social
consensus, which the speaker hoped could be achieved.
An American participant said that, as a labor leader, he had found his constituents much more
interested in the "micro" than the "macro" numbers. During the past three years, 100,000 fewer
people were employed in his industry in the U.S. and Canada, and many plants had been closed or cut
back. It was hard to tell people that wages of $5-7 an hour were too high, or to explain to them that they
were unemployed because of budget deficits or high interest rates. Approaching our problems on
such a macroeconomic basis lacked the compassionate concern that ought to be the benchmark of
our society. A national unemployment rate of 6-6.5 per cent did not appear "acceptable" to the 40 per
cent of minority youths who were unemployed, nor to their elders who were without jobs. We had to
address the problems of structurally hurt industries on a sectoral basis through national industrial
policies. That had been done, for example, in the case of U.S. agriculture, which had been trans-
formed from a disaster in the 1930's to a "winner industry," through federal measures such as soil
conservation, aid to land grant colleges, research, and continued multi-billion dollar annual sub-
sidies.
Talk of free trade in today's world was self-delusion. Seventy per cent of the shoes worn in the U.S.
were now imported, compared with 40 per cent a few years ago. Textile apparel imports had grown 25
per cent in 1983 and were up in the first quarter of 1984 at an annual rate of 40 per cent. We needed a
trade policy related to reality. In textile apparel, an internationally managed program, under the
Multi-fiber Arrangement, had proved successful for the developing world over the past two decades.
It had given the LDCs a mushrooming industry, and for the developed world had provided a market for
plant and equipment, as well as apparel at attractive prices. If this had been left entirely to the free
market, a disastrous trade war would have ensued. Internationally managed trade in a number of
sectors was therefore the most sensible approach. A Frenchman intervened at this point to say that
54
the analysis of such issues as managed trade, protectionism, and the coordination of macroeconom-
ic policies could not be separated from monetary issues, notably the overvaluation of the dollar.
A Swedish speaker emphasized the importance. of new investment in com batting unemployment.
He pointed out that, after the oil price rises a decade ago, most governments had braked their
economies. The subsequent high relative p·rlce changes had rendered a large fraction of manufactur-
ing capital economically obsolete. Replacement investment had not followed, so that the capital
stock available to industry and business today was too small to provide for full employment. It could
be restored only by providing incentives to profitability. An OECD advisory committee study had
shown tb..at,,. if the net return on equity did not exceed prevailing bond interest rates, employment
would decline. If it were appreciably higher, employment would increase. With current high nominal
interest rates, though, this meant that we would have to achieve net after-tax returns on equity of
double the figures of the 1960's just to maintain constant employment. If we aimed to increase
employment, returns had to be even higher. It would help, of course, if more employees held shares in
their businesses, but unless they owned a stake individually, rather than as indirect beneficiaries, they
did not feel it was part of their compensation. In many countries, investment could be increased only
by tailoring consumption to fit it. This could be done either by lowering the wage share of the value
added or by decreasing corporate -taxes. The speaker did not agree that structural changes were
bound to exacerbate unemployment, but the new technology intensified the need to build up our
capital stock.
According to an Irish participant, we did not fear the effects of unemployment enough to take the
necessary action. The cushion of unemployment benefits and the apparent absence of social unrest
hid serious dangers. In many countries, there was a high degree of alienation that could be ignited by
a spark and spread to neighboring countries, as had happened in 1848 and 1968. The problem was
structural as well as cyclical. but many people-especially in the trade unions-were reluctant to face
the implications of structural change, and tended to look to normal macroeconomic measures. The
effects of unemployment varied widely according to demographic differences. In any case, it was
easier to cope with structural change in periods of growth than in recessions. In small countries with
open economies, reflation could not be accomplished without exporting most of the benefits in terms
of encouraging imports, and this was true to some extent even in larger units. We had established the
EEC as an economic unit, but we were failing to make good use of it. In such an enlarged unit, a given
degree of reflationary action ought to produce for the unit as a whole a balance of payments deficit of
a much smaller magnitude than would be experienced by any one of its parts acting individually. The
logic of this was being frustrated, though, by ideological differences among member governments,
which were exerting an unprecedented effect on world politics. Structural change was hard to tackle
because it was complex, when people wanted simple solutions, and because it confronted cultural
and social attitudes.
As for job-sharing, the logic of it derived in part from sociological factors we were not examining.
Much of recent growth in the labor force had resulted from the entry of married women, and it was
now common to·halllil.. both husband and wife working. In other cases, neither was employed.
Part-time work was the logical solution for such cases, as for the elderly and the very young. Also, as in
Sweden, we could put the unemployed to work on community projects at little incremental cost.
These things required a degree of trade union cooperation which was not easy to achieve when they
were under pressure. One helpful step would be for governments to take a more constructive
approach to trade unions than many of them seemed willing to do.
Unemployment was the most severe economic disease of our time, according to an Austrian
participant. Since the 1970's, the number of employed in the OECD countries had increased substan-
tially-in both the registered and the unregistered "parallel" economies-but the present level of
unemployment was still unacceptable, for humanitarian, social and political reasons. We had not run
out of work opportunities, so it would be wrong to resort to work-sharing or reducing hours. The
common difficulty of finding enough trained and skilled people for the work available suggested
insufficient mobility and flexibility in the labor markets, as well as inadequate educational facilities.
Unfortunately, we were misallocating valuable resources through protectionist subsidies of the
wrong areas of our economies, while funds were needed for R&D, capital formation, and training to
create new opportunities. We thus risked creating a two-part society, which was unacceptable.
A similar theme was sounded by a British participant, who paraphrased Lincoln to say that our
society could not Jong endure half employed and half idle. Concentrating too much on some of the
cyclical factors, though, might engender a sense of complacency about unemployment. "Short-term
gimmicks" were not the answer. What was needed were improved technology and productivity and
new jobs and services. All this was easier to achieve in a climate of growth, and the speaker was
worried about the threat to world economic recovery posed by the present U.S. policy mix. The main
stimulant to American recovery had been the federal budget deficit, but the resultant high interest
rates had a deleterious effect abroad, especially in the developing countries, who had to service their
55
debt with much more expensive dollars. Moreover, those who were currently supplying the U.S. with
funds were worried about a sudden and abrupt fall of the dollar and a revival of inflationary pressures.
That could lead to a cycle of still higher U.S. interest rates, with European countries defensively
following suit. High unemployment, combined with payments imbalances and, in particular, the
effects of the Japanese export surplus, had intensified protectionist pressures. This problem ought to
be addressed by all the industrialized countries in some new approach in which the Japanese would
be included.
A German participant agreed that unemployment was our most important domestic concern, but he
suggested that the analysis of the problem was often not sufficiently penetrating. More jobs were
available than were seen in the statistics, but not at official labor prices; a look at the "black" labor
market in the Fetleral Republic demonstrated that. European unemployment had probably been
exacerbated by the mistakes in the U.S. policy mix, notably high interest rates. The question now was
whether the economic recovery would last, and the speaker confessed that he expected a U.S.
downturn in 1985-86. To defend against the effects of that, he had recommended an early tax reform
in Germany. This should provide not merely tax incentives, but should lower the tax burden as a
whole, so as to take a smaller share of GNP. For the public sector to take as large a share of GNP as in
Sweden would be a "nightmare," this speaker said. Sweden's answer to its problems had been a 16
per cent devaluation of its currency, a "beggar my neighbor" policy which would have resulted in
severe international complications if pursued by a larger country such as the Federal Republic. The
results had been lower comparative labor costs but higher real wages, interference of the government
in wage negotiations and agreements, price controls, and higher inflation. A Swedish response to the
preceding intervention was that the devaluation had been chosen at a time of acute currency crisis in
preference to an extremely restrictive policy which would have created widespread unemployment. If
such solutions were not available to larger countries, well then, "small is beautiful."
The compar.o-:.~ :' ""'"Simplified statistics between countries was not a sound basis for policy
determination, according to a l:Hnr~·, ~.:::'.':'::- 0 ~1 Different categories of unemployment, for instance,
called for quite different remedies. Getting unemployed teenager~ ""u ,;·,.,, ;_,~,;: ;n;:::'.::: ·
..;:.~ ,.,ut
comparable to getting adults who were working "underground" back into the tax net.
An American acknowledged that his government's deficits were using up too large a part of the
world's savings, but he said that European governments were taking a larger amount from that pool in
absolute terms and an even larger share as a percentage of GNP. Perhaps European deficits were less
worrisome-being more cyclical than structural-but thera was a degree of built-in inflexibility that
was harmful to European employment. That point was addressed by a Belgian participant, who
cautioned against confusing short-term effects with long-term social policy. Europe's rigidities were
attributable to its three layers of social security. Individual social security, developed largely since
World War II, had become a political tool for redistributing wealth in exchange for votes. This had
provided the social consensus necessary for rebuilding the continent. Then had come social security
for industrial firms, in the form of subsidies paid to protect employment. In effect, healthy companies
paid taxes which were transferred to sick firms not likely to survive anyway. (In Belgium, more was
paid out annually in industrial subsidies than was paid in taxes by industry.) Finally, there was what
might be called social security for nations, or "hidden European protectionism." This involved a
thicket of regulations and preferences which hindered adaptation and integration.
What should be done? In the case of individual benefits, the speaker suggested refocussing on the
original social purpose of helping those who really needed it. If we did not go back to being selective,
we would be unable to pay the bill. In the case of companies, employers' associations had to give clear
signals that industry opposed subsidies. ("We have to sweep before our own door.")
A Spanish intervention suggested that Europeans tended to overlook some positive aspects of the
present U.S. policies, such as the ability it gave them to compete in American and world markets and
the high rewards of holding dollar assets. The willingness of foreigners to hold dollars gave the U.S. in
turn the advantages of low inflation, low unemployment, good growth, and the means to finance its
trade and budget deficits. It was not clear that this situation could be maintained indefinitely, and if a
correction of the U.S. deficit was unavoidable, it was important that adjustment be ach.ieved smooth-
ly, to avoid speculative movements of capital and currencies that would disrupt world trade.
An Italian speaker remarked that the two working papers emphasized wide differences between
Europe and the U.S. on the unemployment problem. The American author had prescribed a mac-
roeconomic treatment, centered around a reduction of the budget deficit, from which the rest would
follow almost automatically. In contrast, the Dutch author had concentrated on the structure of the
labor markets. One implication was that an improved macroeconomic situation was, in the U.S.,
necessary and sufficient to solve the economic problem, and in Europe, necessary but not sufficient.
With regard to the Dutch author's proposal to alleviate unemployment by shifting the tax burden from
labor and energy onto raw materials, the speaker wondered if this would not have a significant
adverse impact on exports of the LDCs, with a dangerous feedback to the industrialized countries. A
56
possible alternative was to alleviate the burden of social security contributions by bringing them into
the general tax system. The Dutch author intervened here to say that, while his proposal would pose
certain difficulties for the LDCs, it would result in much more careful use of raw materials. The
American author then added that, in her view, a macroeconomic solution was necessary but not quite
sufficient, in view of serious special problems, like that of unemployed teenaged blacks.
Another American participant saw a major new source of unemployment in the overvaluation of the
dollar resulting from the U.S. policy mix. His country's trade imbalance would be $120 billion this year
and $150 9illion next, if the dollar continued to be 25 per cent overpriced, as seemed likely with rising
interesf'rates. Historically, an overvalued dollar had been a prime source of protectionist pressures.
Despite sincere free trade professions, the Reagan Administration had taken more protectionist
measures in the past three years than any other administration since the 1930's and appeared headed
toward.more trade controls. If other countries followed suit, we risked a major disruption in the world
trading system, which in turn would hamper the ability of the Third World to service its debt. It was
therefore essential that the U.S. and its allies take urgent action to stem the protectionist tide and to
open new trade negotiations.
A Swedish participant observed, that many of the conservative prescriptions to improve employ-
ment called either for fundamental changes in our economy and society, which would take too long,
or for wider scope for market mechanisms, which might increase social tensions. Sweden had
demonstrated that flexibility could best be achieved by improved labor market policies. International
trade unionists had been seeking a theory applicable to the so-called "third way" societies, which
would not require far-reaching structural changes. Increased economic interdependence meant that
only the very biggest countries could hope to shape policies on their own, but a recent report
prepared jointly by the Council of Nordic Trade Unions and the West German Trade Union Confedera-
tion argued in favor of multilateral action. It purported to show that a stimulus to all industrial
democracies equivalent to one per cent of GNP-in the form of more public and private investment,
tax reduction, etc.-would, in two to three years' time, result in a four per cent increase in growth in
those countries, 8.3 million more people employed, and significantly reduced budget deficits. All the
negative effects of an expansionary policy pursued in isolation would be mitigated or avoided in the
case of joint action. Such a program required essentially only the good will of political leaders.
A German speaker discussed what he called some "trivial facts" behind the decision-making
process in business. Under a rational economic policy, factors of production and distribution were
chosen on the basis of at least two criteria: cost and convenience. Accordingly, when interest rates
were high and earnings depressed, new investment would be relatively low; when energy prices were
high or rising, consumption would decline and new sources would be sought; and when labor was
expensive or inflexible, levels of employment would be comparatively low. We tended to lose sight of
the tact that a market economy was meant to serve the consumer, so that productivity gains should be
used to reduce or stabilize prices in the market place. This was impossible so long as we distributed
productivity gains exclusively to the production factors. (Gains from technological progress could
also be passed along to the consumer through lower prices, resulting in enhanced purchasing
power.)
A rational business decision-maker would always seek a cost mix of capital, material, energy and
labor which would strengthen his competitiveness. Any action which hurt competitiveness was
bound to lead to even greater unemployment. As far as labor was concerned, this meant that we had
to pay for it in accordance with the development of productivity; that we had to improve its skills and
qualifications; and that we had to increase its flexibility and mobility. All this had to be done in
conjunction with lightening the tax burden on personal and capital income, to release funds needed
for technological and structural development.
An American participant, while conceding the negative effect of U.S. budget deficits and high
interest rates, argued that high, sustained unemployment in Europe was fundamentally a problem
rooted in the socio-economic policies of most European governments since 1968. During that period,
a combination of high wage rates, strong unions, and weak coalition governments had led to
decreased competitiveness and a drop in labor mobility. Research indicated that, even with real
growth of two to three per cent a year, unemployment in Western Europe would continue to rise to an
average of around 12 per cent by the end of the 1980's. We were witnessing what the speaker called
"Eurosclerosis," and the challenge was to boost Europe's competitiveness by facilitating labor
mobility. A Swede intervened at this point to argue that, generally in the OECD countries, the higher
the unemployment benefits, the more elaborate the social security system, then the stronger the trade
unions, the lower the unemployment tended to be.
Another Swedish participant claimed that, on balance, American policies of recent years had
benefited Europe. An economy starting from a very low level of capacity required a consumer-led
upswing, which fiscal policy provided; high interest rates would not cause a noticeable drag in that
phase. But the U.S. economy had now reached a stage where a change in the policy mix was needed
57
to lower interest and exchange rates, foster growth, and stem protectionism. The speaker agreed that
European unemployment was solidly embedded in European rigidities: restrictive fiscal policies,
wage rises out of proportion to productivity gains, and the prohibitive cost of dismissing workers. The
only comparative advantages left to Europe, he concluded, were "old museums and the ability to
blame the U.S."
A Spaniard said that solving the unemployment problem without changing the essence of our
societies posed a challenge to Western moral decency. Seeking solutions in the industrialized
countries at the cost of higher unemployment in the LDCs, though, would be explosive in the middle
term for all of us. The speaker perceived the lack of a feeling of generosity and responsibility among
Europeans toward the Third World, which was cause for concern.
A Canadian participant pointed out that the U.S. enjoyed benefits which were counterparts of the
costs of its present policy mix. The capital inflow from Europe and Canada was financing a measure of
U.S. domestic consumption, as well as industrial and defense expenditures. This served to shelter the
U.S. from spending constraints, and made it hard to change the policy mix..
A Belgian outlined three aspects of the unemployment problem Our first priority had to be growth if
we aimed to create more jobs. That meant increasing world trade, which in turn implied easing the
Third World's debt by enabling them to sell more to us. To do that, the LDCs would have to improve
their own management and encourage private international investment. For its part, the EEC ought to
make a renewed effort to create a true common market. Secondly, we had to reduce the huge part of
our GNPs used inefficiently by the public sector. In Belgium, for example, if the figure 10 represented
the cost of labor to an enterprise, gross income to the workers was only 5 and disposable net income
was 2112. So while workers complained that real wages were diminishing, employers felt forced by the
high cost of labor to compress or reduce employment. Finally, while part-time work and flexible
schedules were commendable, working more in the end meant more jobs. The Low Countries, where
workers worked on average 1,500-1,600 hours a year, had the highest unemployment in the OECD. By
comparison, unemployment was low or declining in countries like Japan (2,100 hours), Switzerland
(1,910), and the U.S. and Canada (1,875). We all needed to emphasize education and training, and the
speaker had been impressed by Sweden's accomplishments in that field.
At the conclusion of this session, the authors of the working papers offered some final reflections.
The Dutch author said that too little attention had been paid to the problem of developing new skills in
an informational society. The active producer was at the same time an active consumer, and being
concerned about the employed was important in getting the unemployed back to work. The cost of
labor of those employed was the most valuable part of our strength, and we ought to concentrate on
that, either by reducing labor costs or raising the cost of other elements, so that labor's position
would be less vulnerable. Moreover, we had to protect industry from unnecessary "unnatural"
competition, and to invest heavily in technology.
The American author had welcomed the discussion of the additional disadvantages of the U.S.
policy mix, notably the dangers of protectionism and difficulties with the Third World. Moreover, it
was inappropriate for the U.S. to be a borrowing nation. She associated herself with all the interven-
tions that had stressed the importance of training and retraining at every stage of life, and not just for
the very young.
The final intervention from the floor was from a Swedish speaker who endorsed the notion of
training people to adapt to new technology at any age. Only in that way could we achieve substantial
productivity gains. We ought to rely mainly on the effectiveness of competition, but people needed
the safety net of social security, so that they would not be left "to battle the market alone."
58
IV. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
Moderator: Vernon Jordan
This session dealt with the topic "Continental Drift: Economic and Political." The discussion began
with remarks by an American, a German, and an International panelist, who approached the subject
from their particular points of view.
The American led off by quoting a European diplomat who had likened transatlantic relations to the
weather conditions over that ocean. On the surface, there were occasional storms, involving high
seas, high winds and discomfort, but with reasonable seamanship one could ride out those storms.
Below the sometimes stormy surface there was a deep layer of still water, where very little was going
on. Beneath that lay the ocean bed, where the slow, gradual movement of continental drift was
occurring. What was the evidence of that drift?
In the U.S., important changes in the nature of the country and its society could be included in the
realm of continental drift. The speaker cited the rise of the "Sun Belt," far from the Atlantic coast. If
California were an independent nation, it would rank about tenth in the world in GNP. That state had
50 of the 435 members of the House of Representatives. Los Angeles had become the third largest
Spanish-speaking city in the world, and the U.S. might soon become the second largest Spanish-
speaking nation in the world; by 1990, Hispanics would be the largest minority in the U.S. In 1978. U.S.
Pacific trade had surpassed Atlantic trade for the first time; by 1982, the gap had widened to $13
billion. There was, too, a growing awareness of America's western border with the Soviet Union in
Alaska.
Beyond these objective causes of continental drift, with all their political implications, there were
subjective causes, including the deceleration of progress toward European unity, which had con-
fused Americans; a certain disillusionment about the U.S. among some groups of young Europeans:
differing estimates about detente; and the latent American impulse towards isolationism, which had
been affected in some measure by recent experience in Lebanon and Central America.
One thing which had not drifted, in the speaker's estimation, was the basic commitment to mutual
defense. This was underscored by the continuing, low-key "Mansfield debate" in the U.S. Senate.
Although that resolution was dead, the debate which it had inspired went on. It was significant,
though, that the emphasis had shifted from how many troops the Americans would bring home from
Europe to how many they would leave there.
There would continue to be differences between Europe and America, notably about burden
sharing, and the gap might even be seen to widen. The speaker concluded that the way to handle this
continental drift was not to deny the gap, but to extend the bridge.
The German speaker began by noting that there were in the Federal Republic of Germany ("FRG"),
just as in any country, groups who were fundamentally opposed to their country's foreign policy. But
there was no__movement of any political significance in Germany flying the banner of neutralism.
There was nothing there, for example, corresponding to the 15 to 20 per cent of Communist voters in
France, supporting a party basically pro-Soviet and hostile to NATO. (That situation, the speaker said,
only increased his respect for the firm stand of the French government on security matters, and the
same could be said for Italy.) The overwhelming majority of Germans in the FAG-including the
opposition in the Bundestag-supported the Western alliance, and in particular the alliance with the
U.S. Only extreme fringe groups were calling for withdrawal from NATO or its military organization.
This generally shared consensus could readily be understood against the background of the FRG's
geopolitical situation and global postwar developments. A position as intermediary between East and
West, such as that occupied by the German Empire under Bismarck, was impossible forthe FRG. As a
consequence of the second World War-unleashed by the German National Socialists-the political
balance in Europe had been completely and irrevocably transformed. The Soviet Union had become a
superpower, ruling all of Eastern Europe and a good part of Central Europe. It would have been able
to extend its reign over the entire continent had the U.S. not acted after 1945 to restore the balance of
power and save at least the Western European nations from a Communist regime.
Under those circumstances, the German interest was clear. If it were left on its own, it would soon
be drawn into the wake of Soviet hegemony after a brief transitional phase of self-isolation, or it would
become the apple of discord between the superpowers. Only as a full partner in the Western
community could it guarantee its security and pursue an active policy (not least of all the policy
supporting genuine detente between East and West). Whatever weight the FRG possessed in the
world derived from its membership in the Atlantic alliance and the European Community. The great
majority of Germans instinctively understood that integration with the West provided the indispens-
able foundation of German security policy and of the FRG'.s foreign policy. The speaker therefore was
at a loss to understand why the threat of a "new Rapallo" was served up to the public in the West year
after year.
59
Against this background of broad consensus in the FRG, the few neutralists there took on the.
appearance of exotic creatures, and attracted public notice far in excess of their political importance.
These small groups seemed to believe that the FRG, although it was in the heart of Europe, could
withdraw from the arena of international affairs and thus escape all its dangers and tests. Behind that
hope lay a rather diffuse feeling of uneasiness about the high-profile exposure of the FRG, and not a
well-defined program with fixed foreign policy goals.
Another current phenomenon involved a tendency to place the two superpowers on the same plane
and to judge them by similar moral and intellectual standards. This remarkable inability to differenti-
ate was irritating to all who believed that the Western Alliance embodied common values as well as
interests, but it did not represent a political force capable of influencing German foreign policy.
At the same time, there was a growing awareness of the German and European interests in the
Atlantic alliance, which was visible in three major fields. First, Europe as a divided continent and
Germany as a divided nation both had a vital interest in a peaceful modus vivendi between the two
blocs and in the process of security and cooperation in Europe. The West Germans attached
paramou·nt importance to maintaining and expanding contacts with the German Democratic Repub-
lic. Second, Europe was interested in ensuring that the West did not undermine its economic and
social stability through disproportionate arms spending. Such stability was essential for long-term
competition with the Soviet Union. Finally, Europe had a vital interest in controlling and resolving
regional conflicts in the Third World, to keep them from becoming East-West conflicts or otherwise
threatening European stability.
This new, clearer awareness of inherently European interests was expressed, not by questioning
the need for the Alliance, but by calling for greater balance within the Alliance. Europe's role as the
second pillar of the Alliance needed to be strengthened. This was in line with U.S. interests, too, as it
would enhance the ability of the Alliance to secure its defense and to continue a political dialogue
with the East. Greater weight in the Alliance could not be obtained free of charge, though, and the
Europeans would have to put forth increased efforts if they hoped to speak with one voice. Europe
had to reduce its dependence on the American nuclear deterrent and assume greater responsibility
for its own security.
Such a shift in emphasis would not be to the detriment of the Alliance if the U.S. took the new
developments into consideration. The only dangers were that the Americans might confuse inform-
ing their allies after the fact with truly consulting them, or that they might yield to the temptation of
unilateralism and present the Europeans with a fait accompli in matters of common _interest.
The speaker concluded by emphasizing that neutralism was not a danger to be taken seriously,
either in the FRG or in Europe as a whole. Consideration was being given in Germ2.ny to th;, i•••t:r eMs
of, and the role played by, Europe in the Alliance with the U.S., and in the framework of East-West
conflict. This inevitably called into question cherished habits of thought, but it also betokened the
vitality and adaptability of the most successful "alliance for peace" in modern times. (To a Norwegian
who intervened to ask what he foresaw as the eventual relationship between the two German states,
this speaker replied good-naturedly that he could not answer that question in less than three-quarters
of an hour.)
The International participant addressed the subject especially from the vantage point of the
European Community, or as a spokesman for what had been described humorously as "Eurosclero-
sis." He began by referring to recent changes in European self-assessment, especially in economic
and technical matters. There was a new awareness that competitiveness had to be measured, not
among the various European countries themselves, but at the world level. The rapid introduction of
new products and processes in the world implied that one was either "with it" or "out of it." There was
no third way. Moreover, the Europeans' habitual complacency about this problem had given way to a
recognition that they had failed in a major way over the past C!lecade by not generating the spontaneity
needed for the creation of new enterprises. Instead, Europe had sought to maintain its global
competitiveness through productivity gains. As a result, the consumption of new products and
services was much lower in Europe than in the U.S., Japan and Southeast Asia.
Europe now accepted that it would not become a dynamic society without greater.flexibility. It was
no mean achievement for the old European countries to move away, as they were doing, from their
postwar consensus about the balance of activities of the state and the private sector, in which it had
been a "cultural reflex" to turn to the state for economic security. But as Europe became more
dynamic, it also became more concerned about its dependency.
In the same spirit of dynamism, the European Community had tackled for the first time a serious
reform of its Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), after having "fiddled" for a number of years at trying
to reduce its cost without altering its structure. The EC was now seeking to limit production in the
dairy sector while reducing guarantees for that limited production. If this succeeded, it would
introduce a valuable element of flexibility while retaining an agricultural policy which was an
indispensable political link among members of the Community.
60
Europe was also concentrating on the importance of an enlarged market-which was one of the
underpinnings of American dynamism. The Europeans had a market which was more or less as big as
the American market, but they were not using it adequately. They would need to find the delicate
balance between deregulation and regulation, and to draw lessons from the U.S. and Japan about the
role of public procurement in stimulating activity, such as in the field of telecommunications.
Improved mobility in training within Europe was also essential, not just for economic reasons but to
produce a network of young people with common experience and knowledge, which was so impor-
tant for _innovation.
Were conditions right for the success of Europe in these various efforts? The speaker was
optimistic at the Community level, as the macroeconomic policies of the various member states were
less different than at any time since the "oil shocks." Some of the areas of progress needed would
come from market forces rather than from the traditional "push technique" of government. At the
world level, though, a major obstacle was presented by Japan, which had not yet been integrated into
the dialogue about the responsibility for the functioning of the international economic system.
European efforts to discuss individual issues with the Japanese or to participate in their market had
not been marked by much success, and the Japanese were being allowed to get away with "steps in
the right direction" in the form of small packages of token liberalization coinciding with the world
economic summits.
The speaker felt that European-American cooperation in all these areas was insufficient in scope
and imagination. Although there had been an explosion of exchanges at the company level in the
industrial and service sectors-as was emphasized in a later Swiss intervention-there were no grand
joint projects in fundamental research with public funding, such as in nuclear fusion. Nor were we
working together imaginatively on the multilateral rules for trade and services. With respect to the
current U.S. debate over the Export Administration Act, it was unrealistic to deny that there were
important security aspects to the international transfer of high technology. U.S.-European trade
dealings were bedevilled by uncertainty about the applicability and duration of export controls. This
was the one factor that could push European industries into "working out their own problems"
instead of adhering to a more general program, and that would be unfortunate.
Military procurement was another area in which there was inadequate cooperation, and this had
negative effects from military, industrial and political standpoints. Cooperation was not likely to
improve until the Europeans demonstrated that they were serious about their own affairs.
In conclusion, this International s;:ieaker called for Europeans and Americans to shift their focus
beyond the perpetual "r"''c::Jdirng through" in the short run to some fundamental problems with
'.;;:.;;;:.: :_;;, .iorµ11cat1ons. Cooperation in the short run was essential for credibility, but if it were to be
sustained one had to look farther ahead than we were doing now.
In responding to the foregoing panelists, an American participant substituted a military simile for
the oceanographic one. He said he was inclined to be optimistic about the tactical aspects but
pessimistic about the strategic ones. We had fewer short-term problems than many people thought,
but perh'aps--more worrisome long-term concerns. The current situation could not be discussed
without reference to the difficult INF problem we had been through. We were still living in the shadow
of that debate. The fact that the Soviets had left the negotiating table and that there were no nuclear
negotiations underway made people anxious and uneasy about the future of the East-West rela-
tionship, despite the absence of a clear crisis to point to. The end of the INF debate in Europe at large
had had an effect on the more gencral transatlantic debate. Last year, governments had tended
almost to suppress disagreement on other issues to create the cohesion necessary to move forward
with INF deployment.
With the beginning of deployment, some of those other issues had been moved from the back to the
front burner: the new importance of strengthening conventional defenses, for example, or the need
for a two-way street in procurement. We were not likely to make progress with those issues over the
next four to six months-in part because of the U.S. elections-but we could hope to achieve
something in the next two or three years, thanks to some of the lessons learned in the INF debate. The
Europeans' involvement in the successful implementation of the December '79 decision was evi-
dence of their willingness to assume greater responsibility. Another example of this was the begin-
ning of an important Franco-German security dialogue. In the economic area, we had successfully
dealt with protectionist pressures.
The speaker was not as concerned as some others about the political effects of U.S. social and
demographic shifts, but he was worried about the increasing polarization which seemed to be moving
the U.S. toward global unilateralism and Europe toward regional parochialism and escapism. The
loss of momentum toward European unity, and U.S. frustration about European defense contribu-
tions, could intensify this polarization. If, as the preceding International speaker had suggested,
Europe were to "miss the boat" in this generation of technological progress, a number of negative
results might ensue. Western Europe's capacity to underwrite its defense contributions would be
61
impaired; it might be led to look increasingly toward the East as a market in which it could be more
competitive, intensifying the strains in the area of technology transfer; and chronic unemployment
would turn its governments toward parochial matters at the expense of wider concerns. It was only to
be hoped that the right people in the right places had already awakened to these problems and were
working on solutions.
A British respondent alluded to the European tendency, on policy issues, to want to eat one's cake
and have it. If the dollar were in fact lower, many European industries would be in even graver
difficulties. If the U.S. were not so vigorously turning toward the Southwest and technological
innovation, Europe would say that the New World was showing signs of growing old. If the U.S. were
not turning its attention toward Asia and Latin America, Europe would be castigating i:for its ignorant
insularity. America had been overexposed in Lebanon, but had it refrained from intervening Europe
would have blamed it for its neglect. Had the Reagan administration not insisted on INF deployment,
Europe would be bewailing its weakness. If the EEC were not fighting over its budget and other
internal problems, its foreign policy would be even more bankrupt. In short, the U.S. was a maturing
continent that was still young, while Europe was too old to display signs of youth.
Nevertheless, the speaker expected that Europe would probably respond in a healthy fashion, and
did not need to be too disturbed by the American challenge. There was indeed a sense of "Euro-
sclerosis," of no growth and stagnation, of loneliness and resentment. But democracies, unlike
authoritarian regimes, could afford such periods of worry and fear, and should thrive off them. In
entrepreneurship and innovation, there were encouraging signs in Europe. The EEC crisis was
concentrating the minds of Europeans in good ways, and there was the start of a debate about a
European Defense Force. Through painful debate the Europeans were struggling to a definition of
their own responsibility and their attitudes to nuclear and other defense. In this way, the peace
movements had been constructive in questioning our assumptions and forcing us to analyze and
defend them openly. Above all, Europeans had been made to get used to patience and pain in place of
the era of automatic growth.
All these things related to the battle for opinion in the 1980's. Much of that battle was domestic, and
would continue to be so, but some of it was Atlantic. It was important that Europe should win this
battle for its own opinion. Although Europe was being forced to be more autonomous, one had to
keep in mind that she was thereby made more dependent on the effects of the policies and public style
of what happened in the U.S.
A French participant spoke of the uncertainty about security matters that was manifest throughout
Europe, and especially in Germany, following the economic decline of recent years. Several million
jobs had been lost in Europe since 1975, while the U.S. had created 15 million new jobs during that
time, and Japan an equally high number. There was a similar gap in the fields of investment, industrial
production and advanced technology (such as electronics, robotization and biotechnology). Amer-
ican primacy in these matters was attributable in part to a more flexible system and the absence of
external constraints on its currency. The European countries seemed bound to follow "stop-and-go"
policies, with the emphasis on "stop." Because of inadequate coordination among the member
states, French expansion might coincide with German restriction. Moreover, Europe's growth was
not facilitated by a socio/cultural/economic model comparable to Japan's. For these various reasons,
Europe was vulnerable to an acceleration of its economic decline.
With regard to security matters, German youth had discovered in 1982 what General de Gaulle had
known in 1960, namely that there was no absolute guarantee from the U.S. for European cities in case
of war. Possession of their own deterrent force had rendered the French less susceptible than some
other Europeans to pacifist pressures, and there was little neutralist sentiment in France today. The
place of the Communist party in France, as in Italy, was mainly a cultural phenomenon among the
electorate. It was true that Europe had to be more self-relfant in its defense; this goal could be
advanced by increased Franco-German discussions and by Community-wide plans for industry and
technology.
A Spanish participant observed that the gap between his country and its continental neighbors was
narrowing. After many years in the "ghetto of neutralism" under Franco, Spain was moving back into
the current of modern history. It was motivated by such diverse impulses as concern about its security
and envy of the more advanced industrial societies.
A Dutch speaker said that we had to analyze the problem of continental drift unemotionally,
remembering that a new generation of Europeans did not look at the U.S. through the same eyes as
did those who had been America's allies during the war. But there was still an overriding desire
among Europeans at large to cooperate with the U.S. Fruitful cooperation, though, ought to be
achieved as equals, and this was where the trouble lay. The European countries had not yet developed
the homogenous, standardized market necessary for economies of scale. There was abundant
technology and talent, but they were not being applied to a big enough economy. Europeans had to
resolve to tackle this problem as a community, and not on a country-by-country basis. One had to start
62
by dismantling the measures erected over the years by individual countries which hampered the
growth of industry. Otherwise, one might see the fulfillment of aJapanese prophecy that, at the end of
this century, the U.S. would serve as the world's breadbasket, Japan as its manufacturer, and Europe
as its discotheque.
A German participant cautioned against interpreting closer relations between East and West
Germany as a sign of neutralism or impending reunification. The division of Germany was unnatural,
so that improving relations by small steps tended partially to normalize an abnormal situation. Such
normalization was in the interest of the Western Allies, in that it lightened their burden as guarantors
of tbe security of West Berlin and tended to damp the intensity of East-West conflicts. Beyond that,
citizens of the Federal Republic felt a certain responsibility to ameliorate where possible the living
conditions of their compatriots in the East. But the gradual strengthening of these fragile links
between the two Germanies in no way involved a neutralist sentiment.
Two apparently incompatible trends were mentioned. by an American. One was the increasing
"nuclear allergy" among people in the U.S. as well as in Europe, a desire to decrease our reliance on
nuclear weapons for deterrence. The other was the inability or unwillingness on the part of European
governments to do substantially more for a conventional defense. In addition, several European
opposition parties-notably in Britain. Germany and Denmark-seemed to be moving away from the
security consensus of the postwar era. Since usually opposition parties eventually came into office,
this trend had worrisome implications.
On the latter point, two Germans observed that, in recent history, moving back toward a centrist
position on security matters seemed to be a prerequisite for being returned to office. On the other
hand, a Briton recalled that the left wing opposition parties, including the SDP in Germany, had
required long and careful "handling" before joining the security consensus at all. The British Labour
party had been extremely hostile to the notion of German rearmament.
Generally, the precondition for left wing parties' support of the defense consensus had been the
acceptance of detente as the other side of the coin. Whenever detente was attenuated, left wing
support of the defense consensus declined accordingly. With the right wing parties, support of the
alliance had always been primarily a function of European perceptions of the wisdom and consisten-
cy of U.S. leadership. Some of President Reagan's actions and rhetoric were testing the loyalty of his
allies, and the risk of disaffection did not lie only among left wing parties in opposition.
Another American said that, even with increased conventional strength in NATO, he saw no
alternative in this century to an extended deterrent based on U.S. nuclear arms and subject to
escalation.
A German speaker acknowledged the existence of "nuclear allergy" in Europe, but said that he felt
in good company, together with the Catholic bishops of the U.S. and Henry Kissinger. There were
some 4,000 nuclear weapons in West Germany, two-thirds of which had a range of 25 kilometers.
"They don't scare the Russians," he said, "they scare me." A lot had been done to improve conven-
tional strength in his country and the Bundeswehr was a much better force than it had been a decade
ago; it wouldbe1'etter yet a decade hence. Reservists were important, too, and the FRG could field
some 1.3 million troops within 72 hours.
A Finnish participant intervened to say that the sort of neutral foreign policy practiced by his
country had nothing whatever in common with pacifism, and involved no sympathy with it.
A U.S. speaker raised the question of how we should define security concerns of a geopolitical
nature which were important to the alliance but lay outside its boundaries, such as in Central America,
the Middle East and Africa. Should the U.S. be expected to respond to crises there while still
maintaining its force levels in Western Europe, should Europe take a greater interest in those areas, or
should there be a division of labor? Was there a disagreement among the allies about the importance
of such areas, or how to deal with them?
An International participant took issue with descriptions of an "arms race" in Europe. To him, the
Western European members of the alliance looked more like tortoises moving backwards. The
Western countries were spending about half as much on defense as 20 years ago, expressed as a
percentage of GNP. Another International speaker intervened to say that, on the other hand, the
Warsaw Pact nations were like a "galloping tortoise." There was still an essential strategic equiva-
lence between the two sides, but it was doubtful if we could hold our own without a considerable
increase in defense spending.
To a speaker from the Netherlands, it appeared that the combination of Vietnam and Watergate had
destroyed the foreign policy consensus in the U.S. American liberals seemed to have turned into
noninterventionists and conservatives into unilateralists. It was to be hoped that a consensus could
be restored on at least some of the major foreign policy issues, as this was essential to America's
ieadership role. The American panelist replied that many of his compatriots were deeply concerned
about this problem and were working on it. There were indeed political and constitutional infirmities
which tended to disrupt continuity in U.S. foreign policy.
63
A Canadian participant predicted that between now and the end of the century North America's
economic relations with the Pacific rim countries would grow at a much faster rate than relations with
Europe. Three factors would be instrumental in this. First, the European and North American
economies, which had been complementary in the last century, were now much more competitive,
particularly in agriculture. There would be substantially less opportunity tor those blocs to sell goods
to each other. Second, Canada and the U.S. were both Pacific as well as Atlantic nations, and the logic
of geography was turning their attention toward the last-growing economies that rimmed the Pacific.
Finally, immigration from Asia in the 1970's had produced in Canada, as in the U.S., strong social and
personal links with the Pacific. We would c;ontinue to see a shift of economic and political power to
the western coast of North America. The consequences of this for the Atlantic relationship were not
entirely clear, but the speaker hoped it was not a "zero sum game."
A Portuguese participant wondered whether it was wise for his country to continue seeking
membership in the EEC, as it had been doing since 1976. Perhaps its strategic importance, as well as
that of its Atlantic islands, combined with its experience in other parts of the world such as Africa,
could open the way instead to a profitable and influential partnership with the U.S. The same might be
true for other small European countries which were not members of the EEC. A German and an
International participant responded to this by urging that Portugal persevere patiently in its discus-
sions with the EEC. In the long run it was bound to be disadvantageous for a small European country
to remain outside the Community. Portugal's case exempliled a problem of adjustment which had its
parallel in many other EEC problems.
A Norwegian speaker felt that equating "Europe" with the EEC countries risked overlooking an
important segment of public opinion among the youth of the non-EEC countries of the alliance. Many
of them were especially concerned about the moral aspects of public issues, and were more
susceptible to the peace movement and the "drift." If we wanted their support for the defense
consensus, we would have to be seen to uphold certain moral and spiritual values.
An International participant felt that "Continental drift" was the wrong expression for the problem
we were facing, which he would describe more as a "drying out" of notions of international order and
structure. We were up against, not nationalism or neutralism, but provincialism and parochialism, of
which the signs were manifold. For example, one noticed increasing signs of moral righteousness.
(As one Dutchman had recently observed ironically, the new Calvinist motto seemed to be "God is
dead; long live Zimbabwe.") European attitudes toward Latin American problems seemed 10 :leiine
who was "liberal" and who "conservative". There was a decline in the attraction of Community
structures and procedures, and protectionism was getting more popular. One heard about
"Europeanization" and "small is beautiful." The "me generation" had been translated into societies
and become respectable. The speaker had no strategy for dealing with these trends. Much depended
on the European political leaders, but also on what happened in the U.S., which he called the "think
tank of the Western world." Unfortunately, the U.S. had not been interested in recent years in .defining
what could be the international order, but had tended to view world issues in a simplistic fashion,
trying to organize its alliances on the theme of "those who are not with us are against us." The costs of
that attitude had been profound. Part of the task of being a superpower was developing ideas of
international structure. The Europeans were incapable of doing that alone, and their provincialism
would be reinforced ii America did not do it.
An American participant was disturbed that no reference had been made so far in the discussions to
the forthcoming economic summit meeting. II, as some people had 5aid, this demonstrated our low
expectations, that was unfortunate, as we should avail ourselves of every opportunity to expand
economic and broader policy coordination.
An.other American expressed surprise at the implied complacency about economic relationships
between the U.S. and Europe. He saw real continental drift in those relationships in at least four areas.
On the monetary side, the current dangerously high level of the dollar on the foreign exchange
markets was merely the latest manifestation of the severe currency imbalances that had plagued us
for a decade, and of our unstable international monetary system. This was basically the responsibility
of the U.S. and Europe, and one observed no efforts to improve the workings of the system. Closely
related to that was the trade problem, with its outlook for large-scale disruption.
A third area of concern was the international debt problem. There were large differences between
American and continental European banks about about how-or even whether-to respond to that
problem in new ways. No contingency plans had been developed to deal with the crisis that might
erupt because of a further sharp rise in interest rates, a new recession, or increased protectionism.
Finally, big differences had emerged in recent years about support for the international financial
institutions: the quota increase for the IMF, the IDA replenishment, and the role of the World Bank in
filling the gap lel.t by the private banks in the developing countries. Underlying all this was the
fundamental question of whether we could continue to have the kind of meaningful international
economic cooperation and efforts at policy coordination that had marked the last generation. Did the
64
neglect of the economic summit in these discussions evidence simply skepticism about summit
meetings, or did it suggest a broader erosion of confidence in international economic cooperation?
The observed continental drift was not just an economic problem. It was closely related to security:
poor economic results would make itharder to achieve NATO spending targets. Economic hardships
would exacerbate the "Mansfield problem." On the other hand, the economic opportunities arising
from interdependence could provide at least part of the new constituency for the constructive U.S.
foreign policy consensus that some of the European participants had referred to.
Ta another U.S. participant, though, one of the few encouraging signs was indeed that there had
been no efforts to reform the present international monetary system, which he described as "the
worst possible, except tor all the others." Moreover, he was pleased that we had matured enough to
realize that economic summits were a good occasion for mutual education but not the place to make
fundamental international agreements. A British speaker expressed his agreement with that view.
An Austrian participant emphasized an area in which, he said, there had been no continental drift:
the strengthening of the democratic system in Europe. For one thing, there had been a return to
democracy in countries which had temporarily existed under non-democratic regimes. For another,
the influence of the Communist parties had steadily declined in most European countries. (In the last
Austrian elections, for example, the Communists had received only one-half of one per cent of the
votes.) No continental drift was observable in the commitment to basic democratic values. The term
"neutralist" was misleading when applied to neutral countries like Austria, however, as it implied
equidistance from East and West. Austria and the other neutral European countries, he said, were
firmly committed to the West-ideologically, politically and emotionally.
The final intervention from the floor at this session was by an International participant, who
discussed the security implications of political and economic drift. To begin with, there had been an
impairment of the alliance's military mission of credible deterrence, of both overt aggression and
intimidation. We risked being seen as incapable or unwilling to defend ourselves. While Western
Europe's defenses were stronger every year, the gap was unfortunately widening between the force
capabilities of the Allied Command Europe and those of the Warsaw Pact, and this would leave us
exposed to pressure and blackmail from the Soviets. The speaker was more concerned about
coercion and intimidation than overt military aggression. But if Western Europe were attacked
conventionally today, the Allied Command would have little choice but to request the release of
nuclear weapons fairly quickly, a s·11uation which the speaker found most disturbing. The only
alternative was the adequate improvement of our conventional forces according to certain priorities,
foremost of which was the improved use of existing forces to meet our standards. But this would
require additional sacrifice, which had to be based on an understanding of the threat.
The speaker feared that the Alliance nations would be doing less with their next set of force goals
than with the last, despite evidence of the widening gap with the East. NATO force goals for 1983-89, if
fully met, would have required a real annual increase of an average of four per cent per nation. The
anticipated newJorce goals would be closer to three per cent. Historically, though, only about 70 per
cent of the force goals had been placed in national programs, and only some 70 per cent og the
proposals from major NATO commanders had been accepted as force goals. This meant that we
ended up with only half of what was needed anyway.
We all wanted peace with freedom, a lower level of international tensions, and reduced and
balanced levels of forces of all categories. This would require successful negotiation with the
Russians, and to achieve that we had to improve our conventional forces and continue to deploy the
intermediate range nuclear forces, so that we could deal at the negotiating table from a position of
strength and resolve. Weapons systems were so costly, though, that if we continued to do "business
•s usual" we would be effectively forced into unilateral disarmament through our inability to afford
what we needed.
Duplication in mHitary expenditures within the Alliance was costing us unnecessary billions. With
GNPs equivalent to two and hall times that of the other side, and more spending, we were neverthe-
less accomplishing less than they because of inetlicient development and procurement efforts. In the
U.S., better coordination among Congress, the executive, and industry was needed to open the way to
greatly ·improved U.S.-European procurement efforts. On the European side, a forum had to be
found-in the Independent European Program Group or elsewhere--to promote the exchange of
technology, research and test data.
The speaker concluded with a reference to the requirements for short-range nuclear weapons, a
problem with which SHAPE had been wrestling since 1980. By the spring of 1985, the political
authorities of the Alliance would be presented with recommendations as to exactly how many
warheads were needed, and where, tor deterrent purposes. No single weapons system would be
"sacrosanct" in the rigorous analysis of those needs. SACEUR was under a constraint from the
Montebello summit conference to remove another 1,400 warheads from Europe in addition to the
65
1,000 sent home in 1980, and the number of warheads remaining would not exceed the ceilings
prescribed.
The major challenge within the Alliance was to convince our people of the threat to their freedom,
and to elicit from them a willingness to make some additional sacrifices.
The session concluded with remarks by the three panelists. The International speaker thought that
any theoretical discussion about whether Europe was getting more or less parochial was a waste of
time, but he had observed less despondency and more curiosity about industrial and technological
innovation. The capacity to respond to this-whether in Europe, the U.S. or Japan-was a world
problem, not a local one. With reference to the alleged complacency about long-range troubles, the
speaker felt that we were unjustifiably smug about our ability to continue to "muddle through."
Sometimes we were worse off after our muddling than before. Fundamental protectionist trends
could explode at any moment, triggered by eitherthe Japanese, the Americans or the Europeans. The
economic summit meetings were a recognition of the link between political an.d economic questions
and created an opportunity to overcome bureaucratic squabbles when forward movement was
needed. A related problem was that we had not yet found a way to accomodate the growth of
less-developed countries. As they grew in strength and found ways to repay their debt, the accom-
panying large excesses in their trade balances would created export pressures in the developed
countries. But if trade overall was not growing, this would be a zero-sum game resulting only in a
change in market shares. So the uncertainty in international financial institutions about the condi-
tions for creating sensible overall growth was disturbing.
The German panelist frankly found the results of the economic summits disappointing, but since all
our economies were now doing better, perhaps the upcoming London meeting would produce
something meaningful. As for detente, he had always supported it but he disagreed that it had worked
more to the advantage of Europe than the U.S. In any case, the Russians had misused it, leaving us all
with serious problems. The speaker was optimistic about Europe, although he hoped to see it more
open-minded, less protectionist, and more ready to accept worldwide competition. If it did not
become so, it risked falling far behind in technology and industrial efficiency.
The American panelist contended that, if detente had not worked better for the Europeans than the
Americans, it had at least worked differently, which pointed up the need for improved coordination of
our approaches to the Soviet Union.
In both North America and Europe, there were elements in the younger generation whose back-
ground had not necessarily made them sympathetic to "the Atlantic culture" or European concerns.
So a great deal of education about our common experience and problems would be necessary on
both sides of the Atlantic. Finally, he said, we had to deal with the problems underlying the U.S. trade
deficit, which was assuming "nightmarish" dimensions.
66
·'
V. THE SOVIET UNION, THE WEST AND THE THIRD WORLD
A CASE STUDY: CENTRAL AMERICA
Working Paper Prepared by Miguel Angel Martinez,
Deputy Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee,
Spanish Congress of Deputies (SPA)
1. when two blocs are competing with each other, as is the case in the world today, it may seem
logical for the USSR to seek a foothold in what might, a priori, be considered to be within the
adversary's zone of influence. The logic will, of course, be even stronger if the zone in question has
such cardinal strategic importance for the U.S. as Central America and the Caribbean.
2. Nevertheless, in recognising that the USSR has an interest in seeking influence in the region,
we must not exaggerate its impact on the area up to the present. Nor should we view everything that
happens there in terms of an obsession with the danger of a Soviet advance. Nor should we allow our
actions to be basically guided-and•even less justified-in the light of this danger. When all is said and
done, the danger cannot be used to shield and mask a category of interests other than those that are
openly proclaimed.
3. To begin with, it can hardly be disputed that neither the geography, nor the history nor the
cultural tradition of the peoples and countries making up Cental America contain anything that
seriously favours, prepares or facilitates Soviet penetration or influence-or even Marxism-
Leninism-in the region.
4. We must therefore analyse, if only cursorily, the characteristics of the current position in the
Central American countries to see whether political, economic and social conditions there are such
as to facilitate penetration by the USSR.
5. Underdevelopment is, of course, the salient characteristic of the societies of Central America
and the Caribbean-with all that it means in terms of poverty, illliteracy, unemployment and disease.
But it is also an underdevelopment which institutionalises social injustice through systems in which
exploitation, repression and corruption are dovetailed into each other, producing an apparently
stable and smoothly working status quo. In societies of this type, it is difficult to install regimes that
respect human rights and fundamental freedoms. Their opposition to the interplay of democracy and
the rule of law is equally great. The few cases in which such enterprises have succceeded therefore
deserve all the more merit. Unfortunately, however. the tendency is for power to be in the hands of the
oligarchies, which keep all the privileges to themselves while denying all the rights to their peoples.
The facade shielding the exercise of this power is unimportant-personal dictatorship, dictatorship
by the military establishment, or a parliamentary farce in which some consciences are lulled into
acquiescence, but which are often less dangerous than open dictatorships because at least they do
not confuse the fssui;.._or compromise the future of genuine democracy.
Another significant feature of the recent past and the present in the majority of Central American
countries is the dominance of economic interests centred on the U.S. These interests have joined
forces with the ruling minorities in each society, thereby helping to keep them in power, while relying
on them to extract the maximum profit margins. It was probably in defending such private economic
interests-and long before other criteria came into current use-that the U.S. came to adopt its
traditional policy of treating Central America as its own backyard.
6. Given the-admittedly simplified-situation of the peoples of Central America described
above, it is not hard to list their ambitions. All that is necessary is to review their history in this
century-beginning with Mexico, for example-long before even the name of the USSR had been
heard in these latitudes. The demands of the Central American peoples closely match the shortcom-
ings listed above, in fact what they are being denied: social progress and justice; freedom and
democratic rights; and national dignity.
7. Can it be asserted that the claims being advanced in Central America and the Caribbean do not
reflect objectively established privation? Can the support for these claims be explained solely or
fundamentally in terms of the possible-and indeed probable-agitation being carried out in the area
by the USSR? Can these claims, as defined above, be identified with Communism, Marxism-Leninism
or Sovietism? It would surely be more correct to state that there are deep-seated, genuine reasons
why the peoples of Central America should refuse to accept the conditions they have endured
hitherto, without any impulse from the USSR or indeed from the devil himself. It would be more
correct to recognise that the claims of the Central American peoples are inspired not by Leninism but
from the principles derived from the history of mankind, such as those of the great American
democracy of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.
67
8. And yet, through U.S. policy in Central America, with certain differences of emphasis and
irrespective of the administrations replacing each other in the White House, there runs a constant
thread of opposition to the claims that have just been listed. It must be acknowledged that this
opposition runs absolutely counter to the principles underpinning the Western world by systematical-
ly subordinating these principles to the economic, political and strategic interests of the U.S.
Moreover, this opposition has always proved counter-productive in its effects: on the one hand, it
contradicts the consistency of these values and the confidence placed in them by the peoples of
Central America and, on the other hand, it has enabled the Soviet Union to play a part which it would
have found hard to adopt on its own merits.
9. An analysis of U.S. policy in Central America shows that it has pursued two objectives: first, to
prevent a chain of events that sooner or later would inevitably harm private U.S. economic interests;
and, second, to halt any process that would ultimately lead to greater independence by the countries
in question from their great neighbour to the North. Until the 1940's, this policy needed no explana-
tion or justification: it seemed legitimate and even proper that a powerful country should protect its
nationals' interests even at the expense of the interest of other countries and peoples. But before
long, the era of the great colonial empires showed every sign of coming to an end. That did not mean,
however, that the U.S. made any significant change in its Central American policy. An effort was
merely made to render it more presentable by arguing, from paradox to paradox, that it was defending
freedom against the Communist advance and defending the West and the security of the U.S. against
Soviet penetration and threats.
10. And so, hitherto, a clear case of North-South conflict has been presented as a part of the
East-West conflict. This has been done so persistently that, while preserving its fundamental charac-
teristics, it has-and sometimes in a very dangerous form-entered into the rivalry between the two
blocs. This approach to the problem has the advantage for the U.S. that it blurs its responsibility as a
Northern power for the crisis gripping the region. Moreover, it tends to commit the rest of the West in
support of its North American allies and not only against the enemy to the East but also against the
legitimate aspirations of the Central American peoples.
11. In such a situation, with open war breaking out on several fronts and Central America turned
into one of the main danger points of current world tension, a heavy responsibility lies on us all and
more particularly on Europe and perhaps most of all on Spain, to make every effort to, first, bring
peace and detente to the area and, second, to set it on the path towards solving its problems. To do so,
it is first or all necassar:1 to unmask the conflict, to demonstrate its true nature and to try to find
answers which are designed not simp!y tc reserve privileges that are as unjust as they are outdated or
to combat spectres which may turn out to be real if they are summoned up too o~:en.
12. The concern that we in the West feel about Central America and the Caribbean should impel us
to propose realistic alternatives based on solidarity, respect for the right of each people to choose its
own path, and our joint responsibility to safeguard peace.
13. Unfortunately, the actions of the present U.S. government do not appear to be guided by these
principles. On the contrary, Washington persists in interpreting-and therefore presenting-every
libertarian, nationalist demand emanating from Central America as a direct reflection of Soviet
penetration and therefore an immediate threat to the very security of the U.S. This in turn derives from
the principle, shared equally by both superpowers, that they have areas of interest which are vital to
their security and in which they are entitled to control events as they think fit.
In this particular case, there has been a mobilisation and influx-as disproportionate as it is
unwarranted-of U.S. military personnel of all kinds in Central America and the Caribbean, as part of
an openly declared policy of intervention, taking the form of constant harassment of Nicaragua,
complete domination of Honduras (thereby weakening its institutions and undermining its sovereign-
ty by turning it into an unconcealed base for anti-Sandinista operations), and increasingly compro-
mising involvement in El Salvador (at this point, one wonders whether any lessons have been learned
from the blatant mistakes committed in Viet Nam). This policy has been highlighted by the invasion of
the tiny island of Granada which, to put it mildly, recalled certainly episodes of bygone days that
we-naively, it would seem-thought were things of the past.
14. Neither the report of the Kissinger Commission nor the other alternatives it puts forward offer
much hope or prospect of a solution to the crisis in Central America. This bipartisan Commission,
appointed by the White House to devise a medium- and long-term policy for Central America based on
consensus, does not depart in essentials from the policy of the Reagan administration forthe area. In
short, although the report shows an understanding at least of certain factors based on objective
circumstances in the area, it is plain that whether in analysing the problems or defining the solutions,
the crisis is once again diagnosed in terms of East-West rivalry, without any attempt to bring out the
obvious relevance of the Central American situation to the North-South conflict.
This biased approach to the current problem is even more apparent in the attempts to trace the
area's underdevelopment back to its early colonial history, ignoring the colonial-style exploitation
68
which has taken place and is still taking place up to the present time. This persistence iri interpreting
the situation in terms of the East-West conflict distorts the approach of the Kissinger report and leads
it into contradictions that are difficult to sustain. For example, the underdevelopment of the area is
regretted not so much because of the poverty and injustice it entails for the men and women of
Central America and the Caribbean as-and above all-because it may provide a breeding-ground for
Communist ideas and facilitate the growth of Soviet influence.
As a result, while acknowledging the need for peace in the area and for democratic systems of
government in·the countries composing it, as essential conditions for overcoming underdevelop-
ment, the emphasis in the proposed solutions is on military cooperation and aid to enable each
countr\i i~ fight "subversion" at home and "aggression" abroad. It does not seem very consistent to
aim for peace while promoting military escalation, or to try to establish democratic regimes by
strengthening military governments which, in this part of the world, have always been distinguished
by their anti-democratic character and proneness to coups d'etat. Moreover, the policies proposed
for overcoming the area's underdevelopment are not only unilateral and politically discriminatory but
appear to assume a process of Americanisation of Central America and the Caribbean, and the
maintenance, in many cases, of interests and patterns which are at variance with the requirements of
the rational, balanced development of the individual countries concerned. If the proposed solution is
to consist of creating a number of Puerto Ricos in Central America and the Caribbean, it might be
more honest to say so openly; the problem may be what the peoples of the area think of the project.
And what the rest of the international community thinks of it as well.
One significant point which helps to characterise the report of the Kissinger Commission is the
mistrust it displays of the part that Europe might play in the settlement of the Central American crisis;
the report places a positive construction on the fact that, in the words of its authors, European
declarations on the Central American situation have "died down". This would appear to be a reversion
to the old-established "backyard" doctrine.
15. Nevertheless, within the U.S. itself, there is growing concern over the crisis in Central America
and great anxiety over the part that the Reagan administration is forcing the country to play in it.
Public opinion generally, university and intellectual circles, the trade unions and, above all, the
political media are demanding more information, debating and in many cases disowning a policy
whose consequences are unforeseeable, to say the least. It has become a prominent issue in the
current presidential campaign and, in any event, all the questioning of the policy pursued hitherto is
leading to its rethinking and the putting forward of realistic, reasonable and progressive alternatives
which afford grounds for optimism about a settlement of the Central American crisis.
16. These concerns and reactions in the U.S. itself are matched by the anxiety felt and the efforts
·being made in Latin America to put an end to the tension and suffering being endured by Central
America and the Caribbean. One example is the admirable stand made by the governments of
Panama, Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela, despite every form of pressure; between them, they have
displayed tremendous political courage in launching the operation named after the island of Con-
tadora, where i!Airst took shape.
The proposals of·iheContadora Group have been defined in a series of papers setting out clearly
the principles on which peace and co-existence must be based in the area where tension is now
greatest, together with the conditions that must be fulfilled if the tensions are to be eased and
progress in the area consolidated without obstruction or interference. The proposals of the Con-
tadora Group are so right, so candid and so incontrovertible that hardly anybody has ventured to
criticise or oppose them openly. Quite the contrary, with more or less hope, with more or less
enthusiasm, with more or less good faith, the governments and the majority of the political move-
ments of the countries of the area have expressed their willingness to abide by the guidelines put
forward in the Contadora plan for overcoming the crisis in Central America.
Naturally, this initiative by the Contadora Group has had determined, powerful detractors, in the
main those who are defending interests that are incompatible with the social, political and economic
progress of Central America. Since they cannot decently attack the plan, they have concentrated on
underground operations, varying in their objectives, but with the common goal of trying to empty
Contadora of its substance. Pressures and even destabilising operations have been directed against
the governments of the Group; some have been reminded that their institutions are only relatively well
established, and others of their precarious economic situation. Already there has been resistance on
the part of countries in the area with conservative governments, which are failing to display as much
conviction and despatch as would be desirable; while in the remainder of Latin America and Europe,
there has been an organised campaign to ensure that demonstrations of support for Contadora are
confined to lip service, without committing anybody to take any action. Every effort has been made to
downgrade the proposals of the Contadora Group and strip them of their content-by obstructing.
their sponsors, by holding up the measures advocated and by cutting the project off from any form of
international solidarity or commitment. Despite all these manoeuvres, the fact remains that the
69
Contadora project is still valid and is in fact the only reasonable one we have-and one which has
aroused the necessary agreement and support to bring about a settlement of the grave crisis which is
convulsing Central America and the Caribbean and endangering peace in the whole area and indeed
the world.
17. Europe, as an essential part of the West, has a prominent part to play in all this, regardless of
the consequences, and at two different though complementary levels, while also coordinating its
efforts with our Latin American counterparts, within the framework of the Contadora Group's
proposals and strategies. In the first place, Europe must make it clear to its ally, the U.S., that this
alliance entitles us to demand some consistency between the democratic principles we have in
common and our deeds, especially with regard to Central America. The U.S. must be made aware that
it is in the interest of all-the Central Americans, naturally, but also Europe and the U.S. itself-to
establish a pattern of relationships based on friendship and trust instead of the current, and in the
medium-term explosive, satellite relationship. Secondly, Europe, observing the priorities set by the
countries concerned, should launch practical projects with the widest possible participation-
prompt, imaginative, generous, properly-backed projects which can serve as models of cooperation
in the kind of development that Central America and the Caribbean need, without any exclusions or
discrimination; it is obvious that this development will not only promote progress for the Central
Americans but will do much to ensure the genuine independence of these countries and peace
throughout the area.
18. And probably, without directly meaning to do so and therefore without making it a policy
objective, we would through these programmes, this display of solidarity and-by virtue of its
r.onsistencv-t!i;q r"laffirmation of our principles, be acting effectively to deprive the USSR and
Marxism-Leninism of the (in our view, lir,;i:c:::; :~!!~"lnce they have managed to acquire in the area,
mainly by taking advantage of the clumsiness and selfisl;qess of their opponents.
Information Sheet on the Report of the
National Bipartisan Commission on Central America
MAJOR THEMES
-The crisis in Central America is acute. Its roots are indigenous-in poverty, injustice and closed
political systems. But world economic recession and Cuban-Soviet-Nicaraguan intervention brought
it to a head.
- The crisis will not wait. It must be addressed at once and simultaneously in all its aspects.
Ultimate resolutions depend on economic progress, social and political reform. But insurgencies
must be checked if lasting progress is to be made on these fronts.
- Indigenous reform, even indigenous revolution, is no threat to the U.S. But the intrusion of
outside powers exploiting local grievances for political and strategic advantage is a serious threat.
Objective of U.S. policy should be to reduce Central American conflicts to Central American dimen-
sions.
- U.S. has fundamental interests at stake: Soviet-Cuban success and resulting collapse of Central
America would compel substantial increase in our security burden or redeployment of forces to
detriment of vital interests elsewhere.
- As a nation we have deep and historic interest in promotion and preservation of democracy.
Report concludes that pluralistic societies are what Central Americans want and are essential to
lasting solutions. In this case our strategic interests and our ideals coincide.
- Central Americans desperately need our help and we have a moral obligation to provide it. The
U.S. and other nations can make a difference. But in the end solutions will depend on the efforts of
Central Americans themselves.
-Although there is urgent need for action, no quick solutions can be expected. U.S. must make a
long-term commitment and stick to a coherent policy.
- That policy can and should be bipartisan. Commission found wide consensus on principles and
objectives.
70
--~-----
POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
- Central American economies grew substantially during the 60's ahd early ?O's. But income
distribution was highly inequitable, except in Costa Rica and Panama.
- Trend toward more pluralistic political systems in El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua
reversed in early ?O's.
-World recession and rising political violence had catastrophic effect on region's economies in
late ?O's, early 80's. All have declined dramatically. El Salvador's gross domestic product is off 25%
since 1na.
- Even with successful stabilization programs and restored political stability, per capita wealth in
1990 would only be three-quarters of what it was in 1980.
- There must be substantial increase in outside assistance.
- Commission believes economic development cannot be separated from political and social
reform. Objective must be parallel development of pluralistic societies and strong economies with far
more equitable distribution of wealth.
-We propose a program of U.S. assistance designed to promote economic growth, democratiza-
tion and greater social equity.
- We encourage the greatest possible involvement of the U.S. private sector in the stabilization
effort. Recommend the formation of an emergency action committee of private sector personalities to
provide advice on new private-public initiatives to spur growth and employment.
Recommendations: An Emergency Stabilization Program
- Leaders of U.S. and Central America should meet to initiate a comprehensive approach to
economic development of the region and reinvigoration of the Central American Common Market.
-A $400 million supplemental in FY84 over and above the $477 million now in the budget for the
seven countries. There is urgent need to stabilize economies now going downhill very fast.
-Focus this assistance on labor-intensive infrastructure projects and housing. Unemployment is a
critical problem-politically and economically.
- Establish a program to provide U.S. government guarantees for short-term trade credits.
External credit has dried up. Without it economies cannot be reactivated.
- Provide an emergency loan to the Central American Common Market to permit the reactivation
of this vital organization. Lack of resources in the Market to settle trade accounts among the
countries has stalled it.
- U.S. government should take an active role in the efforts to resolve the external debt problems of
Central America and should encourage the countries that have not done so to seek multilateral
rescheduling.
-Also encourage commercial banks to renegotiate at the lowest possible interest rates.
Recommendations: Medium and Long-Term
- Commissio_n estimates $24 billion in net external exchange inflows needed to 1990 to foster a
growth rate of three·percent per capita, returning these countries to pre-recession levels of per capita
wealth. About half-$12 billion-is expected to come from international institutions, other donor
countries, and loans and investments from private sector sources.
- U.S. government will have to provide as much as $12 billion if these financing needs are to be
met.
- We propose in this context a program of $8 billion over next five fiscal years (FY85-89) in USG
assistance. This would be divided very roughly into about $6 billion in appropriated funds and about
$2 billion in contingent liabilities covering guarantees, insurance and the like.
- Compared with current projections for FY85-89, these contributions would constitute an in-
crease of about $2.8 billion in appropriated funds and $.7 billion in contingent liabilities over the
five-year period.
- Urge that Congress authorize multi-year funding of this program. Commission believes firm,
long-term commitment is essential.
- To give form and structure to the development effort suggest establishment of the Central
American Development Organization (CADO). Perhaps one-quarter of U.S. aid could be channelled
through CADO.
-CADO would consist of the U.S and those countries of the seven willing to commit themselves to
internal democracy and reform. Continued membership would depend on demonstrated progress
toward those goals. Adherence to regional security pact also required.
- Nicaragua could participate by meeting these conditions.
-CADO's principal body would be a Development Council with tripartite, ILO-style representation.
Would assess program and progress toward economic growth, democratization, reform and pre-
servation of human rights.
- Other democracies would be invited to join.
71
Additional Recommendations
- Expanded assistance from the U.S. government for democratic institutions and leadership
training-neighborhood groups, cooperatives, binational centers and visitor programs for leaders of
labor unions, local governments and other organizations.
- Require a firm commitment by the Central Americans to economic policies, including reforms in
tax systems, to encourage private enterprise and individual initiative, to create lavorble investment
climates, to curb corruption where it exists, and to spur balanced trade.
- Urge extension of duty-free trade to Central America by other major trading nations.
- Review non-tarill barriers to imports from Central America with a view toward using whatever
flexibility that exists within the framework of multilateral agreements, to favor Central American
products.
- Establishment of the Central American Development Corportion-a privately owned venture-
capital company which could initially be financed by a loan from the U.S. government.
- Recommend that the U.S. join the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
- Technical and financial support for export promotion and a U.S. government review of non-tariff
barriers to Central American imports.
- Expanded availability of insurance guarantees for new investments from the U.S. government's
Overseas Private Investment Corporation.
-Increased locus in assistance programs on small business and accelerated agricultural develop-
ment-particularly in production of food for domestic consumption.
HEALTH AND EDUCATION
- Democracy and prosperity in the region require accelerated human development. Hunger,
disease and illiteracy sap a people's vitality and impede the growth of viable democratic institutions.
- Literacy rates are unacceptably low in several counties (e.g., Guatemala 45%, El Salvador 63%,
Honduras 60%), handicapping education efforts seriously.
-Widespread malnutrition also handicaps education by sending physically and mentally underde-
veloped children to school.
-Goals should include a reduction of malnutrition, elimination of illiteracy, expanded education,
health, and housing opportunities.
- Initial efforts must be to increase food assistance to Central America through the PL 480
programs.
- Commission calls for formation, under direction of the Peace Corps, of a Literacy Corps and a
Central American Teachers Corps.
- To meet needs in higher education, U.S. government scholarships should be raised to approx-
imately 10,000 over 4-6 years, a level comparable to Cuban and Soviet Union efforts.
- Educational reform can also be encouraged in the areas of technical and vocational education,
through the expansion of the International Executive Service Corps, and through closer cooperation
with Central American universities to improve the quality of education.
- Judicial systems in Central America can be strengthened by providing resources for training
judges, judicial staff, and public prosecutors.
-Continuation and expansion of existing programs for dise.ase control and eradication, as well as
immunization and oral rehydration.
- Training of primary health workers, especially nurses, should be expanded and the means
developed to integrate private and public financing of health services.
- Assistance programs should target the area's severe housing shortage.
- Training of public administrators required to improve public service.
- U.S. government should provide more resources to meet critical problem of refugees and
displaced persons-more than one million of them need help.
SECURITY ISSUES
-In El Salvador there are two separate conflicts: (1) between those seeking democratic reform and
those seeking to retain their privileges; (2) between Marxist-Leninist guerrillas and those who oppose
Marxism-Leninism.
-In discussing the latter we identify three general propositions about such guerrilla movements:
(1) They depend on external support. Without it they are unlikely to succeed.
72
(2) They develop their own momentum which reform alone cannot stop.
(3) Victorious, they create totalitarian regimes, even though they have enlisted support of
democratic elements in order to project democratic, reformist image.
- External support comes from Soviet Union, Cuba and now Nicaragua. Cuba has developed into a
leading military power through Soviet assistance. Since Sandinista victory, Soviets have come
around to support Cuban strategy of armed road to power in Central America.
- There are serious strategic implications for the U.S. in Soviet-
Cuban support for armed insurgency in the region.
- Triumph of hostile forces there could require us to devote large resources to defend our
southern approaches.
- This s;ould mean either substantially increased defense burden for the U.S., or a redeployment of
forces~lo ihe detriment of our interests elsewhere.
- Threat to our shipping lanes in the Caribbean.
- Increased violence and dislocation in the area from which we could not isolate ourselves.
- Erosion of our power to influence events worldwide as we are perceived as unable to influence
events close to home.
El Salvador
- The war is stalemated, a condition to the ultimate advantage of the guerrillas.
- U.S. military assistance is Inadequate to permit modern, humane and successful counter-
insurgency.
- Commission recommends that U.S. provide significantly increased levels of military assistance
for greater mobility, more training, higher force levels and more equipment.
- Assistance is to be conditioned through legislation on terminating death squads, progress
toward democracy and establishment of the rule of law.
- In Guatemala, such assistance should only be provided if the same terms are met.
- Increased military assistance also needed for Honduras to build a credible deterrent and to meet
renewed efforts at insurgency.
- Commission concludes that U.S. security interests are importantly engaged in Central America.
Larger program of military assistance needed, as well as expanded support for economic growth and
social reform.
- Success will depend on an end to massive violations of human rights and the neutralization of
external support for the insurgencies.
THE SEARCH FOR PEACE
-A successful U.S. political strategy in Central America requires resources to promote economic
growth, vigorous efforts to advance democracy and reform; other inducements and penalties.
- General strategic objective of U.S. diplomacy in Central America should be to reduce the civil
wars, national conflicts and military preparations to Central American dimension.
- Specifically, we should seek to stop the war and killing in El Salvador. Create conditions under
which Nicaragua becomes a peaceful and democratic member of the Central American community.
And open the way-fur democratic development in all countries.
- Commission calls for negotiations in El Salvador between guerrillas and the government to be
elected in March to establish conditions for later legislative and municipal elections in which all could
participate: electoral commission with FMLN-FDR representation, cease-fire and end to all violence;
international observation of elections.
- Adequate economic and military assistance from U.S. can help to achieve such a settlement.
- Commission believes military stalemate works against rather than for a political settlement
based on the popular will.
- In Nicaragua, consolidation of a Marxist-Leninist regime would create a permanent security
threat. Nicaragua's mainland location makes it a crucial steppingstone to promote armed insurgency
in Central America. Cuban personnel (2,000 military advisers and 6,000 civilian officials), several
hundred Soviet, East European, Libyan and PLO advisers, extensive arms deliveries (13,000 tons in
1983) add an external dimension to the threat posed by Nicaragua to its neighbors.
-What gives the current situation its special urgency is the external threat posed by the Sandinista
regime in Nicaragua, supported by Cuban military strength, backed by Soviet weapons, guidance and
diplomacy, and integrated into the Cuban network of intelligence and subversion.
- Central American leaders believe pluralistic political orders are essential to long-term security.
-An alternative would be an attempt at containment. But that would threaten militarization of the
isthmus-the creation of garrison states. Democracy would wither. And the U.S. could find itself as
surrogate policeman.
- Commission proposes comprehensive regional settlement based on:
(1) Respect for sovereignty and non-intervention.
(2) Verifiable commitments to non-aggression and an end to all attempts at subversion-
covert or overt.
73
(3) Limitations on aims and sizes of armed forces. Prohibition of foreign forces, bases and
advisers.
(4) No military forces, bases or advisers of non-Central American countries would be per-
mitted.
(5) Commitment to internal pluralism and free elections in all countries.
(6) Provision for verification of all agreements.
(7) Establishment of an inter-government council to meet regularly to review compliance.
(8) Adherence to the overall agreement would be required for membership in the Central
American Development Organization.
- U.S. would support the agreement and provide assistance; and would commit itself to respect
results of elections within countries as long as principles of pluralism at home and restraint abroad
observed.
- Commission's proposal based on and amplifies 21 points of the Contadora Group.
- Commission fully endorses Contadora efforts.
- Finally, majority of Commission opposes dismantling existing incentives and'pressures for the
regime in Managua to negotiate seriously.
-As for Cuba, Commission sees little possibility of separating it from Soviet Union. But U.S. should
be prepared to negotiate seriously if Cuba were to show itself prepared for genuine coexistence,
dropping support for insurgency in Central America and revolutionary violence elsewhere in the
world.
-As for Soviet Union, establishment of Soviet military base in Nicaragua is not the major concern.
Before that could have happened the crisis would have reached proportions not containable in
Central American dimensions.
- There is little promise in negotiating with the Soviet Union over Central America. Soviets would
seek to cast such negotiations in terms of sphere of influence, an unacceptable concept for the U.S.
DISCUSSION
Moderator: Walter Scheel
In addition to the Spanish Working Paper and the Information Sheet on the Report of the National
Bipartisan Commission on Central America (Kissinger Commission), discussion of Central America
was based upon introductory remarks by an American about the report and about U.S. policy in the
region in general. This section begins with a summary of those remarks.
The commission consisted of twelve Americans with widely divergent views and personalities. It
was perhaps an indication that public opinion in the U.S. was not all that divided that the commission
came up with a unanimous report at a time when there were very real incentives to divide along
partisan political lines. From the point of view of American national and global interests, the range of
policy alternatives in Central America was not great. In the commission's report were embodied the
major outlines of the direction in which American policy had to go if the next administration, whether
Republican or Democratic, was to command a consensus.
Some basic questions about the situation in Central America had to be considered. These were:
Did the U.S. have vital interests in Central America?
Was the problem an economic, a social, or a security one?
What was the relationship between diplomacy and the use of pressure?
What role could be played by other groups, such as Contadora?
Was the Nicaraguan revolution "incipient Titoism," or a cause of real concern?
An area as close to America's borders, to the Panama Canal, and to major shipping lanes as was
Central America had to be a major U.S. interest. No administration could afford to ignore the
geopolitical implications of a hostile presence in the region. Military questions aside, the impact of a
"Cubanized" Central America upon other nations in the area would be profoundly significant,
particularly for such countries as Mexico and Colombia, which already had internal difficulties.
Throughout Latin America, the debt problem was becoming a "rallying point for political evolution,"
challenging free market economies and democratic values. The relationship of the U.S. to the
Western Hemisphere was at stake.
74
The U.S. did not view Central America as mainly an East-West conflict. The origins of the problems
there were not in Moscow or Havana; they went back many centuries. But the historical causes,
including Spanish colonialism and more recent U.S. involvement, were today largely irrelevant. There
were now legitimate social and economic causes of discontent that had to be dealt with. Yet these
dissatisfactions had been translated into aguerrilla insurgency, organized and led by outside experts.
Such guerrilla movements tended to develop a momentum which posed a security problem. While it
was true that poverty was a cause of discontent, it was not true that the upheaval would cease with the
eradication of poverty. The problem was that the "time scale of reform was different from that of
guerrilla warfare."
Theilrsl two-thirds of the commission's report was devoted to the economic, social, and political
problems in Central America. The commission had undertaken a systematic analysis of the external
financing requirements necessary to alleviate "the current hopelessness." An average 30 per cent
drop in per capita GDP since 1978, coupled with a rising birth rate, had made it impossible for
governments to meet even the minimum aspirations of their people. The commission had determined
that, to return the region to the 1978 level, it would require $20 billion, of which $8 billion would come
from the U.S. and the remainder from Europe and from international institutions. Quite apart from
protecting American economic irlterests, the commission's program sought to induce American
companies to commit capital to the area, where currently there was very little flowing in. To accom-
plish this, the commission proposed a Central American Development Organization which would
include both private and public sectors.
With respect to El Salvador, the U.S. had imposed a very difficult assignment on the government: to
conduct elections, carry out land reform, and end abuses by the security forces-all while fighting a
guerrilla insurgency. There was no "negotiating gimmick" that would end the war. Power sharing was
not the answer; history told us that sooner or later one side in a coalition would throw the other out.
The guerrillas in El Salvador had made unrealistic proposals-that a coalition be formed only afterthe
army had been disbanded and the conservatives banned.
In the case of Nicaragua, the problem was twofold: the structure and convictions of the Sandinista
government, and their importation of arms. The Nicaragua army numbered 100,000 men-ten times
the size of Somoza's. Cuba was sending in more arms than the U.S. was supplying to all of Central
America. The result would be a military imbalance in the area which ultimately could lead either to a
policy of military containment, or to a collapse of the whole area. The commission's objectives were to
"return Central America to Central American dimensions." That meant:
- reduce arms on all sides to an agreed upon level.
- remove all foreign advisors and bases.
- put severe limits on importation of arms.
- require the commitment of all sides to pluralistic processes.
Contrary to the belief of some critics, the U.S. did support the Contadora initiative. But the
Contadora countries-Mexico, Panama, Venezuela and Colombia-were an "unnatural grouping"
with internal problems that made them weak. Their initiative could be most effective if the U.S.
pursued a serious, enilghtened policy that was not identical to the Contadora position but was one to
which the Contadora nations could offer a compromise. A blanket endorsement of Contadora by the
U.S. would be counterproductive.
U.S. policy was hampered by a "spirit of abdication" at home and in the West in general that
considered American setbacks not only the deserved result of ill-conceived policies, but also as
necessary to "break the spirit of arrogance and interventionism with which the U.S. had conducted its
affairs." If this attitude led to a collapse of U.S. policy in Latin America, there could be an American
reaction leading to military intervention and an obsession with the Western Hemisphere at the
expense of the Atlantic and Pacific regions. What was needed was a "mature realization" that there
was a security problem in Central America and the development of a negotiating position that
realistically addressed it. But if results could not be achieved through negotiation, the U.S. had to be
determined to defend its security interests by any means necessary, including force.
The preponderance of European commentary on U.S. policy in Central America was critical. A
Spaniard said the many Europeans shared a "profound disillusionment" with the U.S., which had lost
credibility and respect because of policies that "contradicted Western principles."
A British speaker felt that the Reagan Administration "completely misunderstood the reality" in
Central America and that its policies there were "doomed to failure." Perhaps it would do well to be
guided by Spain, which had had more experience in the region. Other participants argued that the
administration wrongly placed the situation in Central America in the East-West context. The U.S.,
said the Spanish speaker, exaggerated Soviet activity in the region. The demands of the people had
nothing to do with Soviet or Cuban agitation. They were basic demands which deserved Western
75
respect and support- "progress and social justice, freedom and democratic rights, and national
dignity." These were not Communist demands; they were being pursued through guerrilla warfare
only because that was the only alternative.
The U.S., the speaker continued, opposed the legitimate demands of the Central American people
because of "short-term economic interests and strategic obsessions." By dealing with Central
America as an East-West problem, the U.S. was dangerously polarizing the situation into North and
West versus South and East.
In one American speaker's opinion, his country's policy in Central America derived from the
Reagan Administration's "obsessive hatred" of the Soviet Union. This attitude led to "distortions of
judgement, improper analyses, and misconceived actions." The U.S. was "lowering itself to the
standards of the Kremlin by imitating Soviet methods and practices. " In its attack upon Nicaragua,
the U.S. was forsaking its own values and instruments of influence-standards of freedom and justice
and respect for the law. The inevitable result, warned the speaker, would be the alienation of future
generations in the Third World.
It was a British participant's fear that the U.S. was "trying to contrive a pretext" for invading
Nicaragua. He saw dire consequences of such an action. If the U.S. reserved the right to pursue its
interests in Central America by military force, it would then legitimize a Soviet right to do the same
thing in areas in its backyard. An American invasion of Nicaragua, furthermore, would place greater
strain on the Western Alliance than any event since the Suez crisis. In Latin America, it would trigger a
"tide of revolt" against what would be seen as a revival of Yankee imperialism. And that might lead to a
repudiation of international debts which in turn could bring down the whole Western financial
system.
A Swedish speaker's opinion was that the tactics used by the U.S. against Nicaragua-mining
harbors and aiding the contras- were in contravention of international law. The U.S. tended to
"create its own monsters." It had done that with the Sandinistas, who, in the speaker's view, had made
mistakes, but were "uncorrupted and enthusiastic" and deserved to be given a chance. The contras,
on the other hand, were "Somozist thugs."
Other participants expressed fundamental support for American objectives but questioned some of
the policies used to achieve them. A Spaniard who was more sympathetic to U.S. aims than his
countryman felt that it was right in defending democracy and trying to stop the spread of "Marxist
totalitarian regimes" in Central America. But the U.S. was hampered by a poor record in the area. It
was now in danger of making "another Cuba" out of Nicaragua. To avoid such a result, the U.S. should
cease hostile acts, remove the Somozist elements opposing the Nicaraguan regime, and support the
Contadora initiative.
The Western principles that the West should support, said a Greek participant, were that govern·
ments should depend on the support of the governed and that foreign invasions against the will of the
governed should be opposed. Did not those principles argue for democrats around the world to
support Duarte in El Salvador? And was it not in the West's interest that Nicaragua democratize and
cease importing arms and supporting the insurgency in El Salvador. This, however, did not justify U.S.
support of the contras, who were an undesirable element.
In defense of U.S. policy, an American pointed out that not all of the contras were Somozistas. Many
had fought on the side of the Sandinistas and had later become disillusioned. We should also
remember, he continued, that the Carter Administration had tried to accomodate the Sandinistas and
had initiated a massive aid program, only to be "rewarded with intransigence."
Other speakers had a dim view of the Sandinistas. Their record on human rights was not much
better than Somoza's had been. An American supported this view, inasmuch as his contacts among
trade union movement leaders in Nicaragua had told of imprisonment and death threats.
In an International participant's opinion, the Sandinistas posed a threat to other countries in the
region which ought to be resisted. He decried the "selective indignation" of those who criticized the
U.S. while not mentioning Cuba and the Soviet Union. A German also saw hypocrisy i.n the fact that
Europeans complained when the U.S. pursued its global interests but was quick to look to American
help when their own interests were threatened.
An American said that too much time was being wasted in debating whether the causes of unrest in
Central America justified one side or the other. We could all agree that conditions had been appalling
in both Nicaragua and El Salvador, and that reform needed to continue. But it was also true that there
had been considerable outside manipulation in both countries.
The question in Central America, the speaker went on, was not whether oppression justified taking
up arms or whether outside manipulation justified opposition by force to those taking up arms. The
coming together of internal protest and outside manipulation had created a dangerous situation. The
issue was how to separate them.
76
In El Salvador, the U.S. goal was to provide sufficient military assistance to contain the insurgency
while at the same time providing for land reform and democratizatio.n. The fact was that both efforts
had made great progress. Some 23 per cent of the arable land had been redistributed and there had
been three popular votes. In the case of Nicaragua, the American objective was to pressure the regime
to renounce its support of the insurgency in El Salvador and to stop importing arms. The Central
American crisis was solvable if the right policy mix of promoting reform and opposing outside
manipulation was followed.
The Kissinger Commission, according to a speaker who had served on it, worked hard to address
the social and economic concerns of the Central American peoples. It sought a wide diversity of
opinions. It concluded that a military shield would crumble without social and economic pr.ogress.
Another commission member said the report was not only based·upon what the members thought,
but also upon what they were told by Central Americans. He described it as "an attempt to rationalize
our loftiest objectives with the messy realities of life."
But a Spanish speaker thought the report offered no effective solutions. While it contained some
correct analysis, it was obsessed with Soviet and Communist influence in the region. The provisions
for economic development were discriminatory, applying different standards to different countries.
Moreover, the economic development aspects were centered upon the U.S. In any event, economic
development, as the report acknowledged, required peace and democratic governments. How could
it occur when the U.S. was promoting military escalation and supporting military establishments
opposed to democracy? The report was, he concluded "acceptable music, but when it was played, it
would sound differently."
A Swede agreed that the report concentrated excessively on the East-West issue and relied too
heavily on military solutions: It made .no sense, he argued, to build a shield "to protect the people
against themselves." A German worried that the report might be "a fig leaf for a different policy, one of
creeping militarization."
New initiatives were required to deal with the situation in Central America, many participants
believed. The involvement and cooperation of the U.S. was essential, but there were important roles
for Europe and.the Contadora countries to play. The Contadora initiative, which the U.S. had been
ignoring and trying to discredit, provided the best solution. The European role, he added, should be to
"bring the U.S. back into compliance with Western principles."
An Austrian felt that one useful political initiative was to pay more attention to Costa Rica, the only
functioning democracy in the area. The U.S. was wrong to pressure Costa Rica to give up its neutrality
in the Central American conflict. More should be done to strengthen Costa Rica politically and
economically.
The economic plan embodied in the Mathias initiative introduced in the U.S. Senate was hailed by
several speakers. As described by an American, the initiative proposed a five-year economic program
whose main component would be a Central American Development Organization with representa·
lives from the Contadora countries and the five Central American republics. It had no military
aspect-that was left to Congress to enact on an annual appropriations basis-and it mandated an
annual Congressional review and certification of progress in human rights and political development.
Another American pointed out that the Mathias initiative "embodied the spirit and the details of the
Kissinger Commission."
For some speakers, Central America raised new questions about how to deal with world problems.
The idea that the U.S. had "a blueprint for all the world's ills" had long since been punctured, said an
American. In the future, U.S. involvement around the world would have to be increasingly selective.
A German viewed Central America as "one of a series of insoluble problems, which included
Ireland, Lebanon, and Cambodia." How should a superpower deal with such problems? Should it
stake its prestige on dealing with them? Central America was not an East-West problem and therefore
we did not know how to deal with it. It inherently had no solution. For the U.S. to present an insoluble
problem as the "linchpin of East-West relations and of American policy" could not help but damage
the Western alliance.
An American disagreed that the problem was insoluble. It could be solved if "a multi-faceted
strategy," combining incentives and disincentives, were followed. The current U.S. approach had
economic, political, military, and even covert elements. If it did not work, the U.S. would be faced with
the difficult choice of either disengaging from the area or committing itself militarily. It was genuinely
reluctant to follow the latter course because to do so would create major domestic problems, polarize
Latin American opinion, and disrupt the Western alliance. Yet in the criticisms of American policy, the
speaker saw a double standard. In El Salvador, the government had offered to bring the guerrillas into
77
the government if they would lay down their arms. In Nicaragua, the contras had said they would lay
down their arms if they were brought into the government. A judgement had to be made as to who was
right in each situation.
What, asked another American, did the critics of the U.S. want it to do? Should it agree to disarm
those fighting against a totalitarian takeover? Why was it considered militarization to provide a shield
long enough to pursue a negotiation that would lead to the disarming of all sides? True, the U.S. had
made some mistakes in the region in the past. But the Reagan Administration's rhetoric had been
infinitely worse than its policies. It had strenuously opposed the death squads and had insisted on
land reform and free elections. Negotiated settlements in both El .Salvador and Nicaragua were
possible. The U.S. did not want a Cuban or a Soviet solution, but nor was it seeking an American
solution. What it wanted, and what Europe should support it in achieving, was a center solution, one
that reflected the aspirations of the people of Central America.
At the end of the last session, the Chairman thanked all those whose generous and efficient efforts
had contributed to the success and enjoyment of the conference. He especially mentioned the
Swedish hosts, headed by Sten Gustafsson, supported by the professional conference staff; the
authors· of working papers and moderators of discussion sessions; the interpreters; the Secretaries-
- General and the Bilderberg secretariat; and the hotel and security personnel.
