I\)
U1
•
I\)
.
......_.
l>··
.
.
"'C
....
-·
-
......
co
.
co
en
:!:a:J
-
mr-
mc
::!m
z
::rJ
,.....m
"'"
m.
(/)
::rJ
.
.',.......
"'"
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
GLENEAGLES
CONFERENCE
25-27 April 1986
NOT FOR QUOTATION
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS .................................................................... 5
INTRODUCTION ..............................................................•.............. 10
AGENDA ........................................................................................ II
I. THE SOVIET UNION UNDER GORBACHEV:
FOREIGN POLICY IMPLICATIONS
Working Paper .......................................................................... 13
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ... ............................................. 19
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II ............................................... 20
Discussion .... ... ... ...... .. .... .......... .............. ...... ....... .. ......... .. ..... ... 21
II. THE WESTERN GLOBAL RESPONSE TO THE SOVIET CHALLENGE
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I .. ... ... ......... .. ........ ...... ............... 27
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II ............................................... 28
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III .............................................. 29
Discussion ....... ............................................................. ............ 30
III. THE FRAGMENTATION OF THE WORLD ECONOMY: DEBT,
CURRENCY DISORDER, PROTECTIONISM, UNEVEN GROWTH
Working Paper ... .... ........ ...... ..... ... ...... ........ .......... ... ... ............. .. 35
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ................................................ 41
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II ........................................... :: .. 42
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III .............................................. 44
Discussion ................................................................................ 44
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: TERRORISM
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ..................................... ......... .. 51
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II ............................................... 51
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III .............................................. 52
Opening Remarks from the Panel, IV .............................................. 53
Discussion ................................................................................ 54
V. SOUTH AFRICA
Working Paper .. .... ... .... .. ... ... ...... ... ...... ....... ... .... ... .. ... ........ ........ 57
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I ................................................ 61
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II ............................................... 62
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III .............................................. 64
Discussion ................................................................................ 65
CLOSING REMARKS ....................................................................... 68
3
•
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN*
Joint Chairman, S.G. Warburg & Co., Ltd.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden Univeristy
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE U.S.A.:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.*
Executive Director, The Center for Asian Pacific Affairs, The Asia Foundation
SWE
NOR
UK
ITA
DEN
AUS
USA
FRO
UK
USA
ICE
USA
TUR
CAN
UK
USA
NETH
USA
TUR
ORE
SPA
USA
FRA
USA
USA
FRA
BEL
CARL JOHAN AABERG
TORVILD AAKVAAG
ANTONY A. ACLAND
GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
TAGE ANDERSEN*
HANNES ANDROSCH*
GEORGE W. BALL••
MARTIN BANGEMANN
JOHN F.H. BARING
ROBERT L. BARTLEY
EINAR BENEDIKTSSON
JACK F. BENNETT*
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
CONRAD M. BLACK*
LORD BOARDMAN
NICHOLAS F. BRADY*
HANS VAN DEN BROEK
RICHARD R. BURT
YAVUS CANEY!
COSTA CARRAS*
JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO*
JOHN H. CHAFEE
ALAIN CHEVALIER
HENRY F. COOPER, JR.
KENNETH W. DAM*
DAYID DAUTRESME
ETIENNE DAV!GNON*
Under-Secretary of State
Director General, Norsk Hydro A/S
Permanent Under-Secretary of State and
Head of the Diplomatic Service; Ambas-
sador-Designate to Washington
President, Fiat S.p.A.
Managing Director and Chief Executive,
Den Danske Bank
Chairman of the Managing Board of
Dir'ectors, Creditanstalt-Bankverein; For-
mer Minister of Finance; Former Vice
Chancellor
Former Under Secretary of State
Minister of Economic Affairs
Chairman, Baring Brothers & Co., Ltd.
Editor, "The Wall Street Journal"
Ambassador to the United Kingdom
Director and Senior Vice President,
Exxon Corporation
Director of Companies
Chairman, Argus Corporation Ltd.
Chairman, National Westminster
Bank PLC
Chairman, Dillon, Read & Co., Inc.;
Former U.S. Senator (New Jersey)
Minister for Foreign Affairs
U.S. Ambassador to the Federal
Republic of Germany
Governor of the Central Bank
Director of Companies
Chairman, Banco Hispano Industrial
U.S. Senator (Rhode Island)
Chairman, Moet Hennessy
Deputy U.S. Negotiator, Defense and
Space Group
Vice President, IBM Corporation; For-
mer Deputy Secretary of State
General Partner, Lazard Freres & Cie.
Director, Societe Generale de Belgique;
Former Member of the Commission of
the European Communities
5
USA ROBERT A. DAY, JR. Chairman, Trust Company of the West INT MAX KOHNSTAMM** Former President, European University
NETH WILLEM F. DU!SENBERG President, De Nederlandsche Bank NV
Institute
UK JOHN L. EGAN
Chairman and Chief Executive, BEL LEON J.G. LAMBERT* Chairman, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert
Jaguar PLC
S.A.
USA DANIEL J. EVANS U.S. Senator (Washington) INT ALEXANDRE LAMFALUSSY General Manager, Bank for International
USA MURRAY H. FINLEY* President, Amalgamated Clothing and
Settlements
Textile Workers Union LIE H.S.H. PRINCE HANS-ADAM
IRE GARRET FITZGERALD Prime Minister
VON LIECHTENSTEIN
CAN BARBARA FRUM
Host of "The Journal" (Television Pro- SWI FRANZ J. LOTOLF* General Manager and Member of the
gram of the Canadian Broadcasting
Executive Board, Swiss Bank
CAN
Corporation)
Corporation
ALLAN E. GOTLIEB Ambassador to the United States ITA ANTONIO MACCANICO General Secretary, Office of the President
UK LORD GREENHILL OF HARROW Former Permanent Under-Secretary of
of the Italian Republic
the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; CAN DONALDS. MACDONALD* Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy
Director of Companies ORE STEPHANOS MANOS Member of Parliament
CAN ANTHONY G.S. GRIFFIN** Director of Companies USA CHARLES Mee. MATHIAS, JR.* U.S. Senator (Maryland)
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON* Chairman of the Board, SAAB- POR LEONARDO MATHIAS Ambassador to the United States
SCANIAAB USA DONALD F. McHENRY University Research Professor of Diplo-
ICE GEIR HALLGR!MSSON* Governor of the Central Bank; Former
macy and International Affairs, George-
Prime Minister; Former Minister for
town University; Former Ambassador to
Foreign Affairs
the United Nations
USA ARTHUR A. HARTMAN Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. FRA THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of Interna-
UK DENIS \V. HEALEY Member of Parliament; Opposition
tional Relations; Professor of Economics,
Spokesman on Foreign Affairs
Ecole Polytechnique
USA HENRY J. HEINZ II** Chairman of the Board, H.J. Heinz ITA MARIO MONTI* Professor of Economics and Director of
-company, Inc.
the Centre for Monetary and Financial
UK LORD HOME OF THE HIRSEL Former Prime Minister; Former Chair-
Economics, Bocconi University, Milan
man of Bilderberg Meetings NETH H.M. THE QUEEN OF THE
USA ARNOLD L. HORELICK Director, The Rand/UCLA Center for NETHERLANDS
the Study of Soviet International NETH H.R.H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE
Behavior NETHERLANDS
USA ROBERT D. HORMATS Director, Goldman Sachs International ITA TOMMASO PADOA-SCHIOPPA Deputy Director General, Banca d'Italia
Corporation; Former Assistant Secretary UK MICHAEL P ALLISER Chairman, Samuel Montagu & Co.
of State for Economic and Business
(Holdings) Limited; Chairman of the
Affairs
Council, International Institute for Stra-
AUS HANS IGLER Partner, Schoeller & Co.
tegic Studies
Bankaktiengesellschaft USA ROBERT L. PFALTZGRAFF, JR. President, Institute for Foreign Policy
FIN JAAKKO lLONIEMI
Member of the Management Board, Analysis, Inc.
Union Bank of Finland; Former Ambas- DEN HERBERT PUNDIK Editor-in-Chief, "Politiken"
sador to the United States UK ROBERT p. REID Chairman, Shell UK Ltd.
SWI ROBERT A. JEKER
President of the Executive Board, Credit UK MALCOLM RIFKIND Secretary of State for Scotland
Suisse FRA MICHEL ROCARD Member of Parliament (Socialist Party)
UK SIMON JENKINS
Political Editor, "The Economist" SPA MARIANO RUBIO Governor, Bank of Spain
SWI PAUL R. JOLLES
Chairman of the Board, Nestle S.A.; ITA RENATO RUGGIERO General Secretary, Ministry for Foreign
Former State Secretary for Foreign Eco- Affairs
nomic Affairs UK JOHN SAINSBURY* Chairman, J. Sainsbury PLC
USA DAVIDT. KEARNS Chairman, Xerox Corporation CAN JEANNE SAUVE Governor General of Canada
USA HENRY A. KISSINGER*
Professor, Center for Strategic and Inter- ITA GAETANO SCARDOCCHIA Editor, "La Stampa"
national Studies, Georgetown University; FRO WALTER SCHEEL Former President; Former Chairman of
Bilderberg Meetings
FRO HANS KLEIN
Former Secretary of State
FRO HELMUT SCHMIDT Former Chancellor
Member of Parliament for the CDU/
CSU; Spokesman on Foreign Affairs FRA E. ANTOINE SEILLIERE* Director-General, Compagnie Generale
UK ANDREW KNIGHT*
Chief Executive, "The Daily Telegraph" d'Industrie et de Participations
UK PATRICK SHEEHY Chairman, B.A.T. Industries PLC
6
7
,,_.,__,., ~--~-'O\J-"'"'"~ .,=--.---.-------~·-
POR ARTUR SANTOS SILVA
UK JOHN SMITH
FRO THEO SOMMER*
ITA LUIGI SPAVENTA
UK DAVID STEEL
BEL FRANK SWAELEN
TUR SEYFI TASHAN
NOR NILS MORTEN UDGAARD
USA PAULA. VOLCKER
FRO ANGELIKA E.C. VOLLE
AUS FRANZ VRANITZKY
UK H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES
NOR NIELS WERRING, JR.*
USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD
DEN NILS WILHJELM
USA LYNN R. WILLIAMS
USA FRANK G. WISNER
FRG OTTO WOLFF VON
AMERONGEN**
SPA JUAN A. y ANEZ-BARNUEVO
UK LORD YOUNG OF 0RAFFHAM
ITA PAOLO ZANNONI*
OBSERVER
AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMANN
RAPPORTEUR
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
IN ATTENDANCE
ITA ALFREDO AMBROSETTI
NETH SASKIA TEN ASBROEK
8
Former Under-Secretary of the Treasury;
Former Vice President, Bank of Portu-
gal; President, Banco Portugues de
Investimento
Member of Parliament (Labour Party)
Publisher, "Die Zeit"
Professor of Economics, University of
Rome
Member of Parliament; Leader of the
Liberal Party
President, Christian Democratic Party
Managing Director, Foreign Policy
Institute
Deputy Secretary, Prime Minister's
Office
Chairman, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Research Fellow, Deutsche Gesellschaft
fiir Auswartige Politik (German Society
for Foreign Affairs)
Federal Minister of Finance
Chairman of the Board, Wilh. Wilhelm-
sen Limited A/S
Deputy Secretary of State
Minister of Industry
International President, United Steel
Workers of America
Deputy Assistant Secretary for African
Affairs, Department of State
Chairman of the Board of Management
and Chief Executive Officer, Otto Wolff
A.G.
Director, Department of International
Affairs of the Office of the Prime
Minister
Secretary of State for Employment
Vice President, Defense Systems, Fiat
USA, Inc.
Managing Director, Creditanstalt-
Bankverein
Director, Wood, Struthers and Winthrop
Management Corporation
President, Studio Ambrosetti; Organizer
1987 Conference
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
UK ALEC s. DONKIN
USA CHARLES w. MULLER
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS:
AUS
BEL
CAN
DEN
FIN
FRA
FRG
ORE
ICE
INT
IRE
ITA
LIE
NETH
NOR
POR
SPA
SWE
SWI
TUR
UK
USA
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Greece
Iceland
International
Ireland
Italy
Liechtenstein
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
United States of America
* Member of the Steering Committee
** Member of the Advisory Committee
Organizer, 1986 Conference
President, Murden and Company
s
INTRODUCTION
The thirty-fourth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Gleneagles Hotel, Auchter-
arder, Perthshire, Scotland on April 25, 26, and 27, 1986. There were 109 partici-
pants from 19 European countries, the United States, and Canada. They
represented government, diplomacy, politics, business, law, labor, education, jour-
nalism, the military, and institutes specializing in national and international studies.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without committing in any way the
organizations or governments to which they belonged. As is usual at Bilderberg
Meetings, in. order to permit frank and open discussion, no reporting of the confer-
ence proceedings was allowed.
In opening the conference, Lord Roll of Ipsden, the Chairman of the Bilderberg
Meetings, welcomed the participants to Gleneagles. He then read the text of a mes-
sage of thanks and good wishes, sent on behalf of all those at the conference, to
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth. The Chairman also took note of the death of Olof
Palme, who had attended many past Bilderberg Meetings and had been scheduled to
be a participant and panelist at the Gleneagles Conference.
AGENDA
I. THE SOVIET UNION UNDER GORBACHEV: FOREIGN POLICY
IMPLICATIONS
Moderator: Theo Sommer
Working Paper Author: Arnold L. Horelick
Panelists: Arthur A. Hartman
Denis W. Healey
II. THE WESTERN GLOBAL RESPONSE TO THE SOVIET CHALLENGE
Moderator: Donald S. MacDonald
Panelists: Henry A. Kissinger
Michel Rocard
Helmut Schmidt
III. THE FRAGMENTATION OF THE WORLD ECONOMY: DEBT,
CURRENCY DISORDER, PROTECTIONISM, UNEVEN GROWTH
Moderator: Lord Roll of Ipsden
Working Paper Author: Robert D. Hormats
Panelists: Alexandre Lamfalussy
Paul A. Volcker
Lynn R. Williams
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: TERRORISM
Moderator: Etienne Davignon
Panelists: Richard R. Burt
Renato Ruggiero
Theo Sommer
John C. Whitehead
V. SOUTH AFRICA
Moderator: John Sainsbury
Working Paper Author: Simon Jenkins
Panelists: Hans van den Broek
Leonardo Mathias
Donald F. McHenry
The conference program included a cocktail reception and dinner attended
by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
11
N.B.
For the purpose of this report, the discussions of the various agenda items have
been re-ordered according to subject matter. Thus, the various individual interven-
tions are not necessarily reported in the exact chronological order in which they
were made.
Grant F. Winthrop, Rapporteur
I. THE SOVIET UNION UNDER GORBACHEV:
FOREIGN POLICY IMPLICATIONS ,
Working Paper
In the early 1980s the image of a Soviet Union that was at once the "strongest
military power in the world" yet at the same time an "economic basket case"
became the point of departure for a great deal of prognostication and punditry.
Allowing for exaggeration in at least one if not both parts of the cliche, the dispar-
ity between the Soviet Union's success in amassing military power and its failure in
virtually every other sphere of national performance described a paradox of enor-
mous significance for the future of both the USSR and the world order.
Precisely what that significance may be was then and remains today a matter of
great uncertainty and debate. In the early 1980s some argued that the leaders of a
militarily powerful but internally weakened USSR were more likely than ever to
resort to external aggression in order to seize crucial new geopolitical positions and
resources before their own declining domestic capabilities and more competitive
Western adversaries closed their "window of opportunity." Since the most striking
new evidence of Soviet decline at that time - the CIA's forecast of an imminent
downturn in Soviet oil production - coincided roughly with the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, this belief spawned predictions of a dramatic Soviet breakout into the
Persian Gulf calculated to deal a mortal blow to the oil-hungry West.
Others foresaw precisely the opposite Soviet behavior. Anxiety about the progres-
sive weakening of the USSR's domestic foundations would compel Soviet leaders to
turn inward, pare down external ambitions, and make concessions to secure access
to the Western capital and technology needed to modernize the Soviet economy.
Soviet behavior thus far in the 1980s has clearly refuted the dire predictions of
the pessimists. Although less starkly falsified, the optimists' predictions have also
not been fully borne out. There was no major Soviet geopolitical advance into the
Persian Gulf or elsewhere, but neither were there any major Soviet retreats. Indeed,
leaders of Brezhnev's generation stubbornly resisted the idea that the Soviet domes-
tic predicament was so grave as to require radical internal repairs and correspond-
ing adjustments in Soviet external behavio-r.
In the year since he took over the reins of leadership, Gorbachev, by contrast,
has repeatedly made clear his conviction that deteriorating domestic conditions
endanger not only the future prosperity of the Soviet Union, but also its status as a
world power. "What is at stake today," Gorbachev has told the party, "is the
ability of the Soviet Union to enter the new millenium in a manner worthy of a
great and prosperous power ... Without the hard work and complete dedication o(
each and every one it is not even possible to preserve what has been achieved." To
paraphrase Solzhenitsyn, to remain a great power the Soviet Union must now
become a great country.
The new Soviet party program calls the USSR's attainment of strategic parity
with the United States "the historic achievement" of socialism. Brezhnev will be
remembered by his heirs as the leader who permitted the stagnation of the Soviet
economy and the demoralization of Soviet society while presiding over that historic
achievement, an achievement, moreover, that failed to yield the expected foreign
policy payoffs.
The Third World prizes of Soviet expansion in the 1970s have become not prom-
ising outposts for further expansion, but besieged, unstable client regimes strug-
gling to survive against anti-Communist national liberation movements their rule
has spawned. The massive military buildup of the Brezhnev era, while it substan-
tially improved global and regional military balances in the Soviet Union's favor,
did not buy for the Soviet Union enhanced political influence commensurate with
13
its increased power. Most importantly, it did not secure from Western Europe the
deference th'at Soviet leaders believed was their due in the light of the altered corre-
lation of forces. In the crucial test of Moscow's pretensions to play the role of
Europe's security manager, the Soviet Union failed in the early 1980s to head off
the deployment of U.S. intermediate range missiles in Europe. .
What Brezhnev's military buildup and muscular displays in the Third World did
produce, however, was a powerful American backlash, which began to build in
Carter's last: years and was greatly broadened and accelerated under Reagan. Ironi-
cally, this backlash began to gather momentum precisely at the time when Moscow
had begun to slow the rate of its own military growth in response to the Soviet
economy's slowdown. And it grew in strength precisely at a time when the USSR
was least well disposed to match it. In the mid-1980's, Brezhnev's heirs confront
what they see as serious challenges to their military gains of the seventies.
In the strategic nuclear area, a whole series of U.S. modernization programs will
over the next decade be yielding new, highly capable deployed systems. Expensively
acquired Soviet advantages in prompt hard-target counterforce and long-awaited
improvements in homeland air defense appear destined to disappear as the United
States proceeds with its strategic modernization efforts. The fielding by the U.S. of
highly accurate ICBMs and SLBMs equippe_d with multiple warheads will increas-
ingly place at risk the large-silo-based ICBM force that is the cornerstone of Soviet
strategic nuclear prowess.
In the theater nuclear arena, the failure of Soviet efforts to derail NATO's INF
decision has led to U.S. deployments that will substantially reduce both the political
and military advantages Moscow had hoped to enjoy by augmenting its long-range
theater nuclear capabilities with massive SS-20 deployments.
In Europe, where extensive modernization of Soviet forces enlarged the margin
of Soviet conventional warfare advantages substantially in the 1970s, new NATO
"deep strike" concepts and technologies for implementing them could, if success-
fully developed, challenge the viability of Soviet military strategy for Europe (spe-
cifically, Soviet assumptions about NATO's ability to break up or slow down
decisively a massive Soviet conventional campaign without recourse to nuclear
weapons).
Above all there is the SDI program, which arouses Soviet concerns along a num-
ber of dimensions. First, concern about SDI as a range of potentially deployable
multilayered space-based ballistic missile defense systems of varying degrees of
potential effectiveness; second, about SDI as the leading edge of a broadly based
U.S. military technology effort featuring sensors, computers, computer program-
ming, signal processing, and exotic kill mechanisms, not limited in military applica-
tion to space-based ballistic missile defense; and, third, about SDI as the
technological centerpiece of a broad global U.S. political, military, and economic
challenge to the hard-won geopolitical and strategic Soviet gains of the past two
decades, a challenge that threatens the superpower status of the USSR at a time
when it is hard put to make massive new exertions merely to hold its own in the
world.
The combination of what is perceived as a gathering challenge to the most impor-
tant Soviet military gains of the past and a conviction that the rebuilding of the
USSR's weakened domestic base can no longer be delayed shapes Gorbachev's for-
eign policy and impels it to pursue proximate objectives that are largely defensive.
Gorbachev's first priority in foreign policy is to consolidate weak or threatened
positions. Above all, this applies to Eastern Europe. The prolonged and still not
fully resolved Polish crisis has made a deeply unsettling impression on the Soviet
leaders. It was probably the single most preoccupying external policy issue on the
agenda during Gorbachev's Politburo break-in years (he was elected in 1978). The
challenge for Gorbachev is to find ways to keep the populations of Eastern Europe
14
pacified without increasing Soviet subsidies, risking politically dangerous reforms,
or permitting excessive levels of economic intercourse with the West. So far the
watchword has been tighter discipline.
Even before Gorbachev's investiture an increasingly skeptical view of Soviet pros-
pects in the Third World was evident in Moscow. Earlier it had been hoped that the
creation of Marxist-Leninist "vanguard parties" in Soviet client states would solve
the projllem of securing long-term Soviet influence arid reliable outposts for further
expansion. Bitter experience has brought a deeper Soviet appreciation that influence
in the Third World is limited without control and that control can either not be
attained at all in remote areas or is too costly for what it buys. At a minimum,
Gorbachev will be more selective than his predecessors about making new commit-
ments and more sensitive to the economic and political costs of making bad choices.
If challenged frontally by the United States in any region where Soviet interests can
readily be defended - e.g., in Afghanistan and perhaps Angola, but not in Nicara-
gua - Moscow will respond defiantly. But if its credibility is not placed under
severe challenge and if ripe fruits do not simply fall into its lap, the Soviet Union
will for the time being prefer to avoid new and costly involvements in the Third
World.
Toward the West, the circumstances argue above all for a Soviet policy aimed at
breaking the momentum of Washington's global counteroffensive, and particularly
at containing the security challenge of U.S. and NATO military programs. Gor-
bachev is not likely to "yield to provocations" by Washington and will seek to
avoid both political and military confrontation. He will prefer to moderate the U.S.
military challenge by political means because meeting it head on with a "crash"
defense effort requiring a major reallocation of scarce technology resources, would
be highly disruptive to his program of economic modernization and growth acceler-
ation. It would probably foredoom his already over-ambitious five year plan. And
it would impair his political efforts to deal with the U.S. challenge.
While loath to use a term that conjures up historic images of truly desperate
circumstances in Soviet history, Gorbachev in fact would like what Lenin called a
peredyshka, that is, a respite from the heavy American competitive pressures that
threaten to divert Soviet resources and energies from what are for the time being the
more urgent tasks of rebuilding the bases of Soviet power.
Gorbachev's dilemma is that he must seek a peredyshka without seeming too
eager for it. Lenin unabashedly sought a breathing spell after the revolution and
civil war when Russia was palpably weak, lacking external assets or commitments,
and with nothing.at stake beyond sheer survival. Gorbachev must worry about the
Soviet Union's empire, its credibility as a superpower, and his own reputation as
the new leader of a proud and mighty state.
To this difficult foreign policy change, Gorbachev has brought a verve and
energy long absent in Moscow and a flair for public diplomacy well attuned to the
television age. But he has not yet displayed a comprehensive strategy for managing
the multiple foreign policy challenges he faces.
Periodically, Gorbachev implies that he will seek to de-emphasize the centrality
of Soviet relations with the United States. "The world;' he said· at the recent party
congress, "is much larger than the United States." One of his key advisers, Alek-
sandr Yakovlev, calls openly for a policy of "Europe first:' The past year has seen
a widely publicized Soviet effort to activate Moscow's diplomacy in the Far East,
with renewed overtures to China and Japan. But Gorbachev seems no more willing,
or able, than his predecessors to make the compromises required for substantial
improvement of the Soviet position. In Tokyo, Shevardnadze, while more affable
to Gromyko, was just as unyielding on the pivotal Northern territories question.
Some modest improvement in Soviet relations with China has been achieved
because China, like the Soviet Union, has preferred a relaxation of tensions while
15
attending to economic modernization. But a more fundamental breakthrough in
relations is blocked by persistent Soviet refusal to address China's basic security
concerns: the threatening Soviet military presence in Mongolia and along the Sino-
Soviet border; Moscow's alliance with Hanoi; and the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan.
Gorbachev's European diplomacy has been bolder and more flexible than his
predecessors', but no more successful. He seems unable to understand how Europe-
ans view their security dilemma and therefore he has miscalculated badly in fashion-
ing arms control proposals meant to appeal to Europeans. In October he greatly
diminished the attractiveness of his radical proposal for a deep cut in strategic
nuclear arms by leaving the huge Soviet intermediate range missile force out of the
package and compounded the error in Paris by practically inviting President Mitter-
ant publicly to rebuff his proposal for separate negotiations on French and British
nuclear forces. In January he may have thought he was correcting the October
mistake by proposing a radical zero/zero INF solution along with a freeze of
French and British forces. If so, he again badly misjudged the European reaction to
a Soviet offer than came more than three years too late, that is, after the trauma of
U.S. INF deployment had already been absorbed and the fear of "decoupling" had
become the most salient concern.
At bottom, despite all the talk about shifting to a more Euro- or Asian-centered
orientation, Soviet foreign policy under Gorbachev is if anything more preoccupied
with the United States than before. Gromyko's departure from the Foreign Ministry
was not the harbinger of a downgrading of relations with Washington. A day after
Shevardnadze replaced Gromyko, Moscow announced that Gorbachev and Reagan
would hold the first summit meeting of Soviet and American leaders in more than
six years. Gorbachev went to the summit without having secured in advance any of
the concessions he sought and he joined the American president in assessing posi-
tively a meeting that was conducted on an American agenda without any major
substantive agreements that addressed Soviet concerns. And last month Gorbachev
brought home to Moscow to serve directly under his command in the Central Com-
mittee Secretariat, Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet official most deeply involved with
the United States and now suddenly the senior party apparatchik with foreign pol-
icy responsibilities.
If the United States remains at the center of Gorbachev's foreign policy, arms
control is at the center of his American policy. Gorbachev has dramatically altered
both the style and substance of Soviet arms control diplomacy. Historically, the
Soviets have preferred to respond to American initiatives and not to break new
conceptual ground themselves. They have clung doggedly to positions once taken
and have altered their proposals only slowly and incrementally. And when forced in
the past to choose between constraining the United States or protecting existing
Soviet forces and ongoing Soviet programs, Moscow has invariably opted for the
latter.
The two most "serious" and far-reaching features of Gorbachev's recent propos-
als go precisely in the opposite direction: to break the back of the challenge posed
by the SDI and to constrain U.S. strategic modernization generally, Gorbachev in
October 1985 offered radical reductions in Soviet offensive forces that went very far
beyond any cuts previously proposed or rumored by Moscow. His proposal
included a "concentration" limit that would in effect have required a reduction of
almost 50% in the Soviet ICBM warheads and a comparable associated reduction in
Soviet ICBM throwweight - the principal objectives of U.S. strategic arms control
policy since 1977. In January 1986, Gorbachev further offered to delink INF from
START and space weapons agreements and to eliminate entirely the force of some
250 triple-MIRVed SS-20 Soviet missiles targeted on Europe in return for the elimi-
nation of the smaller U.S. INF force now being deployed and for a freeze on British
16
and French independent nuclear forces. Whatever the net policital-military gain
that Moscow presumably sees in such a trade - probably from the "decoupling"
effect on NATO that withdrawal of U.S. INF systems would entail - the offer to
eliminate the entire Soviet SS-20 force in Europe represents a radical break with
past Soviet military and arms control policies and suggests that Gorbachev, under
conditions of the 1980s, sees arms control tradeoffs differently from his
predecessors.
Why this change? Gorbachev and his advisers may calculate that the marginal
strategic advantages acquired by the USSR in the 1970s that have so gravely con-
cerned the United States - the prompt hard-target kill capabilities of the Soviet
ICBM force, the large breakout potential inherent in their huge throwweight edge,
the massive preponderance of their SS-20 force - are in any case wasting assets
that are being eroded by U.S. and NATO programs; and that by trading them away
now, the USSR could secure some relief from the heavy competitive pressures
exerted by new U.S. high technology programs, slowing them down if not halting
them during the lifetime of an offensive reductions agreement.
Others in Moscow may believe that such concessions are an unacceptably high
price to pay for what Washington is likely to offer in return, that they are at a
minimum premature, and may in the end be unnecessary. They may prefer to bet
that the most ambitious new U.S. programs will in the end fail to achieve. their
objectives, be stretched out interminably, or be killed off by a future administration
with only arms control posturing by the Soviet Union required to help the process
along. They may see ongoing Soviet programs as holding out the promise of main-
taining and even enlarging the Soviet gains of the 1970s - a new generation of
Soviet ICBMs and quieter SSBNs to preserve force survivability and still more accu-
rate RVs to augment the already substantial Soviet hard-target capability.
So long as the Reagan administration is unwilling to place on the table for negoti-
ation the issu'e of greatest concern to the Soviets - constraints on SDI - alterna-
tive Soviet arms control perspectives can be accommodated within the parameters
of Soviet proposals that condition far-reaching concessions on U.S. acceptance of
what are still clearly non-negotiable Soviet demands. Should the negotiations reach
the point of real bargaining, however, Gorbachev could face the first serious inter-
nal challenge to his leadership since his installation in March 1985.
How should the West respond to Gorbachev's evident desire for a peredyshka?
We can dismiss it as a rriere ploy to secure for the Soviet Union a breather to set its
house in order before resuming a broad offensive against us. Or we can explore the
opportunity to use our greatly improved bargaining position to conclude arms con-
trol agreements that address long-standing Western strategic concerns and foster a
safer and more stable strategic environment. ·
The issue has become key to a debate, thus far concentrated in Washington,
between two alternative approaches for dealing generally with the Soviet Union
during Reagan's final term, and particularly with respect to arms control. Both
approaches proceed from the common premise that a shift in favor of the West is
occurring in what the Soviets call the global correlation of forces. Different policy
conclusions are drawn from this assessment, however.
One view supports a policy of "squeezing" the Soviets, seeking deliberately to
maximize competitive pressures on the Soviet Union during a period of its relative
weakness. This approach would attempt to press favorable trends still further in the
hope of securing an even more substantial shift in the correlation of forces, eventu·
ally compelling Soviet retreats on a global scale, or, if the Soviets exhausted them-
selves economically in an effort to avoid concessions or retreat, inducing an internal
Soviet crisis that would gravely weaken the USSR or even compel system-altering
transformations with revolutionary long-term benefits for the West.
17
With regard to arms control, the "squeeze" approach would call for the United
States to take an essentially uncompromising position on the whole range of issues
at Geneva, making at most only marginal, essentially cosmetic adjustments
designed not to enhance the negotiability of U.S. positions but rather to help man-
age domestic and alliance political concerns. Protecting the SDI from arms control
constraints is the central preoccupation of the "squeeze" position. Some "squeez-
ers" believe that SDI's strategic potential for the United States is so great that it
must not be placed on the negotiating table; others believe that withholding SDI
from the negotiations is likely to preclude a compromise arms control agreement
that would at best product marginal benefits while squandering hard-won U.S.
gains and momentum. SDI in this view should be used as leverage on Soviet force
structure, not indirectly through enhanced arms control bargaining strength but
directly, by compelling the Soviets to restructure their forces to compete in areas of
comparative U.S. advantage.
A second view supports an alternative policy of "dealing." It holds that the
United States should take some initiatives in exploring ways to break the arms con-
trol deadlock. Partisans of this view generally believe that a sustained state of high
tension between the United States and the Soviet Union is potentially dangerous
and surely corrosive to the Western alliance if the United States is believed to be at
fault. A credible attempt at arms control negotiations is held necessary to sustain
public and congressional support for the administration's long-term armaments
program.
Advocates of this view tend also to believe (like those who favor squeezing) that
the correlation of forces is shifting against the Soviet Union. They prefer, however,
to negotiate from that improved position now rather than gamble on the outcome
of a totally unregulated arms competition of enormous and possibly unsustainable
cost, incalculable risk and indefinite duration. Soviet anxiety about an intensified
new round of strategic arms competition is held to provide an opportunity for
inducing the USSR to consider basic tradeoffs in strategic weapons negotiations -
tradeoffs that would involve deep cuts in Soviet offensive forces of greatest U.S.
concern in return for an easing of U.S. competitive pressures in areas of greatest
concern to the Soviets.
It may be that the West will prove incapable of concerting a strategy that can
balance competitive pressure and political resourcefulness so as to extract gains that
now seem attainable, while constraining future Soviet aggressive options. Perhaps
we will have to take our chances with the opportunism and ad hockery to which
democracies tend especially to be attracted when the tides of fortune are running in
their favor. It is ironic that in a period of adversity the West succeeded in concert-
ing a strategy for managing relations with a Soviet Union that was an ascending
power, but that a coherent agreed strategy for managing relations with a Soviet
Union that is declining seems to elude us.
Failure by the United States and by the Western alliance to agree on a common
strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union in the Gorbachev era will not only mean
losing the opportunity either to "squeeze" the Soviet Union effectively or to
"deal" with it profitably, but could leave us with the worst of both worlds. If
Moscow gets its own act together, policy initiative will pass to the Soviet leaders by
default. In these circumstances, the Kremlin will surely try to have its cake and eat
it too; Gorbachev will still strive to secure the peredyshka he needs, but without
strong incentives to make compromises requiring him to give up anything of real
value.
18
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I.
The Soviet Union under Gorbachev is not merely seeking a peredyshka; it is pur-
suing a fundamentally new approach to world affairs. The most striking indication
of this is in the preamble of Gorbachev's speech to the Party Congress, where he
refers to the growing interdependence of the nations of the world. He appears to be
rejecting the theory of the two camps - capitalist and socialist - that has domi-
nated Soviet policy since 1917. Gorbachev is the first Russian leader to "conceive of
the possibility of building a comprehensive system in which the two sides work
together:' and he must be taken seriously.
Some important new elements are emerging in Soviet policy:
- The relationship between the Soviet Union and the Eastern European countries
is changing. Gorbachev has accepted the right of the Soviet satellites to "find their
own way toward socialism:' Particularly impressed by the success of East Germany,
he is looking for useful models to follow in meeting the problems faced by the
Soviet Union.
- Gorbachev has accepted, and is no longer fighting against, Eurocommunism.
- He accepts the possibility of working with social democratic parties and with
the church.
- Gorbachev subscribes to the view that "he who is not against us is with us:'
and his approach to Western Europe is more flexible than that of his predecessors.
The central foreign policy problem facing Gorbachev is Soviet-American rela-
tions, particularly in the areas of security and disarmament. The Russians view the
arms race, with the increasing application of high technology to weapons systems,
as itself a potential cause of war. Mutual fears of a first strike are becoming highly·
destabilizing, as the actual mechanism of launching offensive weapons comes
increasingly under the control of computers.
The centrality of relations with the U.S. in Soviet policy is illustrated by
Gorbachev's assignment of Dobrynin to the top foreign policy post in the
Politburo. From his many years in the U.S., Dobrynin "well understands the battle
between the pragmatists and the idealogues in Washington, and the gap between
rhetoric and reality:' Additional significant changes in foreign policy personnel can
be anticipated, with a shift of power from the foreign office bureaucracy toward
the party apparatchik, as well as a larger role for the think-tanks.
Dealing, as opposed to squeezing, is the proper course of action for the West to
follow. If the West opts for continued military competition, the Russians are likely
to be the winners, particularly in the short run. This argues for continuing to abide
by the terms of the SALT II Treaty. The United States is certainly going to have its
military programs cut back by Congress, and will soon face difficult choices
between various types of nuclear weapons and conventional weapons, both inside
and outside the NATO area. If the U.S. is forced by Congress into making unilat-
eral cuts, will the Soviets reciprocate or try to exploit the situation? They will most
likely reciprocate, and these reciprocal unilateral cuts will result in meaningful arms
agreements.
19
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II.
Gorbachev is certainly a more attractive personality than his predecessors. He
expresses himself clearly, and appears to be more comfortable with an open accept-
ance and. analysis of his country's problems. But there is a tendency, both in the
West and in the Soviet Union, for people to project their own hopes and feelings on
the man; this tendency should be avoided. We should look back at the history of
the Soviet Union, with its long tradition of authoritarianism, and realize that it
cannot be escaped as quickly as one man might like. Soviet leadership has in the
past been faced with severe institutional strains, and efforts by leaders like
Khrushchev and Kosygin to make reforms led to their being pushed aside.
Once again, the leader of the Soviet Union is faced with a severe challenge. His
choice is to continue an ideologically based running of the economy and of state
systems, or to make changes. The fundamental question is not whether he is going
to try to make changes, but whether he will be able to. Will the party leadership
give up power and privilege in order to make the economy more efficient?
Gorbachev's speech to the Party Congress did not signal any change. It was an
"ideologically consistent and conservative statement," which he had to make in
order to reassure the party members that he is not going to make radical changes.
His words about change and reform and interdependence do not yet have any real
content, and we in the West should not jump to conclusions as to what content
might be put into them.
The trying of new approaches in some of the Eastern European economies seri-
ously worries Soviet leaders, and there is considerable debate about it going on in
the Soviet Union. It is at least a positive development that these debates are begin-
ning to come out in the press and in discussions with Soviet leaders. But an indica-
tion of the official Soviet view appeared in a recent article in the Soviet press that
attacked every reform put forward in Eastern Europe, attacked the whole notion
that, in Marxist-Leninist terms, basic changes can be made in the way economies
are run. It would mean a weakening of the party structure, which cannot be
allowed. The article went on to attack what the Chinese are doing, and to argue
that eventually they will see the folly of their ways and the party will reassert con-
trol. Gorbachev and his colleagues were brought up in the party structure, were
formed in the ideology of the party, and do not want to change it. Rather they want
to make it work and believe it can be made to work without major changes.
Until the domestic issues are dealt with, there will be no real foreign policy, in a
strategic sense. The current approach to foreign policy issues is just a carry-over
from the past. The Soviets will be looking for foreign policy approaches that avoid
the kinds of internal struggles that will prevent them from solving domestic prob-
lems. So far, there has been a good deal of public relations posturing rather than
serious negotiating, because the leadership does not want to come to terms with
major decisions in the areas that could "weaken the general coalition that is run-
ning the country." With the arrival of Dobrynin, policy making is moving from the
foreign office to the central committee, but it is not yet clear what this will produce
or how it is going to work. It is certainly likely that tensions will arise between
Dobrynin and the foreign minister. With his extensive knowledge of the West,
Dobrynin will likely exercise a more creative and challenging foreign policy than has
so far been seen.
But the West should not be discouraged by all this. The best thing we can do is to
think about policies based upon our own interests, on maintaining our own
strength, but which offer the Russians the opportunity of talking and negotiating
with us. We should continue to put forward proposals that are imaginative, crea-
tive, and attractive to the Soviets and that produce stability and balance. But we
20
have to be careful not to give the Russians the idea that they can have a free ride in
any area; we must convey to them that there will be a price to pay for excessive
adventurism.
Discussion
A number of participants expressed concern that many in the West had developed
unrealistic expectations of what might transpire in the Soviet Union under
Gorbachev's leadership. There was a tendency to "mistake style for substance" in
assessing the new Soviet leader, as one speaker put it. This had been especially true
in Western media coverage, which had tended to portray Russia under Gorbachev
as a "Camelot on the Volga."
A British speaker warned that the West should not become "too obsessed" with
the idea that Gorbachev's leadership would be all that different unless he was able
to accomplish major changes in the Soviet system. He did represent a change in
style, was "fresh" and therefore could pursue a "tolerant" foreign policy without
much opposition. But he had so far not exhibited any intention to change the sys-
tem. What would happen when, after five years of his "hectoring and long-
windedness:' the Soviet economy was as stagnant and unsuccessful as ever?
The answer, in an American's view, was that when the leadership saw that effi-
ciency was not being ·achieved by exhortation, discipline, and abstenance from
drink, it would then be faced with tough fundamental choices. The failure to
achieve the growth rates called for for the remainder of the century would bring to
a head the conflict between those resisting a departure from central planning and
those willing to try new methods.
Another American participant saw three possibilities arising from continued stag-
nation of the Soviet economy. (I) Even without major structural change, there
could be some small successes, which the leadership would trumpet as major suc-
cesses. (2) If there were not even small successes, there could be a return to a modi-
fied form of Stalinism, toward which Gorbachev had already shown a tendency. (3)
Structural change could arise out of desperation.
Several participants wondered if it was realistic to expect fundamental change in
the Soviet system. An American pointed out, by way of comparison, that the
Reagan Administration had come into office with significant new programs aimed
at dealing with problems such as economic inefficiency, inflation, unemployment,
government regulation, etc.; it had, in short, put into effect major changes, but
without making any basic changes in the American system. Why would the same
thing not be true in the Soviet Union? The tactics might change, but not the under-
lying interests. Perhaps the change of leadership was really not all that profound.
Another speaker from the U.S. observed that the analysis of Russia's problems
presented by the working paper and the panelists was not new. The debate about
dealing versus squeezing was an old one. The real question was whether there was
something in the Western response to the Soviet Union that inhibited its leaders
from giving priority to domestic affairs. Or was there something fundamental in the
Soviet system that always resulted in the leader opting against basic reforms that he
allegedly wanted? ·-
Another American gave some credence to this latter notion when he observed that
Russian leaders had not successfully carried out domestic reforms in the past.
21
Indeed, both Khrushchev and Kosygin had been pushed aside precisely because they
had moved toward reforms. It seemed that there was something basic in the
Marxist-Leninist system that "true believers" - and Gorbachev was one - were
not willing to put aside.
Other participants commented on a variety of factors that might inhibit basic
change in Russia. A Briton pointed out that the Russians had been extremely con-
cerned about events in Poland. Would that not inhibit them from moving rapidly
toward domestic reform? Another speaker from the U.K. observed that a market
economy could not function without giving individuals choice, and the problem
facing Gorbachev in giving individuals choice was that it implied a degree of indi-
vidual freedom. Even if the Soviet leadership recognized the necessity for economic
decentralization, could they afford the political decentralization that surely would
accompany it? A Swiss speaker wondered whether decentralization was possible in a
"multinational state" like the Soviet Union. Was it really just a question of reduc-
ing the discipline of the party system, or was the problem that loosening the system
might lead to upheaval among the various nationalities?
A British speaker felt that too much emphasis was being placed on the need for
fundamental change in the Soviet Union. Gorbachev could accomplish, and already
had done, a great deal by making changes at the margin. He had brought his own
people into aU levels of the party structure. Market mechanisms were beginning to
come in, and other changes could be expected. It was likely that the Soviet Union
would once again soon achieve growth rates higher than those of most OECD
countries.
Other speakers expressed confidence that Gorbachev would be able to make sig-
nificant changes. Encouraged that the Soviet leader was "more open, receptive, and
analytical" than his predecessors, a Briton found it hard to believe that Gorbachev
would not be capable of "adapting his country to the real world" and pulling it
away from some of its traditional constraints. In another British participant's eyes,
Gorbachev was "intelligent, well-educated, and modern in outlook:' It was neither
significant nor conclusive that there had not been fundamental change in his first
year in office. Time was on his side; he could reasonably expect to be in power for
twenty years or more. Already he had moved to surround himself with his own
people, and by offering the prospect of stable leadership to a population dispirited
and disillusioned by a succession of leadership changes, he had dramatically
improved the morale of the Soviet people. Gorbachev, the speaker continued,
clearly perceived the widening gap between his country's economic development
and that of the West. It was improbable that he was prepared to preside over a
period of economic decline.
A French speaker suggested that it was worth remembering that, over the past 13
years, the Soviet Union had achieved, with low efficiency, the same average growth
rates (about three percent of GNP) as the Western economies. If Gorbachev were
able to mobilize even a small segment of the population, might not the result be a
significant increase in productivity without major structural change?
An American participant responded that it was misleading to compare the Soviet
Union's three percent growth to that of the Western economies because it was based
on a far smaller per capital GNP. The growth that had occurred was in the wrong
sectors - those that produced outmoded, non-competitive goods. The old methods
by which the Soviet Union had achieved growth in the past - exploitation of cheap
resources and plentiful labor - were no longer available. What was needed was a
change in labor productivity, and this could only come about with a change ia
incentives.
Addressing the notion that, if fundamental reforms had not been made in the
past, they were unlikely to be accomplished by the current leadership, an American
argued that the traditional analyses of the problems of the Soviet Union were
22
Western ones and had not been echoed inside the Soviet Union. Today, their own
analyses of their problems were much closer to ours. Furthermore, there had been
no real progress in the past because Brezhnev had been unwilling to weaken the
military priority, to deemphasize foreign-policy goals, or to risk cuts in consump-
tion. He feared the potentially destabilizing consequences of cutting the standard of
living, so cuts were made in investment and the economic future of the Soviet
Union was "mortgaged to an ambitious political and military build-up and an
unwillingness to risk instability by cutting consumption." The result was that the
bills were now coming due, and Gorbachev had far less elbow room than his
predecessors.
If we accepted that Gorbachev really did recognize the need for basic changes in
the Soviet system, participants in the discussion wondered what the implications
might be for specific areas of Soviet interest around the world. A French speaker
thought it possible that the Russians might attempt a "major breakthrough" in the
Far East, in relations with Japan and China. Might not the time be right for some
sort of concession in the northern territories dispute with Japan, for example? Per-
haps the Soviets could make a deal allowing Japanese participation in the economic
development of Siberia in exchange for Japan's neutralization.
In response to this hypothesis, an American speaker saw "no sign" that the
Russians were about to make "the slightest territorial concession" to Japan, or to
thin out their forces along the Chinese border. But a Briton, while conceding that
the Soviet Union had so far failed to make "the obvious and painless concessions"
in the region, very likely soon would, particularly if China were to throttle back on
its program of reform. With respect to Japan, if the Soviet goal was to secure
Japanese involvement in its economic development, a major change in relations was
not necessary. Already the Japanese were helping the East Germans, and their
assistance was available to the Russians as well.
With respect to the Eastern European countries, considerable concern was voiced
by participants. What was the Soviet attitude toward its allies, many of which had,
as a German pointed out, found a middle ground between opening their economies
to the West and remaining members of a Soviet-dominated Comecon? Trade with
the West was vitally important to these countries, and, so far, Russian appeals for
them to downgrade their relations with the West had fallen on deaf ears. It was
important for the West to continue trade and other Jinks with the Eastern European
countries.
An American felt that Gorbachev's concept of interdependence might have major
consequences for the Eastern European countries. It could be interpreted as a new
policy of opening up Soviet markets to the West and allowing Eastern Europe to
continue earning foreign exchange by exporting to market economies. But rhe
Communist Party had called for greater integration among socialist states, which
could be seen as trying to prevent Eastern Europe from making too much economic
progress and to make them divert their best goods from Western markets to Soviet
markets. So far, there appeared not to be a decision to go one way or the other, but
there were strong indications of a greater emphasis on contact among non-market
nations.
Several speakers felt that economic decentralization in the Soviet Union would
not necessarily lead to political decentralization, and that this might have adverse
consequences on the Eastern European countries. If Gorbachev succeeded in
increasing Soviet productivity, would he try to exert greater pressure and control
over his European allies, wondered a Belgian. An American agreed that there was a
real danger that economic decentralization in the Soviet Union could lead to a
tightening of control. One way the Soviets might seek to gain access to technology,
he suggested, would be to squeeze their satellites, who had managed to get and
23
learn to use technology. In this sense, economic change and political change might
lead in different directions. ·
A participant from the U.K. was less worried. He observed that there were exten-
sive ties between Eastern Europe and the West, both multilateral and bilateral.
Some Eastern European countries had joined the World Bank and IMF. There was
extensive contact and trade. The Russians had not yet been able to force Eastern
Europe to supply the Soviet Union with quality goods. It was important for the
West to. maintain and increase these links with Eastern Europe.
A number of speakers felt that Gorbachev's acceptance of the necessity for eco-
nomic modernization in the Soviet Union boded well for progress in arms limita-
tion. A Finn observed that the rapid pace of technological change in recent years
had wrought important qualitative changes in arms. The Soviets were having diffi-
culty enough, due to the curtailments in their purchasing power brought about by
the drop in energy prices, in acquiring equipment and technology to modernize their
economy, let alone pouring money into the military sector. They would have to
establish priorities. A German agreed that the Russians would never achieve the
growth rates called for in their plans if they shifted resources into the military. Any
additional burden in the arms field would limit the development of the standard of
living. Thus Gorbachev placed great emphasis on arms control. Perhaps it was in
the West's interest to offer him a "way out of the high cost of competing with the
U.S. from a weaker economic and technological base:'
An American disagreed that Russian military spending would be constrained by
the need for economic modernization. Economic factors were, on the other hand,
already limiting American programs, and budgetary considerations would go fur-
ther than arms control agreements in limiting U.S. programs. There was "no dis-
cernable evidence" of any such restraint in the Soviet Union. Their arms control
proposals might evidence a change in style and tactics, but not in substance. The
Russians were testing new systems and were proceeding with research and develop-
ment of a strategic defense capability while seeking to halt the U.S. defense pro-
gram. In the INF area, Gorbachev's zero-option proposal was unsatisfactory
because it failed to address the deployment of new SS-21 and -23 missiles, which
had substantially the same target capability as the SS-20's.
Strongly disagreeing with the foregoing remarks, a British speaker argued that
the U.S. had outspent the Soviet Union and the West had outspent the Warsaw
Pact in arms in the last decade or more. Gorbachev's current zero-option proposal
was better than Reagan's 1981 version because it would leave no land-based missiles
pointed at Europe. One technological development that had had a profound effect
on the Russians was the development of the concept of nuclear winter. This concept
should have major implications for the way in which the U.S. and the Soviet Union
regulated rnilitary competition and sought security. It had been a dominant factor
in the shift in Soviet attitudes and policy under Gorbachev. The Russians had
decided they could not afford to fight a nuclear war. The speaker saw no similar
progress in thinking on "the other side of the Atlantic."
Commenting on current Soviet arms control proposals, an American believed
"there was something in them for the West." The Soviet Union's proposals to
reduce ICBM warheads and throw-weights would result in meaningful cuts in its
capabilities. Indeed, the Russians could be abandoning their quest for a first-strike
capability against U.S. land-based forces. And in considering their INF proposal, it
had to be recognized that the SS-21, -22, and -23 missiles were also capable of
carrying conventional explosives, and it was debatable whether they would be held
back for nuclear use in the event of a conventional confrontation.
According to an Italian speaker, Europe was deeply concerned that progress be
made in arms control. But, at this point, progress in the strategic area was perhaps
more important to Europeans than progress in the INF area, because of the fear of
24
decoupling. In any event, it was important to maintain cohesion in the alliance by
finding a balance between the necessity for a strong defensive capability and achiev-
ing progress in arms control.
A number of participants wondered about the implications of economic change
for Soviet society. A Belgian asked if, with Gorbachev publicly recognizing that
"all was not well in the Soviet Union:' the Soviet people could join in the criticism
without fear of committing an act of treason. Or was the power to criticize in
Gorbachev's hands alone? An American thought there might be "a new era of self~
criticism" developing in the Soviet Union. He cited as possible evidence a recent
editorial in Pravda that criticized the party organization. The editor responsible had
been dressed down, but not fired, as would usually have been the case.
And what about the introduction ofnew technology in Soviet life? The Belgian
speaker wondered how the party leadership would react when it realized that tech-
nology made central planning less important and was not an instrument for political
control. The introduction of new technologies would indeed put pressure on the
secrecy of Soviet society, said an American participant. To get the maximum bene-
fit from technology, there had to be communication. A computer was a means of
communicating and a printing press - two things the Soviet leadership had always
tried to control. Already there were indications that the leadership was attempting
to control the use of computers, to prevent them from communicating outside. a
particular institute, for example. When Soviet technicians realized they were not
getting full advantage of new technologies because of such restrictions, the pressure
between the efficiency proponents and the party idealogues would increase. Con-
ceivably new technology could lead to more communication and therefore greater
stability in the Soviet Union.
A few speakers questioned the assumption underlying the discussion that internal
reform in the Soviet Union was necessarily good for the West. To what extent was it
a Western interest that the Russians increase their productivity, wondered an
Italian. An American thought it dangerous to assume that reform in the Soviet
Union would lead to a foreign policy "more congenial to the West," or that it
would make the Soviet Union easier to deal with from a foreign policy and security
perspective.
Addressing these concerns, an American said that whether Soviet modernization
was good or bad for the West depended on the "character of political changes that
accompanied the economic modernization." Modernization that forced Soviet leader-
ship to abandon the military priority and devote their attention to domestic con-
cerns, such as consumer satisfaction, would be positive. But modernization that
increased "the volume of discretionary resources available to a politician not other-
wise constrained" would not be desirable. In short, economic modernization was
not an "unmitigated good."
Was there, wondered a number of participants, an optimum course of action that
the West could follow so as to influence what happened in the Soviet Union? To
what extent were Gorbachev's actions alterable or dictated by the Western response,
asked a Briton. Would a cooperative approach encourage him to move in a "more
open" direction? Would a confrontational approach put him in a defensive pos-
ture? Or did the Western attitude have any effect at all?
An Italian said that the U.S. could consider the two approaches, squeezing and
dealing, but that, for Europe, there was only one option, dealing. Even if there was
nothing really new in Soviet attitudes and policies, there was the appearance of a
new set of circumstances. The perception in Europe was that Gorbachev repre-
sented change. The West therefore had to adjust its strategy to what seemed to be a
turning point in Soviet policy.
While dealing, which included economic cooperation, bilateral contacts, progress
in arms control, was favored by many European speakers, a Turk warned that, to
25
the Russians, dealing meant "deal and expand:' The West should be careful not to
"let its resolve weaken."
An American participant argued that there were different gradations of dealing,
ranging from soft dealing to hard dealing. But squeezing alone, without any deal-
ing, was a risky strategy that the West might not be able to sustain and to which the
Soviet Union might respond in "ways that could endanger us both.'.' What the West
did certainly had an effect, but it was wrong to think we could manipulate Soviet
domestic development. Our efforts to do so could have the opposite effect of the
one desired. Our best course was to "influence the external environment in which
the Soviet leaders make their domestic decisions ..." We should make that envi-
ronment "less hospitable for Soviet aggrandizement." But we should always "be
ready to reciprocate Soviet restraint."
It was another American's view that the West could not influence Soviet modern-
ization much by selling them physical equipment. But we could influence them by
the way we handled our own economies. We could also have an effect by promoting
exchanges of people, encouraging communication and contact, and trying to break
down the secrecy barriers. We should continue non-strategic trade and keep coming
up with creative proposals. But we should abandon any "social engineering
instinct'' that we could predict the effect our actions would have on developments
inside the Soviet Union. Our policy should be based on our own national interests,
on staying engaged with the Soviets, and trying to move them toward positions that
would lead to greater strategic stability.
26
II. THE WESTERN GLOBAL RESPONSE TO THE SOVIET CHALLENGE
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I.
We in the West should be asking ourselves not what the Soviet Union intends to
do, but what we should be doing. The notion that the Russians have a carefully
designed and detailed foreign policy is not born out in practice. Almost every
breakthrough in relations has been the result of a Western initiative to which the
Russians responded.
The great advantage of the Soviet Union is its persistence in sticking to whatever
course it has adopted. But at some point in the future, the Russians are going to
realize their present attempt to make their system more efficient is not going to
work, and they are going to have to undertake more fundamental reforms. This
realization may cause intense domestic controversy in the Soviet Union, with a
resulting weakening of their foreign policy. It could also coincide with a realization
by the Russians that the Chinese experiment is succeeding. If these realizations did
coincide, the Russians will have to decide whether or not to deal with at least part
of the foreign policy environment before undertaking fundamental domestic
reform; the result might be a dangerous period in the l990's.
Whatever happens, the West must communicate to the Soviet Union what it
means by peace. We tend to practice "diplomacy by conversion;' believing that a
"magic moment" will arrive when the Russians suddenly recognize the advantage
of peace and a great reconciliation will follow. This is wrong. Whatever the long
term intentions of the Russians might be, their bureaucratic incentives now are not
to "rock the domestic boat" by making controversial changes in military and for-
eign policies.
In the area of arms control, the current Soviet proposals are aimed at freezing the
existing relationship of forces at a lower level. The existing relationship favors
them, not because they necessarily have a first-strike capacity, but because the U.S.
has foregone one. In a "tit for tat" nuclear war, the Russians would probably have
more endurance than the West in terms of weapons systems and certainly more in
terms of public support. Furthermore, we have done nothing to redress the existing
imbalance in conventional forces. Thus,-to maintain the status quo, even at a lower
level, risks the emergence of pacificism and unilateralism in the West. It might also
lead to a situation the Soviet Union could exploit, particularly if developments in
China resulted in the opening of a second front for the Soviet Union.
The West's current arms control proposals do not help matters much. Assuming
the West could not stick to its opening position and moved toward the Soviet po&i-
tion, the result would be a compromise that failed to change the fundamental
imbalance. We seem to be heading into "a liturgy of arms control in which an
agreement becomes an end in itself." Symbolism is replacing substance in the
debate. We ought to be asking ourselves where we want to be in 10 years time and
work back from there to a present position.
With respect to SDI, we ought to analyze what combination of offensive and
defensive weapons will correct the imbalance of forces, or will make the use of
nuclear weapons less likely. The Western democracies cannot stick to a position of
total vulnerability indefinitely without demoralizing their populations. The notion
that SDI research is permissible but deployment is not will result in no effective
research being done in the West because governments will not invest money in
research that is not going to be translated into deployment. The problem, which we
seem intellectually unable to deal with, 'is what limitations on deployment related to
what limitations on defensive weapons are necessary to produce maximum stability.
27
In the sphere of U.S.-European relations, there has been a series of events outside
the NATO area in which the various allies have not only disagreed with each other,
but have actively opposed each other. This is a particular problem for the U.S.
insofar as it has a major portion of its armed forces tied up in the NATO area and
cannot use them in contingencies in other areas without the permission of countries
that may oppose the U.S.'s perception of its vital interests. The problem facing the
West in the coming decades is how to prevent North-South issues from becoming
East-West ones, and East-West issues from becoming transatlantic ones. We need
to discuss where we agree and where we disagree, and what to do when we disagree.
What is the permissable scope of disagreement going to be in a crisis?
In both East-West and transatlantic relations, we must ask ourselves where we
think we are heading, and put it in a context that we can place before the Soviets.
Otherwise, negotiations with them become purely technical debates. We must pres-
ent the Politburo with a vision of the future, other than a numbers game, that it has
to study. We have to face our differences frankly, not in a spirit of anger or recri-
mination, and determine what they mean for our foreign policy.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, JI.
Gorbachev will need a lot of time to introduce far-reaching changes into the
Soviet system; it will be several years before any changes are made that effect
foreign policy. Thus, the West is still confronted with a military challenge.
Although the Soviet Union is now on the defensive strategically, we cannot lower
our defenses. A good global reaction capacity to the Soviet threat must be
maintained.
One weakness in decision making and continuity of policy in our alliance is that
we are responsible to our populations, and this is not always the most effective
system. The Soviets have the advantage of centralized control. The West, which is
only partly an alliance, has no centralized command; we respect the sovereign rights
of our democracies. Therefore, to achieve cohesion in our response to the Soviet
challenge, we need to work out a consensus among the leaders of our democracies.
This is especially important if quick action has to be taken.
SDI presents a challenge to the alliance. What are the consequences for Europe of
SDI? The new doctrine of strategic defense has not been fully developed, as SDI
will not protect Europe from short- and intermediate-range missiles. What happens
if, in the next 20 years, budgetary constraints cause the U.S. to focus on strategic
defense at the expense of counter-offensive weapons? Furthermore, we should not
be "putting all our eggs in the nuclear basket:' What happens if there is a conven-
tional confrontation in Europe? What about the development of the Soviet Union's
chemical warfare capacity? We must work out our response to Soviet military
action, whether nuclear or conventional. We are faced with fundamental questions
and strategic choices.
The West's response to Soviet arms control proposals is of great importance to
public opinion, especially in Europe, with respect to medium-range and tactical
nuclear weapons. We are finding it difficult to work out a common response. One
of the problems is that there really is no European strategic response. If, as John F.
Kennedy described it, the Alliance stands on two pillars, the U.S. and Europe, then
the European pillar is somewhat lacking, and we need to do something about it.
28
We also need to work out a response to problems in areas not covered by NATO.
It is in such areas that fighting usually breaks out. In the Mediterranean, we are
acting as individual nations, and not as an alliance. But there is a cultural aspect to
our alliance in the sense that we all belong to the same sort of society; hence we
should have a common policy. This is especially important in our efforts to work
with the moderate Arabs.
Here, the American action in Libya has had a negative effect. It has accentuated
the gulf between the U.S. and Europe in dealing with these kinds of problems. It
has risked provoking problems with the Saudis, the Egyptians, the Algerians, and
the Jordanians, none of whom have been involved in terrorism, but have had to
back Khaddafi. Considering the implications of the U.S. action, a few hours of
reflection before taking such action is really not enough. We need to agree on what
our policy in the region is going to be. One of the problems is that our diplomatic
traditions in the area are differ,ent. For example, the U.S. has a "privileged" rela-
tionship with Israel that Europe does not share.
Another challenge facing the West is how to deal with the indebtedness of third
world countries. This is a geopolitical question as well as a financial one. It is of
particular importance in Africa and Latin America. We need to work out a geo-
political approach to prevent these countries from falling into the Communist orbit.
We need to think about forging a link between geopolitics and finance. From the
point of view of third world economic development, the next GATT round is of
great importance.
We have given our alliance certain legal powers, but not a strong central com-
mand nor a great deal of discipline. To have done so would not be in keeping with
our democratic traditions. The alliance is "an assembly point for sovereign demo-
cratic states." Right now we have a mixed strategy for responding to the Soviet
challenge, and no real consensus. Perhaps this is something for the think tanks to
work out - how to forge a consensus on a global response. We need to choose a
course of action that will preserve the cohesion of the alliance.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III.
Since 1981, the alliance has been characterized by an "abdication" of Europe in
the face of U.S. unilateralism. This has been exemplified by the termination of the
INF talks in Geneva without European consultation, the American attack on Libya,
which left Europe "speechless in sterility:' and by the current arms control situa-
tion, in which a "revolution in military strategy" - SDI - is being thrust on the
Europeans without any consultation.
At the same time, there has been a revitalization of the U.S., and a revival of the
American attitude of "naive optimism;' and of the "arrogance of power:' Europe
has viewed with mixed feelings American policies toward such countries as
Grenada, Nicaragua, and Libya. It has been powerless to do anything about the
"self-centered set of American budget policies carried out at the expense of the
smooth functioning of the world economy." In relations with the Soviet Union, the
U.S. appears to have no concept, save that of an "economic war of attrition by
means of the arms race." Reagan's skill as a communicator to the American people
does not extend to the Europeans, for whom Gorbachev's credibility is growing.
29
Looking ahead to the year 2000, there will be four "great common markets" in
the world: China, the Soviet Union, the U.S., and Japan. China will continue to
develop economically, and, in spite of occasional mistakes and setbacks, will have a
large-scale economy by the end of the century. Politically, it will pursue a policy of
equidistance between Moscow and Washington. The Soviet Union will continue to
be "humble and ill-functioning," but will at least have the advantages of a single,
unified economic policy. It will continue to pursue parity with the U.S., and, if not
contained, to follow a strategy of cautious expansion. By 2000, the economic and
strategic power of the U.S. will have increased substantially. Its foreign policy will
be hard to predict, given its changeable nature. Finally, Japan will continue to
thrive, with a unified economic policy and no burden of defense spending.
Then there is the European Common Market, in which ministers and heads of
state argue about everything, a massive bureaucracy turns out vast sets of regula-
tions, and there are 12 tax systems, 12 legal systems, and 11 currencies. By the end
of the century, Europe will still be dependent on the U.S., perhaps even more so in
the defense area.
Looking at the immediate future, the West has no choice in its relations with the
Soviet Union but to pursue a double-track strategy of containment by sufficient
defense and arms control agreements on the one hand, and economic and political
engagement on the other. Europe has to do three things in particular: increase eco-
nomic cooperation with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, complete the forma-
tion of the ECU, and bring France back into the military structure. This last would
have to be done under some forum other than NATO, but, if it were done, the
American military presence in Europe could be greatly reduced.
The outlook for closer cooperation among the allies in foreign policy is not
promising. Nor is the outlook for developing a new military strategy for Europe to
replace the current strategy, which is 20 years old and does not take into account
the vast changes in weapons systems and in the ways of thinking about how they
might be used. The alliance is not tackling these and other problems. Our main
inhibition is our own "lack of will and mutual sensitivity:' There has not been
"grand-style cooperation" between the U.S. and Europe since 1976. It is unlikely to
be revived without new international leadership, which will probably have to come
from the U.S. But here, the outlook is not very bright, either.
Discussion
An American participant offerred a generally positive view of Soviet-American
relations, saying they were "better today than a year ago." The objective of U.S.
policy was to "improve relations, to better understand the Soviets' objectives and
actions around the world, and to help them better understand ours." Reagan was
particularly eager to achieve a meaningful arms control agreement before his term
in office expired, but he felt that such an agreement could not be reached without
progress in other areas.
The U.S. had embarked on its arms build-up as a reaction to "aggressive Soviet
expansion" around the world, the speaker continued. Of particular concern to the
U.S. was Soviet behavior in Afghanistan, Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua.
Human rights were also a major American concern, and the U.S. sought a curtail-
ment of Soviet "oppression of human freedoms within their own country" and a
lifting of restrictions on immigration.
30
The first summit meeting between Reagan and Gorbachev had established a dia-
logue and a pattern for future meetings. The recent postponement of the meeting
between Shultz and Shevardnadze to plan the second summit was a disappointment,
but the speaker was optimistic the second summit would take place. Progress was
being made in improving relations, and Soviet-American relations, the speaker pre-
dicted, would be better a year from now.
A Canadian welcomed what he saw as the "reassertion of the traditional
American preeminence in the alliance;• even if it was something not all of the
U.S. 's principal allies necessarily liked. The occasional "abrasions" that occurred
between the U.S. and Europe were traceable to some degree to the American spirit
of optimism, but not to any "arrogance of power." Because of Vietnam,
Watergate, and the "irresolution" of the Carter era, the U.S. had "temporarily lost
its way" and had not been able to assert itself in the alliance with its customary self-
confidence. Indeed, there had been a period when the correlation of forces between
the two superpowers had been so narrowly balanced that almost any initiative on
the part of one of the European allies could alter the balance of power. This, in the
speaker's view, had required the U.S. to "show greater deference" toward Europe
- a state of affairs whose passing many Europeans now tended to lament. The
tendency for Europeans to feel underconsulted and other strains in the alliance
brought about by renewed American assertiveness should not be swept under the
rug, but Europeans should at least recognize as a compensating benefit the return in
the U.S. to a bipartisan foreign and strategic policy that had not existed for 20
years.
A Dutch speaker took issue with the notion that, as the U.S. had grown assertive,
so Europe was growing weaker, and more helpless and lacking in determination.
Despite all the difficulties faced by the EEC, nowhere else in the world was there
such a great degree of cooperation among sovereign nations as that among the 12
members of the EEC. The Common Market had achieved significant success, par-
ticularly in the economic sphere, and the current economic outlook was particularly
bright. Effective trade and agricultural policies had been developed, Spain and
Portugal had been newly admitted, and monetary reform had been expeditiously
accomplished, to name a few of the EEC's accomplishments. Cooperation extended
beyond economic affairs, to foreign aid and defense, as well. "Europessimism"
was not justified; Europe could stand firmly as a pillar in the alliance.
What was needed, continued the speaker, was greater cohesion in the alliance.
Europe should not be confronted with unilateral U.S. actions, which were detri-
mental to cohesion. Close consultation, particularly on foreign policy toward
regional conflicts, was vital to maintaining cohesion. This sentiment was voiced by
several European speakers, who felt that consultation had not been adequate.
Greater cohesion among the European members of the alliance was particularly
desirable, in the view of a Spaniard. Europe should draw closer together, even at
the risk of a greater distancing between the two sides of the Atlantic - a risk worth
taking "as long as the fundamentals of the alliance are maintained." A Turk
agreed, arguing that the need for greater consultation within Europe was especially
keenly felt by countries on the flanks, such as Turkey and Norway, which often felt
underconsulted. A Swede added that the efforts of neutral European nations in
responding to the Soviet challenge were an important part of overall European
strategy and should not be overlooked.
But, in the view of some speakers, there were limits to the effectiveness of consul-
tation. An American observed that it was invoked "as though it were a magic for-
mula for solving problems within the alliance." There were a host of issues on
which the allies could consult endlessly and still disagree. It was the obligation of
the U.S. to consider European views, but, in the event its vital interests were at
stake, it had to have the right to act unilaterally. Did Europe have the right to veto
31
the American definition of what constituted vital interests? The Europeans had to
decide not only whether or not to support U.S. actions, but also to what extent they
would carry their disagreement. Was the time right after an action the best time to
be vocal in disagreement? In view of the controversy surrounding the American
action against Libya, perhaps it made sense for the U.S. to consider other basing
arrangements for some of its forces in Europe - its F-lll's, for example - so that
they would be available for out-of-area contingencies without the U.S. having to
obtain permission from the country where the forces were now based. Consultation
should not mean each side paralyzing the other.
A Canadian agreed that it was unrealistic for Europe to expect the U.S. to con-
sult each European government before embarking on even a "modest undertaking"
that it felt affected its own strategic interests. He found it encouraging that the U.S.
once again recognized it had strategic interests in the world and was determined to
defend them. A British speaker observed that, while consultation was important, it
was too often true that only after the U.S. took action did Europe do anything.
Consultation was no substitute for European action.
Another Briton felt it was all right for the U.S. to act in accordance with its
judgement of its vital interests, but it was "essential to get that judgement right!'
One interest had to be balanced against another, such as weighing the importance
of sustaining an alliance against the need to deal with terrorists. A French partici-
pant agreed that the U.S. had to weigh other arguments before taking an action.
What the West needed was a new basis for consultation that should be worked out
by think tanks or perhaps a special task force.
In the arms control field, it was an American's view that the U.S. had been
consulting fully with its European allies. American negotiators in Geneva met regu-
larly with the Atlantic Council, and Nitze was as that moment consulting in the
Hague. Whether or not the Russians were seriously seeking an agreement was
unclear. Gorbachev had been making speeches at home and around the world that
"seemed to open new doors." But, so far, what Gorbachev had been saying had not
been reflected in the positions of his negotiators in Geneva.
Another American found it hard to accept "the concept that there is a gap
between the public and private positions of the Soviets." The public positions them-
selves were "not that exciting or acceptable." The Soviet aim to freeze the balance
of forces would "contribute to the demoralization of the Western world." With
respect to INF, the West had to decide what the deployment was really for. Was it
purely military, or was it to link the nuclear defense of Europe with that of the
U.S.? If the latter was true, then there was a critical point below which the number
of missiles could not be reduced. We needed to have strategic rationale for the
missiles.
Regarding SDI, another American wondered if it would not be applicable to the
defense of Europe before the U.S. because the technology required to defend
against slower-flying intermediate missiles was less complicated than that required
to intercept ICBM's. A German speaker viewed this possibility as cold comfort,
saying that research into lasers and kinetic energy and other components of SDI
technology had been going on for years and could never become operational before
the end of the century. Anyway, it was doubtful that such a defense would work
against contour-flying cruise missiles. Even if SDI did work, continued the speaker,
it would mean a major revolution in military strategy. The belief in nuclear
weapons as the ultimate weapon was endangered by SDI. The West needed nuclear
weapons only to deter the Russians from using theirs. The deterrence argument was
true of conventional weapons as well, and it was urgent that the West do something
about conventional defense. Indeed, there was no constructive thinking going on
about military strategy in the West.
32
~
t
t
t
I
I
r
I
I
I
I
''
A Frenchman felt that it was a high priority to develop a new procedure or mech-
anism to think about the Western strategic concept. Here, the autonomy of French
forces could play a role. An American president faced constraints in not being able
to give the same priority to launching nuclear missiles in defense of Europe as he
would give to the defense of the U.S. It was also likely the cost of maintaining U.S.
forces in Europe would continue to be a problem. Europe. faced a growing need to
take responsibility for its own defense. A new European strategic concept could
involve the use of French forces in service to the Alliance as a "quick response"
force. An American agreed, saying that "French semi-autonomy has produced the
most serious thinking on defense and foreign policy going on in Europe!' A greater
European contribution to its own defense was in the U.S. 's as well as Europe's
interest.
The discussion, focusing as it did on the need for a comprehensive and cohesive
Western strategy in responding to,the Soviet challenge, prompted a participant to
ask how we might "implement a strategic vision" in responding rationally to the
Soviets. "If we accept a two-track strategy as the starting point, what rules of
conduct could we adopt that are simple enough to be understood on both sides of
the Atlantic and binding enough to be effective?"
From one American's point of view, the answer was that the West and the Soviet
Union had to sit down and discuss the political issues dividing them..Each side had
to try to define and put before the other its vital interests. If we could agree, then
we should each respect the other's vital interests by not using force or covert mili-
tary action against them. We had to find out if the Soviet Union was determined to
refuse to accept vital Western interests, in which case we could at best achieve only
"endless military containment." But as we sought to deal with the problems facing
us, we in the West should remember that our "balance sheet" was far ahead of the
Russians, whose system might soon be in crisis. In any event, in negotiation or in
confrontation, "we need not fear the historical outcome!'
33
I
III. THE FRAGMENTATION OF THE WORLD ECONOMY: DEBT,
CURRENCY DISORDER, PROTECTIONISM, AND UNEVEN GROWTH
Working Paper
There are many reasons for optimism about the international economic outlook.
Impressive progress has been made in reducing inflation, interest rates, and ineffi-
cient economic regulations in most industrialized nations. The U.S. is in the fourth
year of its recovery and European growth prospects look increasingly bright.
Towards the end of 1985 the U.S. took a more active leadership role in addressing
the problems of the world economy, the Group of Five agreed to try to better
manage currency rates, the Baker Plan constructively addressed the Third World
debt problem, and members of the GATT set a date to launch new trade
negotiations.
But amidst progress there are underlying problems which jeopardize the longer
term outlook. Like large tectonic plates, economies of many regions of the world
are drifting apart. The U.S., Canada, Western Europe, and much of East Asia,
although not without their problems, have improved the structures of, and the out-
look for, their economies. Latin America, however, continues to suffer·from a large
debt burden that has led to social stress, high unemployment, and low investment.
Africa's economies continue to deteriorate along with the health, nutrition and
overall wellbeing of their peoples. The Soviet Union and much of Eastern Europe
are becoming technological laggards - falling behind the major market economies.
The Middle East has suffered a series of economic setbacks as the result of the
collapse in oil prices.
This paper will discuss the major reasons for disparities in world economic per-
formance, the relationship between them and persistent unemployment, trade, mon-
etary, and debt problems, and policies that show promise of overcoming these
difficulties.
MAJOR FORCES AT WORK IN THE WORLD ECONOMY
Three related forces have dominated developments in the world economy since
the turn of the decade.
(1) DISINFLATION. As electorates and leaders came to recognize the corrosive
effects of prolonged inflation in the 1970s - its erosion of purchasing power, its
adverse affect on investment, and its divisive impact on society - there was a shift
to strong anti-inflationary policies in most industrialized nations. Heavy regulation
and rapid increases in government spending were replaced by steps to deregulate
economies and curtail the growth of domestic programs. Restrained monetary pol-
icy in the U.S., and tighter fiscal policy in most other major industrialized ~nations,
sought to lower inflation rates.
As these policies began to take hold, growth slowed and interest rates increased.
Much of the borrowing of the Third World governments in the 1970s, as well as a
large amount of investment in both industrialized and developing countries in
energy, raw materials, basic industry and agriculture, had been based on the expec-
tation that earnings would exceed interest payments. Prices had risen sharply in
these sectors in the 1970s and many predicted further increases in the 1980s. But
they failed to occur.
When interest rates increased in the 1980s, and growth weakened, many borrow-
ers found that large scale borrowing and investment had led to substantial debt
overhang and excess capacity. The cost of servicing debt was much greater, and
their ability to increase earnings much less than anticipated. That contributt;d to the
enormous debt problem from which many producers of energy, other commodities,
and basic industrial goods now suffer. As these producers attempted to compete
with one another in a weak world market, prices for their products fell percipi-
tously. Such price declines have been of major benefit to the world economy as a
whole (by contributing to lower inflation and lower interest rates). They have been
an important part of the economic sea change from an inflationary to a disinfla-
tionary environment. But they also dealt a major setback to localities (such as oil
and grain producing states in the U.S.) and countries that depend on such goods.
The collapse of prices and revenues in these sectors - in contrast to the vigor of
many others - has been one important cause of disparities in performance among
countries and regions within them. Most dramatically, oil importers who, in effect,
had suffered an enormous tax increase from sharp oil price rises in the last decade,
now are benefitting from the large tax cut resulting from the collapse of such prices
- increasing the availability of resources to spend on other products and reducing
inflationary pressures. The massive shift of resources to oil exporters in the 1970s
has been largely reversed in the mid-1980s.
(2) REDUCED GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN ECONOMIES. As part
of the effort of governments to cut inflation, nearly all industrialized nations and
many developing ones have significantly reduced government intervention in their
economies. Regulations on aviation, telecommunications, energy prices and finance
have been loosened. Growth in social expenditures has been slowed considerably in
nearly all industrialized nations - in some cases a sharp departure from the steady
expansion of such programs in the 1960s and 1970s. Wage indexation has been
modified to reduce growth in labor costs. Government owned industries are being
sold off in many parts of the world.
Greater scope for market incentives has contributed to non-inflationary growth
and efficiency. Again, however, these developments have occurred unevenly. Those
countries that have maintained a large, and often heavy handed, economic role for
the state have tended to fall behind those that have reduced the state's participation
in the economy. The success of many nations of East Asia can, in significant meas-
ure, be attributed to their encouragement of private investment, outward looking
trade policies, and willingness to reduce the economic role of government. This
contrasts sharply with the more inward looking, state dominated, economic strategy
of much of Latin America - an approach which rendered most of that continent
less able to cope with the shocks to the world economy of past years and resulted in
its managing its debt problem less satisfactorily than much of East Asia.
And the Soviet Union along with most of its allies in Eastern Europe have slipped
further and further behind market oriented industrialized nations in Western
Europe, North America and East Asia. As the technological revolution proceeds
elsewhere in the world, the Soviets struggle to keep up. However, incentives are
severely distorted by the dominant role of government in allocating resources. Use
of information technology is closely restricted. The Strategic Defense Initiative
challenges that country to a technological duel for which it recognizes that it is ill
prepared.
(3) INTERNATIONALIZATION OF BUSINESS AND FINANCE. In recent
years international competition has intensified to the point that no major business
can compete either in its home market or internationally without constantly search-
ing out the lowest cost source of supplies, the most desirable locations for produc-
tion facilities, and the most attractive financing wherever they can be found on this
planet. Because much modern technology can be easily transferred among coun-
tries, more and more nations can make goods: the production and export of which
was formerly dominated by the major industrialized nations. Countries which once
attracted investors on the basis of low wages now do so by supplying low cost
engineers and scientists.
36
L.~™fl:e:: ·--~-- ~-----
{
I
I
I
(
Investment increasingly seeks out a secure environment and a favorable tax and
regulatory climate, shunning countries or localities with negative attitudes toward
the private sector or a record of political instability. Sharp differences in the invest-
ment climates among nations has led to changes in the allocation of'new investment
and, thus, in world trade flows. The U.S. and much of East Asia have been impor-
tant beneficiaries of the search of investors for favorable business environments.
And many parts of Asia have benefitted from the search of companies for low cost,
quality goods to sell in their domestic and international markets.
The rapid internationalization of finance has proceeded in parallel with tl:)at of
production and commerce. The veritable explosion in the international mobility of
capital has resulted from the dramatic expansion of offshore financial markets
(particularly the Euromarket), deregulation of capital and currency markets in
Japan and much of Europe, and new technologies for transmitting information and
making transactions. Capital can now move rapidly in response to changes or antic-
ipated changes in returns on investment or in national policies. And differences
among policies and investment returns, within a floating exchange rate system
which has shown a tendency to "overshoot;' have led to exchange rate volatility
and misalignments. Rather than serving to equilibrate trade balances, currency
movements too often have exaggerated them.
IMPLICATIONS OF THESE DEVELOPMENTS
(1) UNEMPLOYMENT. Nothing highlights the unevenness and imbalances of
the recent recovery so much as large pockets of persistent unemployment within our
own countries. While employment in service, high technology, and some manufac-
turing sectors has increased, it has fallen in a number of others. There is high
unemployment among 1) older workers displaced from their traditional jobs by the
scaling down of capacity in sectors suffering from global over-capacity (including
agriculture, "smokestack industries", and raw materials), 2) job displacement due
to domestic and international competition, and 3) younger workers, primarily in
urban areas, who often find it difficult to secure entry level jobs.
Although over time demographic trends in most industrialized countries will lead
to a narrowing of the gap between jobs and available labor, the social costs of
current high unemployment are enormous. Urban unemployment in Europe and
North America, particularly among minorities in the U.S., is a potentially explosive
problem as frustration leads to alienation, bitterness and, potentially, social unrest.
And too often the basic domestic causes of unemployment are obscured as a dispro-
portionate share of blame is placed on imports.
(2) DEBT. A second manifestation, and cause, of the unevenness in world eco-
nomic performance is the Third World debt problem. Much of that can be attrib-
uted to the interaction between, on one hand, economic policy distortions within a
number of developing countries - particularly in Latin America and Africa - and,
on the other, the shift in the world economic environment from high inflation and
low real interest rates to low inflation and high real interest rates. Countries that
had borrowed for unproductive or unwise purposes, or pursued rigid domestic eco-
nomic policies, have coped poorly with the volatile changes in the world economy.
As noted, for commodity and oil exporters the impact of recent events has been
particularly severe. The sharp price increases in these items in the 1970s led ulti-
mately to increased capacity, conservation, and substitution. Price declines in oil,
tin and other commodities in the 1980s are the direct consequence of the powerful
market forces that earlier price increases unleashed. And protectionism plus over-
valued exchange rates in many Third World countries impaired their ability to com-
pete in many industrial products.
37
Although improvement in external payments balances has taken place in Latin
America following a tightening of domestic demand, sharp cutbacks in investment,
and exchange rate devaluations, internal adjustment there has proved more diffi-
cult. Large government deficits, high subsidies, and a poor investment environment
still persist. These contribute to inflation and price distortions, particularly in agri-
culture. The continuation of large Third World debt is a cause of slow growth and
high unemployment in countries directly affected as well as a drag on global growth
and trade, a threat to our financial system, and a potential cause of political insta-
bility in many parts of the World.
(3) CURRENCY DISORDERS. Currency volatility and misalignments have been
one result of a combination of differences in policy and performance in major
industrialized countries and recent changes in the character of world financial mar-
kets. The impact of the dollar's strength, and uncertainty surrounding its future
value, have affected virtually every major sector in the U.S. and abroad. The strong
dollar was responsible for a significant portion of the U.S. trade deficit, and one
reason for the rise in unemployment in U.S. sectors highly exposed to international
competition. But it also helped other nations to boost exports and thus contributed
to their recoveries.
While many techniques have been devised by the financial community to reduce
the impact of currency volatility on trade and investment, their use has added to the
cost of international business. And domestic labor adjustments in the U.S. to the
high dollar, and abroad to the recent shift in currency values, are painful. They are
a proximate cause of demands for trade restrictions and subsidies. Governments in
Europe and Japan now - as has been the U.S. government in recent years - will
be under intense pressure to subsidize domestic industries facing a decline in com-
petitiveness as the result of the appreciation of their national currencies.
Europe has succeeded in creating the European Monetary System to reduce insta-
bility among currencies of member countries. Exchange rate volatility has led to
growing interest in exchange rate reform - in effect picking up the debate where it
was broken off in the early 1970s, when reestablishment of parities became impossi-
ble as the result of the oil crisis.
(4) TRADE DISTORTIONS. The volatility in currencies, enormous domestic
adjustments to changing competitive positions, and shifts in trade flows have con-
tributed to major trade frictions. Ironically, as governments have reduced their role
in domestic economies they have intervened to a greater degree in international
trade. In part they have done this to offset currency distortions, in part to avoid
declines in jobs in weaker sectors, in part to preserve capacity in key industries, and
in part to strengthen new high technology companies. The increase in agricultural
production in countries that for years were major food importers, the diffusion of
technical and industrial expertise around the world, and the vigorous competition
from Japan and newly industrializing countries has added to concerns in the U.S.
and much of Europe about the loss of world market share. In the U.S. the adminis-
tration's once cavalier attitude toward the strong dollar, as well as its reluctance to
provide redress under U.S. law, and in ways consistent with the GATT, to indus-
tries that sought import relief or other types of assistance, has led to a loss of
domestic support for free trade by previous advocates thereof. It added to pressures
for restrictive legislation - often as much to force the White House to take tougher
positions as to protect U.S. industries.
The weakening to the legitimacy of, and compliance with, GATT rules by nearly
all nations has encouraged countries to resort with increasing frequency to restric-
tive unilateral measures, subsidies or bilateral agreements. As these proliferate,
leaders become subject to greater pressures for more restrictions; GATT rules once
used as a defense against such domestic pressures no longer can be credibly cited by
governments as an excuse for not acquiescing to many of these demands. Progress
38
has been made toward multilateral negotiations. But there is little concensus on how
to improve the trading system and reduce trade barriers. Progress in reaching agree-
ment to begin negotiations has been motivated more by a common desire to halt the
erosion of the trading system than a common vision of how to improve it.
NEW POLICY APPROACHES
An impressive increase in international economic cooperation has occurred of
late. Recent meetings of the Group of Five, the Geneva agreement to begin in ear-
nest preparations for a new round of trade negotiations, and the Baker initiative
should lead to a more purposeful focus on monetary reform, trade and debt in the
near future. Lower inflation has improved prospects for investment and non-infla-
tionary growth, and given central banks the opportunity to lower interest rates with
less risk of price increases. The question now is whether constructive ad hoc meas-
ures can be translated into sustained improvements in domestic policies (e.g., lower
real interest rates, greater efficiency) and in the major institutions of the world
economy.
There are three areas in which improvements are both needed and within reach.
(1) POLICY HARMONIZATION. Interest has increased in monetary r.eform to
try to stabilize currency rates. Because of the relaxation of capital controls, the ease
of moving money, and the size of the pool of highly mobile funds, restoring fixed
parities will be difficult if not impossible. But greater stability is possible if proce-
dures can be agreed for reducing disparities in policy and performance. The EMS
has helped to restrain currency volatility in Europe, not so much by forcing
exchange rate intervention but by averting serious policy divergencies and, in partic-
ular, by encouraging efforts to restrain inflation. A similar procedure could be
instituted among a broader group of industrialized nations. But over the longer
term efforts to reduce imbalances will succeed only if the ad hoc harmonization
efforts among the major economies can be institutionalized. And the adjustment
process will need to be made more symmetrical between surplus and deficit coun-
tries - by developing criteria for deciding whether in a given circumstance the
surplus country should take measures to reduce its surplus by, for instance, tighten-
ing monetary poli<;y or the deficit country should act by, for instance, easing mone-
tary policy. Unless such an agreement can be reached, maintaining a "target zone"
or similar system will be difficult. Because it is easier to identify the "wrong"
exchange rate than to identify the "right" one, as the Group of Five is now discov-
ering, the system is likely to evolve into one which. stresses coordination to avoid
extreme misalignments, with less attempts to manage rates in more normal circum-
stances where a consensus on misalignment does not exist.
In addition to trying to encourage effective short-term adjustment, harmoniza-
tion should seek to reduce radical divergencies in tax and regulatory policies that
lead to sharp differences in incentives (or disincentives) to save, borrow, invest or
create credit. For example, financial and trade imbalances between the U.S. and
Japan are in part the cause of, and should impel both nations to reexamine, dispar-
ate tax systems: the U.S. should reduce artificial incentives to borrow and disincen-
tives to save, and Japan should reduce artificial incentives to save and disincentives
to invest.
The impressive cooperation that has developed among finance ministries and cen-
tral banks - as exemplified by recent Group of Five meetings - has raised high
expectations. Parallel reductions in interest rates, reflecting lower inflation and
preferences for using monetary rather than fisc;:al policy to boost growth, as well as
the decline of the dollar, have led the public to anticipate further impressive results
from policy coordination. But tensions within the Group of Five are likely to
increase if disputes continue as to how far and how quickly the dollar should
39
I
decline before the U.S. feels the currency is low enough to lead to a substant
correction in its trade deficit.
While the dollar has declined sharply vis a vis a number of major Europe.
countries and the yen, it has appreciated against the Canadian dollar (the curren
of the largest U.S. trading partner), the currencies of Latin America (roughly or
fifth of U.S. trade), and the Asian NICS. Thus the trade benefits for the U.S.
the dollar's decline are not as great as might be expected if one looks only at sm
currencies as the mark and yen.
(2) TRADE. The planned beginning of trade negotiations this year offers <
opportunity to reverse the deterioration in the international trading system. But
these are to succeed, deeply ingrained attitudes will need to change. Large numbe
of Americans have convinced themselves that the U.S. is virtually free of barrie
and can obtain increased access to markets abroad with few concessions on its par
Several U.S. trading partners appear to believe that the relatively small size of the
economies permits them to protect their markets without damaging the world tra1
ing system, while the U.S., because of the enormous international impact of i
economy, is urged to exercise substantial self restraint. And many developing cow
tries feel they can obtain concessions from industrialized nations while making on:
minimal efforts to reduce their own import restrictions. And heads of state an
government will need to recognize the need for them to take a personal interest i
the success of these negotiations - and apply appropriate leadership.
To achieve needed liberalization of international trade, negotiators will need t
adopt improved "safety valves" to enable governments temporarily to limit impon
that cause injury to industries and workers. To prevent abuse, negotiations will als
need to provide tighter rules for international monitoring of such actions and c
adjustment measures by the protected industries so that the duration of restraints ;
limited. Despute settlement procedures, the slowness, ambiguity and evasions c
which undermine the credibility of the GATT, will need to be improved. Unles
grievances can be expeditiously resolved, the negotiating process will be undercut b
concerns over the difficulty of obtaining redress when others fail to fulfill commit
ments. And the major developing countries will need to be convinced to participat
actively in the process. They are among the world's fastest growing markets an1
most active competitors. Failure to agree on an appropriate balance of benefits am
obligations with them would condemn the trading system to frequent disputes anr
disruptions.
In the meantime the U.S. will experience strong internal pressures to limit th
President's discretionary authority to deny import relief. The Congress may we!
link its mandate to the administration to proceed with negotiations to requirement
that the administration take stiff action against surges in imports or to counte.
restrictive actions abroad. The danger, of course, is that if the U.S. or, for tha
matter, any other country adopts additional restrictions during this period, attache:
overly demanding conditions to its commitment to negotiate, or expects too mud
of others compared to what it is willing to offer, the negotiations will fail to achieve
progress. The result could be a series of unilateral measures. Collectively, tha·
could shock nations to negotiate more purposefully; or it could set the world on ~
Smoot-Hawley type of downturn.
(3) DEBT. Overcoming the Third World debt problem will require continuec
efforts by indebted countries to get their economic houses in order and improve th(
environment for the private sector. Without this, financial assistance will be inef-
fective, funds will be badly utilized, and capital outflow (itself a symptom of lack
of private sector confidence) will continue. The Baker Plan was intended to encour-
age sound policies in indebted countries as well as more lending by international
financial institutions and commercial banks.
40
Critical external variables will be 1) interest rates, 2) commodity prices, 3) growth
in the industrialized world, 4) the level of import restrictions in industrialized coun-
tries, 5) new government and commercial resource flows, and 6) the nature of new
debt rescheduling agreements. The World Bank role as lender, advocate to policy
improvements and catalyst for new private sector lending, will be critical during this
period. It will increasingly be called on to demonstrate ieadership in promoting
development just as the IMF did in organizing rescue packages after 1982.
The central question in coming months will be whether the process of "manag-
ing" the debt problem in the expectation that it can be reduced in severity by
growth and lower interest rates abroad, while the banking system continues to
improve its ability to cope by strengthening its capital base relative to Latin Ameri-
can exposures, or whether a bolder set of measures can be devised to actually
reduce the debt burden of the Third World. Because the latter would involve either
a major writedown of debt by banks, which they understandably resist, or large
resource.transfers by governments, which taxpayers would resist, continued case by
case management of the problem appears to be the likely course.
CONCLUSION
Progress in addressing the above issues will help to promote a higher rate of
world growth. But the key will be a willingness of governments to recognize the
lessons of the last two decades. Large increases in government programs and sizea-
ble budget deficits, followed by pressures on central banks to monitize them, led to
inflation in the 1970s. Internal rigidities and regulations added to the problem. And
large scale borrowing in the expectation of continued inflation have led to overca-
pacity and enormous repayment problems.
Each generation sows the seeds of the problems of the next. We have coped with
the inflationary legacy of the last generation and paid the price of our overdepend-
ence on imported oil. The great danger now is that large government, corporate,
agricultural, and energy-related debt could make our economies highly vulnerable
to increased interest rates and financial disruptions. Unemployment in our coun-
tries can lead to intense social pressures. Deterioration of important developing
nation economies risks economic, financial and political instability. Large trade
imbalances foreshadow painful adjustment. And inadequate efforts to strengthen
international institutions could deprive us of vehicles for addressing economic prob-
lems in future years.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I.
The prospects for growth in the Western industrialized nations in the coming year
or two are reasonably good. But growth will not happen quickly; the immediate
effects of disinflation will not be stimulative.
The anticipated rate of growth will not help solve the problem of unemployment,
though it may prevent it from getting worse. And it won't even begin to solve the
problem of international debt. Debtor countries will be helped by lower interest
rates, but the gain may be cancelled out by lower export prices. These two factors
will not work in the same way for all debtor countries. There may be an improve-
ment for some and a deterioration for others. This at least works against the possi-
bility of a debtor cartel arising.
41
With respect to exchange rates of the floating currencies, two developments are
significant. First, the dollar-yen-deutschmark exchange rates are no longer mis-
aligned, as they were a year ago. Second, a policy change by the U.S. administra-
tion led to the "Plaza" intervention. Should the current situation be deemed
satisfactory, or should we seek a more formal arrangement among major countries
to stabilize exchange rates? A return to the Bretton Woods system of fixed but
adjustable rates is not realistic. What, then, about target zones? These are, in
effect, reference zones from which variation of exchange rates would trigger consul-
tation and policy responses.
There are four major arguments against target zones. The first is the ideological
and philosophical argument, fashionable a year ago but now somewhat less
fashionable, that the market should determine exchange rates. The second argu-
ment relates to the "overwhelming nature of international financial integration and
the massive character of capital movements!' How, in such an environment, can a
target zone system be effectively managed? The third argument accepts that
exchange rates are now in a roughly acceptable zone, but questions whether it is
realistic to try to stabilize them at a time of huge current account imbalances in the
world. It may be better to wait for better growth performance and resulting further
exchange rate adjustments to take effect. The fourth argument against target zones
asks what kinds of policies should or could be triggered if rates go out of the target
zones. There is a danger that all the burden would fall on monetary policy, because
governments are unwilling or unable to change fiscal policy.
The principal argument in favor of target zones is that, if nothing is done, (1)
exchange rates will not stay where they now are; (2) the market desires some sort of
official guidance as to the future direction of exchange rates and has developed
expectations that some sort of action will be taken. The success of the EMS pro-
vides some le"ssons. The same sort of arguments were used against it. But it took a
few years for the EMS to start working.
At a minimum, we ought to set into motion surveillance procedures over
exchange rate movements. And governments should accept that there are "no
taboos" with respect to policy mixes, so that the burden of action does not fall
exclusively on monetary policy.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, II.
There has been considerable euphoria recently about the state of the world
economy, as evidenced by soaring stock prices, lower inflation, falling interest
rates, and some improvement in employment. There is a belief that budget deficits
will come under control, and that sluggish growth will soon take off.
But one should be a bit skeptical about all this, because there are very real prob-
lems, which call for prudence. One of the problems is the exchange rate system,
whose volatility "reflects a certain disintegrating tendency." From the U.S. perspec-
tive, the decline of the dollar has eased concern about its competitive position, but
the trade deficit is still rising and is bound to stay high for a while. The U.S. will
remain dependent on foreign capital inflows to finance the current account deficit,
the budget deficit, and other domestic needs. The question must be asked how long
can these inflows be counted upon, with exchange rates falling, lower interest rates,
growth abroad requiring the use of savings, and the threat of protectionism. The
belief of some that the dollar should fall even further is not consistent with the U.S.
requirement of continued foreign capital inflows. The trade balance will not be
improved without a shift of real resources which is responsive to changes in income
flows as well as in exchange rates.
42
In the past few years, the U.S. has been growing faster than the other Western
industrialized countries. And growth in other countries has been fueled to an extent
by the overflow in demand growth from the U.S. This is true of Europe and Japan,
and it is a situation not conducive to an improvement in the U.S. current-account
deficit or in European and Japanese surpluses. We need a reversal of those growth
patterns, with the U.S. ceasing to play such a large role as the motor for world
growth, and Europe and Japan assuming more of that role. The "current challenge
of economic policy in all our countries" is to see that that shift takes place "to the
extent necessary to contribute to the greater world equilibrium that continued
growth in the U.S. and other industrialized countries may be dependent on?'
International debt, particularly of the LDC's, is another major problem. Before
the decline in oil prices, the situation was gradually getting better in the sense of
being less of a threat to world financial stability. There was also a movement in
debtor countries toward restoring growth and reducing dependence on capital
inflows from abroad. Fortunately, the Baker initiatives came along at a time of
growing "battle fatigue" on the part of the borrowing countries, the commercial
banks, and the creditor countries. The plan pro_vided a fresh impetus and vision by
setting out a "common sense bargain" which asks the debtors to improve their own
economies as a precondition for the creditors' supplying the external resources to
support growth. The steps that the debtor countries have been asked to take, such
as to increase efficiency, provide a better climate for private investment, and allow
more open trade, have been more quickly accepted than in the past because the
regimes themselves, especially in Latin America, have changed. They tend to be
more democratic, less authoritarian, and more open to liberalism in economic pol-
icy. The question is whether these ideological differences can be converted into
reality, particularly in light of the decline in oil prices.
Dealing with debtor countries on a case-by-case basis is feasible up to a point.
But if there is a major departure in any one of the countries, it will become general-
ized among all of them. If one doesn't pay, "it will prove infectious?' Similarly,
one can't be given a special deal on, say, interest rates, without all of them wanting
the same deal. So the basic approach must be generalized.
Many of the debtor countries had reasonably good growth rates in the l 970's, but
they were supported by an amount of external financing that could not be sustained
indefinitely. A very .large amount of that external borrowing was reflected in capital
flight from those same countries. We need to help these countries establish a growth
pattern less dependent on external finance.
There may be no practical alternatives to the Baker plan. A theoretical alternative
is to provide much more official assistance, perhaps on a subsidized basis. But, as a
practical matter, Europe and Japan are not going to contribute much more official
money. Another possibility is a write-down or write-off by private creditors. But
the commercial banks are not likely to be willing to do this, and it is not in the
interests of the borrowing countries to take steps that might cut them off from
normal access to private credit on favorable terms. This would also set back the
effort to encourage more open economies, more internationalization, and private
investment from abroad.
The approach that seems necessary is not that dramatic. It is the only one con-
sistent with the long term interests of creditors and of debtors in rearranging their
economic affairs in a way that growth can be sustained and enhanced without
excessive reliance on assistance from abroad. The challenge is not an impossible one
if we maintain the effort of the creditors and the spirit and morale of the debtors.
43
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III.
Lookingat the situation in the U.S. steel industry today, it is difficult to view the
state of the world economy with much optimism. Since 1979, over 250,000 steel-
workers - about 60 percent of the total - have lost their jobs. Since 1977, the
capacity of the U.S. steel industry has been reduced by 32 million tons. And after
all that, the industry functioned at only 65 percent of capacity in 1985. Other metal
industries in the U.S. are in similarly poor shape.
The source of the problem is imports. The U.S. imported 25.3 percent of its total
market in steel in 1985, even with voluntary restraints in effect. (Without them, the
amount of imported steel would have been far higher.) In addition, there are in-
direct imports in the form of items containing steel. The U.S. is using as much steel
as it ever has, but far less is produced domestically. Import penetration is far
greater than in the EEC (seven percent) or Japan (six to seven percent).
There exists an enormous overhang in steel capacity in the world. The U.S. indus-
try is forced to compete with producers with extremely low wage levels, in some
cases in countries with little recognition of human rights and none of union rights.
In all the theorizing about free trade, there is a tendency to ignore the realities of
the situation. We need to manage our trade flows, to strike a balance between
protectionism and completely free trade. We need to enter into arrangements like
the Multi Fiber Agreement and the U.S.-Canada auto pact.
Discussion
The state of the world economy and the problems and challenges facing the
Western industrialized countries were set forth in an Italian participant's presenta-
tion of the economic issues that would be taken up at the upcoming Tokyo Summit.
On the whole, the speaker said, the outlook was bright. The seven industrialized
nations were entering their fourth year of growth, and the differential in their
growth rates was decreasing. Inflation was lower, interest rates and oil prices had
declined, there was a better alignment of exchange rates, and some progress was
being made in dealing with the debt problem.
But there were some clouds on the horizon. Unemployment was still very high.
There were still large budget deficits in many countries. Several countries had size-
able current account imbalances. The future behavior of exchange rates was uncer-
tain. Trade barriers were still high, and there was a threat of protectionism. The
debt situation remained serious, and there was uncertainty about the future of
energy prices.
Against this backdrop, the main issues that would be discussed in Tokyo were:
(1) Growth. How were we to redress imbalances and assure sustainable, non-
inflationary growth? What were we to do to reduce budget deficits and to correct
current account imbalances? What should we do to increase demand in Western
Europe and Japan? How were we to accelerate the process of structural adjustment
in our economies? And how could we cooperate further in lowering interest rates?
(2) The international monetary system. Are we satisfied with what has been
done, or must we do more, and how? How can we improve coordination of eco-
nomic policies and multilateral surveillance?
(3) Developing countries. We had made some small progress in terms of lower
interest rates and the Baker plan. It would be necessary to improve that plan by
44
adding a fourth element - the role of the industrialized countries. The main issues
included the opening of our markets, a further decline in interest rates, and an
increase in our export credit policy for those countries that had begun to make
adjustments. In addition, we had to do something to promote the repatriation of
flight capita!.
(4) Trade. The next round of multilateral trade negotiations would present a
major challenge. It would be different from previous rounds in the sense that the
trading system had to be strengthened and enlarged to include the newly industrial-
ized countries. We had to commit ourselves politically to the launching pf the new
round. We needed a consensus of the major industrialized nations as to when the
new round would begin and what the agenda would be. We also had to do some-
thing to reduce subsidies in the agricultural field. We should not forget that the
multilateral trading system had been "one of the main pillars on which we built our
wealth, security, and freedom after World War I."
Addressing the question of international debt, a Swiss participant observed that,
while it had appeared to be a liquidity problem two or three years ago, it had now
become a structural and political problem. Handling it would require new methods.
The Baker initiative was timely, but it had a shortcoming insofar as it only involved
three of the four major players: the debtor countries, the lender banks, the multi-
lateral lending institutions, but not the creditor governments. They would have to
make a major contribution, because the amounts called for in the Baker plan to be
made available by banks and lending agencies were unrealistic.
An American agreed that the political dimensions of the debt problem were
"probably more important" than the economic ones. But he did not believe the
answer to the problem lay in the "fourth leg;' if that meant official money or
outright subsidies. That would not even be in the bankers' interests.
It was a British speaker's view that the international debt problem had been
exacerbated by "too much emotional talk about debts never being paid and the
resulting collapse of the world financial system." When the loans were made, he
continued, it was never anticipated that the principal would be repaid or that the
countries could operate without a "substantial inflow of permanent capital." We
had to require the debtor countries to service the debt, to better manage their econ-
omies, to accept and safeguard inward investment, and to reverse capital flight.
This last factor - capital flight - was a matter of deep concern to many partici-
pants in the discussion. A Swiss speaker felt that the problem could only be handled
by the governments themselves. But a Spaniard pointed out that flight capital was
often deposited in the same American and European banks making loans to the
countries in question. Could some form of international cooperation be developed
to "force back the money to the countries from which it fled?"
A Greek stressed the importance of foreign investment in helping to solve the
problems of developing countries. At present, he observed, the huge Japanese trade
surpluses were going into U.S. money markets. As the U.S. budget deficit declined,
would it not be possible to encourage this money to be invested in those developing
countries that were taking appropriate measures to put their economies in order?
An American agreed that foreign investment in LDC's was "absolutely critical;'
and would help create a climate for indigenous investment.
Several speakers singled out Brazil as an example of a country that had made
notable progress in improving its economy. It was true that it had been helped by
the decline in energy prices, but, as an American pointed out, it had "rearranged its
economy in a way that could support its external debt consistent with a return to
[more rapid] growth rates." A Briton agreed that Brazil deserved much credit, but
worried that, unless relief was forthcoming soon, "battle fatigue" in countries like
Brazil that were making a real effort would become a serious problem.
45
A speaker from the U.S. felt that, if we differentiated between different cate-
gories of LDC's - Africa and Latin America, for example - then we should make
distinctions in the way we treated the different categories in terms of debt manage-
ment. African countries in particular called for different prescriptions. They had
not had much growth in the 1970's, their debt was mainly official, and they had
little they could turn into productive assets. A fellow American agreed that the
situation of the African countries was different. Yet, he pointed out, many of their
problems were the same - the inadequacy of incentives, major government subsi-
dies, and corruption. Like the other debtor countries, the African countries needed
improved economic management.
The possibility that political developments in debtor countries could cloud the
current favorable outlook on the debt question worried a number of participants.
This, said an American, was a legit:mate concern, but there was cause for opti-
mism. Mexico, for example, although it had a highly bureaucratized economy with
many controls, and any economic liberalization was seen as a political threat, had
still been stable for 50 years. And Argentina, with a governing party rooted in
American-style urban intellectual liberalism, was nonetheless moving toward imple-
mentation of economic reform.
Turning to the subject of trade, an American observed that the problem of trade
was closely linked to the debt problem. We could not ask the LDC's to liberalize
their economies and look toward export-led growth if we were not willing to take
the exports. The heavily indebted countries were highly dependent on the U.S. mar-
ket. They had been able to export almost nothing to the EEC and Japan.
A German speaker observed that the developed countries tended to follow free
market principles in their own economies, but not in international trade. They
advocated free trade selectively, practicing protectionism in areas where they were
not competitive. Unless they were willing to take responsibility for free trade, the
next round of multilateral trade negotiations would not be successful. The develop-
ing countries could be expected to demand a "more balanced" situation. In this
regard, the negotiations on a new Multi Fiber Agreement were particularly impor-
tant. They would be seen by the developing countries as evidence of whether the
industrialized countries were willing to balance trade, or to be selective. If a more
liberal MFA could not be reached, then the next GATT round would be "dead."
A Canadian predicted that the next GATT round would be the most difficult yet.
For the first time, developing countries would be at the table, taking political action
through GATT rather than UNCTAD. Their agenda would be in conflict with that
of the OECD countries. In addition, the U.S. and Canada would be coming to the
talks at a considerable disadvantage, for the first time. Both were undergoing major
structural change in terms of the displacement of old technologies and materials.
The competitive situation was no longer in their favor. In agriculture, where eco-
nomic displacement was also taking place, the U.S. and Canada faced a serious
challenge from the other developed countries.
An American participant agreed that agriculture, in particular, had to be dealt
with. Problems in that sector were "causing major trade distortions," and trad~
relations would deteriorate if nothing was done. It was worth remembering that
there was significant farm belt influence in the U.S. Senate. A Canadian agreed that
domestic political factors· in the U.S. had to be considered. The new GATT roun'd
would likely be taking place soon before the expiration of the President's trade
authority and the elections in 1988. It would be "very hard for the U.S. to sustain
the free trade ideal." 1
Access to the markets of developed countries for the debtor countries was an
important new dimension in trade policy today, said a Swiss participant. It would
exacerbate the competitive situation. The debtor countries should be required to
observe rules of reciprocity. An Austrian agreed, saying we had to look at "the
46
other side of the protectionist coin - export subsidies." We could not open our
markets to products from developing countries while being shut out by highly sub-
sidized export products.
The success of the next round of trade negotiations was crucial, said an
American. The international trading system "virtually doesn't exist:' If negotia-
tions were not successful, the result would be bilateralism, unilateralism, protec-
tionism, and "go-it-alone" policies.
An overall multilateral trading system was indeed indispensible, said a Belgian.
But, if we were to have an adjusted system that dealt with the problems of the
future, and not just customs duties, then we had to address the whole subject of
currency-exchange rates. A German agreed with this, and added that the new
GATT round would not succeed as long as "distortions of parities occur erratically."
The major currencies had to have a system of stable exchange rates.
A number of participants felt the EMS provided a model for a system of target
zones for the principal currencies. The establishment of the EMS, said a German
participant, had had two major aims: to speed up the economic integration of
Europe and to enhance trade within the EEC and between the EEC and the rest of
the world. When the EMS was established, it was recognized that, for political
reasons, governments preferred to let the market set tli.e value of their currencies,
rather than taking direct action to devalue or revalue. Fixed rates forced economic
discipline on governments, making them avoid policies that contributed to budget
deficits and trade imbalances. Central banks were forced not to monetarize deficits
by broadening money supply policies.
A new system of target zones, continued the speaker, should include, at least for
the rest of this century, the dollar, the yen, and, ultimately, the ECU. (Until ster-
ling joined the EMS, it would have to be the deutschmark.) The system had to carry
the threat that there would be a penalty to pay for a government whose currency
moved out of the target zone. Governments would have to "stand up and bear the
consequences of public criticism."
A Dutch speaKer observed that the EMS had worked "surprisingly well;' thanks
to the existence of a framework for economic policy, the political will to stick
together, the external discipline imposed on governments, and the public psy-
chology about what currencies should be worth. In the case of target zones, a looser
system was called for. The markets, although they wanted some sort of official
guidance, would "always want to beat the margins if they were known." Hence, the
system might be defeated.
An International participant agreed with this, saying that the success of the EMS
was due to its "constraining character." In order to have a constraining effect in a
system of target zones, it would be necessary to have a published target zone and a
set of consequences if a currency moved out of the zone. After ten years of letting
currencies float, to move to such a system at once risked its failure. A less for-
malized system, with lesser constraints was needed at first - perhaps unpublished
target zones.
An American emphasized that exchange rates were not "an independent vari-
able." They depended upon such factors as inflation rates, potential growth rates,
and the overall investment climate. What was particularly needed was a "more
intensive dialogue to harmonize a range of policy variables." Without it, it would
be difficult to agree on hard target zones. With the EMS, the EEC had made prog-
ress by establishing a framework for an improved dialogue on policies and by
attempting to harmonize domestic policies. It was a useful pattern for the Group of
Five to follow.
A participant from the U.S. expressed his concern that, amid all the talk of deal-
ing with debt, harmonizing trade, and coordinating currencies, little had been said
about the problem of jobs. Unemployment was still very high in the Western indus-
L17
trialized countries, and something had to be done about it. It could not be left to
the market.
Several speakers were particularly worried about unemployment in Europe. A
Briton feared that unemployment was "becoming a European disease." In the last
20 years, the U.S. had created 20 million jobs, while the EEC had lost two million.
There seemed to be a "loss of entrepreneurial activity" in Europe, especially in the
U.K. This was attributable, in the speaker's view, to several factors: (1) an educa- i
tional system that had taught the young to look down on careers in trade and indus-
try and to regard wealth creation as "something not quite nice;" (2) a tax and fiscal·
system that had been seen as a redistributive mechanism, taxing not wealth, but the
creation of wealth; (3) a general belief that "governments can make people good!'
The U.S. economy, on the other hand, was characterized by optimism, vigor, and
individualism. Large enterprises were regulated, but the individual entrepreneur had
a great deal of freedom. The opposite was true in Europe. Individual enterprise was
virtually discouraged. Another factor contributing to unemployment, concluded the
speaker, was the social welfare system in Europe, which was seriously out of
balance. When individuals could receive 85 percent or more of their in-work income
on the dole, there was little incentive to work.
An International participant agreed that Europe was hampered by a very rigid
labor market, while a lack of rigidity had helped the U.S. On the other hand;
productivity in the U.S. had been rising only very slowly, and this had helped
employment. But it was not the best prescription for Europe.
Several speakers stressed the need for training and education in both the U.S. and
Europe. An American pointed out that this was especially important in view of the
"aging population pyramid,'' which implied that, in the future, fewer workers
would be supporting a larger population of retirees. The answer lay in higher pro-
ductivity, but workers required training for higher productivity jobs.
A Briton felt that the industrialized countries had been concentrating in recent
years on restraining inflation rather than on promoting growth. Perhaps the time
had come to emphasize inflation less and pay more attention to creating growth and
employment opportunities. Were we not too cautious in always looking for finan-
cial stability?
An Irishman wondered if slow growth was a temporary phenomenon and more
rapid growth would resume once structural ajustments were complete. Or was slow
growth going to stay with us? We ought to be examining its fundamental causes.
Was there a danger that the swing against the policies of the past was being carried
so far as to "obscure the need for demand policies?"
Achieving a higher rate of growth in Europe and Japan was particularly impor-
tant, in the opinion of several speakers. An Italian wondered what was the best way
to stimulate domestic demand that was non-inflationary and created employment.
Certainly labor market flexibility was part of the ans,wer. But there were also capital
constraints in Europe that had to be removed. The investment component had to be
stimulated. Insisting on low real interest rates would encourage investment of a
capital intensive sort. Another policy alternative would be to "facilitate the flow of
financial resources to promising initiatives!' Capital market flexibility was as
important as labor market flexibility.
It was an International speaker's view that disinflation would have a beneficial
effect on growth, because it amounted to an increase in the real money supply.
Even if monetary policy remained unchanged, there would still be a stimulative
effect. With stock markets and financial markets booming and interest rates declin-
ing there certainly was no liquidity problem. There was no point in trying to stimu-
late our economies further by monetary measures.
It was a British participant's view that oil price reductions had been, to a large
extent, fueling economic growth and contributing to the lowering of inflation. But
48
lower-priced oil was undermining the economics of non-OPEC oil and was increas-
ing world demand. The current ratio in world demand of 60 .percent non-OPEC to
40 percent OPEC would reverse by 1990 if prices stayed low. The U.S. dependence
on imported oil would move from tile current 30 percent to over 50 percent. Here
lay the seeds of another crisis in the early 1990's.
Other speakers shared this concern. A Belgian suggested that a new oil shock
could result from Iran winning the war with Iraq and then forcing the Gulf states to
cut production. An American believed that the current oil price situation would be
reversed; the only question was when. A rise in oil prices would alter the inflation
situation, because we had not made as much real progress against inflation as we
should have. The decline in oil prices had obscured our continuing problems.
Another Ameircan worried that, having worked in the 1970's to cut dependence on
imported oil and increase reserves, we were now letting our guard down. A new
dependence on Middle East oil had not only financial implications, but would be a
real security problem.
Another worry for several participants was the consequences of our failure to
control budget deficits. A Canadian pointed out that his country was a "worst
case" example. In the last ten years, revenues had doubled while spending had
tripled. Canada's debt had increased by 650 percent, from 19 percent to 50 percent
of GNP. Interest payments had gone up from 12 percent to 32 percent of revenue.
How long could this sort of thing go on? In the speaker's view, the Gramm-Rud-
man-Hollings Act in the U.S. had "the mark of despair but also the stamp of
reality." We had to face the moral implications of our countries' living beyond their
means year after year.
Another challenge we faced, an Austrian pointed out, was to overcome- the "sov-
ereign nation-state mentality" that too often prevented our working together.
Sovereign governments had to discipline themselves, added an American. But
because of the growing interdependence among our countries, there had to be a
greater degree of "shared sovereignty." The cost to our domestic economies of
international disruptions were far greater than they were 10 years ago. None of us
could afford to go it alone.
49
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: TERRORISM
Opening Remarks from the Panel, I.
Terrorism has been with us for a long time, but state-sponsored terrorism is a
relatively new phenomenon. The U.S. believes it is becoming a major world prob-
lem and is concerned that Europe is not yet so persuaded. Free nations must not
tolerate state-sponsored terrorism, nor must they negotiate with or be intimidated
by terrorists.
Libya is the principal sponsor of terrorism. It finances terrorist acts, it trains
terrorist groups, it supplies arms, ammunition, passports and other documents to
terrorists, and it uses its embassies, so-called peoples' bureaus, as weapons store-
houses and sanctuaries for terrorists. Recently, Libya has been escalating its
involvement in terrorism.
U.S. actions against Libyan terrorism are not new, and so the bombing raid
should not have been a complete surprise. The U.S. first charged Libya with spon-
soring terrorism in 1979. In 1981, the U.S. imposed limited trade sanctions against
Libya and closed its Washington embassy. In 1986, total sanctions were imposed,
and the departure of all American citizens from Libya was ordered. All commercial
transactions between Libya and the U.S. were prohibited. The President considered
and rejected military action at that time, but he reserved the right to use it in the
future. American efforts to enlist the support of its European allies in combating
Libyan terrorism met with little success.
Libyan terrorism continued despite these measures. The evidence of Libyan
involvement in the bombing of the Berlin discotheque was "overwhelming and
irrefutable." The U.S., in addition, received intelligence reports of a large number
of actions planned by Libya against American citizens, mainly in Europe, but also
in Latin America and in the U.S. And so, with peaceful measures exhausted, the
U.S. decided on a "limited military action designed to persuade Khaddafi that he
could not continue to attack American citizens around the world with impunity."
From a military point of view, the attack on Libya was successful. It is too early
to determine what the effect might be on Khaddafi, but he has been "strangely
silent" since the attack. The Soviet reaction was mild and not supportive of Libya.
The public reaction of the Arab world was mild, and, privately, some moderate
Arab states have voiced support of the U.S. action. But there seems to be a lack of
support and understanding from the non-aligned nations and from some of the
U.S. 's European allies. There is a degree of bitterness toward Europe among
Americans as a result. It is to be hoped that this bitterness, as well as the European
condemnation of the U.S. action, will be short-lived. The question we now face is
what can we do together to influence Libya to cease its sponsorship of terrorism.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, JI.
Neither the U.S. nor Europe has the answer to the problem of international ter-
rorism. In the fight against international terrorism, it should be the principal objec-
tive of the alliance to use political means to isolate the terrorist movement. The use
of force should not be renounced, but an attempt should be made to reach a con-
sensus on when force should be used. In the Achille Lauro incident, for example,
Italy was ready to intervene militarily, as the U.S. had requested, but it first wanted
to attempt to isolate the terrorists politically. The attempt succeeded, and there was
no further loss of life.
It is appropriate to ask what international terrorism is. In addition to attacks
against European and American citizens and interests, there have been terrorist
attacks involving many other countries, particularly in the Middle East. Inter-
national terrorism has many targets and many origins. Is it proper to fight against
only one of the originators?
Europe and the U.S. are united in their opposition to international terrorism, but
they have different perceptions about what is the best combination of economic,
political, and. military measures to use against it, and when to use them. Most
Europeans feel that not all of the other possibilities of isolating Khaddafi were fully
explored. Italy, for example, has taken several measures against Libya, in spite of
its extensive economic interests there. They include an arms embargo, trade reduc-
tion, limitations on the number of Libyan diplomants and restrictions on their
movements, new visa restrictions, and Italian control of Libya's diplomatic pouch.
Nor is Italy opposed to using force when appropriate. In the wake of the Libyan
attack on Lampedusa Island, Italy has declared its intention to respond militarily to
another such attack.
In the case of international terrorism, the vital interests of the U.S. and of
Europe are the same. Hence, we need consultations on how to combat the problem.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III.
It is important to recognize that the differences between the U.S. and Europe on
the subject of Libya do not arise from anti-Americanism in Europe. The American
people and way of life remain very popular in Europe. But the differences over
Libya do reveal a profound crisis in transatlantic relations - perhaps the worst
crisis in the history of the alliance. When two-thirds of the American people sup-
port the raid on Libya and two-thirds of the Europeans oppose it, then we face a
serious estrangement.
No one in Europe has any illusions about Khaddafi's behavior, but he is not the
only one supporting terrorism, and may not even be the principal one. Strong
doubts exist about Libyan involvement in the airport attacks in Rome and Vienna.
The evidence is not that clear, and the best verdict that most Europeans can come
up with is "not proven." This is why Europe did not go along with the U.S. on
sanctions last January. '
Even if the evidence against Libya was watertight, would that justify the attack
against Libya on moral grounds? Would it vindicate the "killing of Libyan inno-
cents in order to save the lives of Western innocents?" The killing and injuring of
civilians in the U.S. bombing struck many Europeans as barbarism, as fighting
terror with terror.
The raid was counter-productive. It has made Khaddafi into a hero in Libya. And
other Arab nations, no matter how much they may dislike him, have been forced to
rally behind him. The effects ·are especially damaging for moderate regimes like
those in Tunisia and Egypt. In terms of the effect on relations with the Soviet
Union, the raid may have derailed the next summit meeting.
Europeans are concerned that the American action will instigate "more murder-
ous plots" from Libya or other nations. These may be primarily directed at
52
American targets, but their victims will include other nationalities as well, just as
the discotheque bombing did. Perhaps terrorists will go after nuclear weapons in
Europe. The fallout from the U.S. action could include "an endless series of repri-
sals and counter-reprisals, a new freeze in East-West relations, and a new estrange-
ment in transatlantic relations." If the U.S. sees international terrorism as the
West's number one problem, then its priorities are wrong.
The U.S. is also wrong to criticize the Europeans for not offering another alter-
native to military action. In some situations, there is no solution. It is wrong to
conclude that it is better to do something than to do nothing. More energetic
measures against terrorism, involving police, technical, and intelligence coopera-
tion, are appropriate, but they should not be undertaken "in the framework of a
new crusade."
Opening Remarks from the Panel, IV.
Rather than one dominant European response to the American action against
Libya, there are differences of opinion. Some polls indicate considerable popular
approval of the action. So we should not generalize about either European public
opinion, or about the attitudes of European governments.
The U.S. has shared its evidence of Libyan involvement in the Berlin discotheque
bombing with European governments, and they accept the evidence. The West
German Chancellor has stated that his government has independent evidence of
Libyan involvement. The evidence has not been made public because doing so
would compromise the gathering of intelligence on terrorist activities.
The West has missed an opportunity for joint action on the problem of terrorism.
The Europeans favor diplomatic action, but, to be effective, diplomacy must work
"through a pattern of incentives and disincentives designed to influence behavior."
Europe has not been willing to address this question; the argument that economic
sanctions never work is an excuse for not fully examining them. Before the U.S.
action, there was no discernable interest in Europe in taking action against Libya.
In the communique following the meeting of EEC foreign ministers to discuss ter-
rorism, Libya was not even mentioned.
It is an exaggeration to say that we now face one of the most serious crises in the
history of the alliance. We have had disputes in the past over contingencies outside
of the NATO area, and this one is not qualitatively different. But, in the long run,
our failure to develop a consensus on how to deal with security problems in the
third world will confront us with a profound crisis.
Since World War II, there has been a reversal of the roles of Europe and the U.S.
with respect to the third world. Formerly, the Europeans, with their colonial inter-
ests, were willing and able to project military power into the third world. The U.S.
tended to be anti-colonial and took a "moralistic approach" to the use of military
power. Now the U.S. is a global power with security responsibilities in the third
world, while Europe seems "increasingly parochial" and unwilling to support the
U.S. in these commitments.
The West faces a serious problem if the European attitude is that the U.S. should
only be able to use force in the direct defense of Europe, because when it uses force
elsewhere it undermines domestic support in Europe for the alliance, and it under-
mines East-West detente. Growing European parochialism, in terms of its own
security interests and its desire to preserve peace in Europe, will inevitably lead to
53
growing U.S. unilateralism. Libya is only the most recent example of the urgent
need of the West to work out a common approach to regional security problems.
Discussion
The grounds on which many Europeans opposed the U.S. bombing raid on Libya
were set forth by an Irish participant, who expressed deep concern about the impact
of the action on transatlantic relations. First, it was Europe that was most directly
effected by the fallout from the American action, both in terms of possible new
terrorist acts carried out on European soil, and in terms of the economic impact of
the sharp decline in tourism resulting therefrom. Second, the Europeans felt they
should have been consulted, not just informed, about the planned U.S. action. "An
action on behalf of all civilized nations can not, by definition, be unilateral," said
the speaker. Third, there was genuine European concern about the morality of the
action. And fourth, the action was very likely counter-productive in that it might
strengthen Khaddafi and weaken the stability of the moderate Arab regimes.
A number of speakers criticized the bombing as being a violation of international
law. A Dutchman argued that the U.S. had failed to exhaust all political and diplo-
matic measures before taking the military option. There should have been attempts
to put the issue of Libya's conduct before the UN Security Council or the
International Court of Justice. It was an American's opinion that his country, in
killing innocent civilians, had followed the principle of collective punishment as
practiced by the Nazis in World War II. Europe, added a Briton, viewed the bomb-
ing with "particular revulsion" because of its own historical experience.
Many participants in the discussion were concerned about the effect of the U.S.
action. A British speaker felt it would not reduce the risk of terrorism from Libya·
or anywhere else. To think that it would, added a German, was an example of
American "naive optimism." Even if Libya were wiped out, terrorism would still
function. History would show, worried an American, that the bombing had
worsened the situation, with respect to terrorism and to the whole Middle East
problem. A number of speakers thought that Khaddafi's position had probably
been enhanced. There had been indications, said an Irishman, that his position in
Libya was getting weaker, but now it was likely it had been strengthened. It was
only natural that Libyans would rally behind their leader in such a situation.
Others expressed concern that Khaddafi's position in the Arab world might also
have been strengthened. A Briton observed that "our friends in the Middle East"
had been forced to publicly express support for the Libyan leader. This could have
damaging implications for the stability of moderate Arab states who were facing the
threat of increased fanaticism in their own populations. AFrenchman observed that
the American action risked a rupture in relations with the very people we needed to
maintain contacts with to make progress in the Middle East - Mubarak, Hussein,
and the Saudis. A British speaker was sure the damage had been done, saying the
raid "had destroyed Western influence in the Arab world and had gravely under-
mined the West's few remaining friends there."
The question of evidence of Libyan involvement in terrorist activities was a
source of considerable debate among speakers. While no one questioned the evi-
dence of Libya's role in the Berlin discotheque bombing, some participants felt that
the evidence presented by the U.S. on a Libyan connection to the Rome and Vienna
airport attacks was less than convincing. Why was the U.S. not more forthcoming
with its sources, wondered some. An American explained that the U.S. was reluc-
tant to compromise its .sources of information. He went on to say that he was
54
troubled that the European allies doubted the evidence presented by the President
and Secretary of State. A lack of trust among the allies would only foster American
unilateralism. Another American felt it was wrong to "ask for judicial proof in
circumstances that are inherently ambiguous."
Other speakers needed no convincing about Libyan involvement in numerous ter-
rorist activities over the years. Khaddafi's support for terrorism had been well
known for a long time, said a Briton. Europe had failed to take action, and thus
had to bear some of the responsibility for the American raid. A countryman agreed,
and wondered why no collective action had been taken against Libya when
Khaddafi first transformed his embassies into "peoples' bureaus." It had taken the
murder of a policewoman by Libyans inside the "peoples' bureau" in London to
prod the British into closing it. Yet, the speaker continued, the U.K. had gone on
training Libyan pilots. A German participant felt that Europe had been "much too
timid" and should have closed the "peoples' bureaus," ordered European citizens
out of Libya, and stopped buying Libyan oil. Europe should also have realized that
"American patience was exhausted."
It was the view of an American that the bombing would probably never have
taken place had the Europeans earlier taken the steps against Libya that they had
been taking in the aftermath. But a British speaker doubted that the Europeans
would have done anything had the U.S. not taken military action. it was all very
well to call for diplomacy, but to be effective, diplomacy sometimes had to be
"alarmed" by the use of force:
A Belgian intervened with the observation that it was not likely that the funda-
mental difference of opinion on the American raid would be resolved. It was appro-
priate, therefore, for us to turn our attention to the question of where we went
from here in combatting terrorism.
A German observed that the ultimate test of the effectiveness of the U.S. action
depended on the "degree of convergence between the U.S. and Europe on the ques-
tion of fighting international terrorism." There was near unanimity among partici-
pants in the discussion that closer cooperation and consultation were essential. We
needed first to put emotion behind us and try to reach a consensus on joint action
to deal with the problem, said an Irishman. An Italian suggested that the upcoming
Tokyo Summit would be a good opportunity to begin, not by agreeing on sp.ecific
measures necessarily, but by sending a "message of cohesion and solidarity."
Consultation was all well and good, said an American speaker, but we also
needed to determine what we agreed on and what we did not agree on. It was
unrealistic to think we could all approach foreign policy problems the same way.
There were going to be differing perceptions of vital interests, and we would have
to isclate those interests where there was a need for autonomous action. We then
had to agree on how to "limit the implications of the autonomous action." If ·we
could not agree on everything, we had to figure out how to handle the disagree-
ment. It was not in the European interest to undermine the U.S.'s determination to
defend its vital interests, lest the U.S. do the same to the Europeans.
A German agreed that, if we could not work a common approach, then we
should aim for a joint understanding of what the problems were, which ones had to
be dealt with together, and which ones could be dealt with unilaterally. This would
not necessarily lead to harmony - there would still be public reactions to unilateral
action even if it had been agreed to in advance. But it was "better than being
surprised.''
In an American speaker's view, consultation went "hand-in-hand with
responsibility.'' The implementatio11 of the I979 INF decision had been successful
because both the U.S. and Europe. had taken join responsibility for implementa-
tion. In situations outside the NATO area, there was not the same sense of joint
responsibility and common interest. But the West had made some progress in arriv-
55
ing at a joint approach to the Middle East problem. What was needed now was an
agreement on a division of labor among the Western countries. We had to get away
from the notion that Europe was the "good cop" and the U.S. the "bad cop." The
"key to a successful consultation" would be Europe's "playing a stronger, more
unified role and accepting more responsibility in regional security situations."
Another American stressed that the U.S. was ready to have consultations. But its
objective was to stop terrorism, and consultation was no substitute for action.
Consultation should not be used "to do nothing." It must lead to positive steps.
It was the opinion of several speakers that the place to start in dealing with state-
supported terrorism was to examine its root causes. A Dutch participant pointed
out that, in order to make progress in diplomatic efforts to enlist the support of
Arab states in the fight against terrorism, the whole Middle East situation, the
Palestinian issue in particular, had to be addressed. An American agreed, saying the
Palestinian issue was "fundamental to Khaddafi's activities." In his view, the "deep
Palestinians grievance [had] been allowed to fester far too long." We need to "give
a new impetus to the peace process in the Middle East;' advised an Italian. A
German added that to give priority to the fight against terrorism while letting the
peace process slide "did not betray much judgement."
But an American argued that progress in the peace process would not be enough
to solve the problem of terrorism. It was no substitute for a concerted effort to
fight terrorism. Radical elements opposed to progress in the peace process could be
counted on to use terrorism to disrupt it. Furthermore, the Arab-Israeli dispute and
the Palestinian situation were not the only serious problems in the Middle East. The
contest between the moderate Arabs and the fundamentalists was an even more
dangerous source of terrorism.
Turning to specific measures the West should take against Libya, an American
called for improved cooperation in police and intelligence work, the closing of all
Libyan "peoples' bureaus,'' the termination of all activities supportive of Libya,
such as pilot training, and the cessation of purchases of Libyan oil.
Another American argued forcefully for this last measure. Europe was wrong to
feel that economic sanctions would not be effective. It was true they had failed in
the past, but the Libyan case was different. Its reliance on one export, oil, made it a
"good candidate" for sanctions. The West, he concluded, should follow a triple-
track strategy, comprising (1) diplomacy backed up by economic and diplomatic
sanctions and the use of force as a last resort; (2) a more concerted European role
in the third world; and (3) an active diplomatic process aimed at solving the prob-
lems in the Middle East and in other volatile regions.
A Belgian speaker concluded the discussion by stressing that there really was no
divergence of opinion about Libyan involvement in terrorism, and the determina-
tion of Europe _to take action would be apparent in the weeks to come, as Libyan
diplomats were "sent packing." The debate about the U.S. raid had been emo-
tional, but it was important that we allow the expression of emotion without
jeopardizing the more profound common belief in preserving the alliance. Disagree-
ments should not be allowed to influence that belief. We also had to be careful of
the tendency of Europeans, when they disagreed .with the U.S., to view it as being
reckless, and the tendency of Americans, when they disagreed with Europe, to view
it as parochial and inward-looking. Finally, it was important to have consultations
about our involvement in situations outside the NATO area, and to accept the
responsibility of the consequences ·of those consultations. ·
56
V. SOUTH AFRICA
Working Paper
THE WILL TO INTERVENE
Every western government is under pressure to ''do something about South
Africa". In most cases this means seeking an end to apartheid and a peaceful tran-
sition to black majority rule. This pressure is intense, demanding comprehensive
intervention in the internal affairs of an autonomous state. Yet the forms of inter-
vention are controversial, and the results embarrassingly elusive. This has led to
frustration and a widespread cynicism over the will of western governments to
"stand up to apartheid".
Four ways of exerting leverage over South Africa can be identified:
(1) Military confrontation, either direct or through proxies: now being pursued
by Russia through support for Angola and the ANC in Lusaka.
(2) Friendly alliance and the exploitation of military and economic assistance.
This was tried by the West in the 1950's and 60's but mostly served to increase
security and self-sufficiency out of proportion to any increase in leverage. It was
probably counterproductive to the struggle against apartheid (though not much).
(3) "Constructive engagement". Developing those contacts which are likely to be
effective levers and using them selectively to achieve particular policy goals. Adum-
brated by Dr. Chester Crocker, now of the State Department, it implies deep and
controversial contact with South Africa and is vulnerable to the charge of
appeasement.
(4) Disengagement. The withdrawal of political and economic contact, to isolate
South Africa and put pressure on its policy-makers through exclusion. It is the
policy adopted by the UN and Commonwealth and liberal politicians in Europe and
America.
For western governments at present, policies 3 and 4 (the "thin carrot" and "big
stick" options) are the most realistic. Debate between the two is lively. Disengage-
ment has the best tunes. It is antagonistic and appeals to interventionists. As a
global "law-and-order" policy, it is active rather than passive. Sanctions can be
imposed and, if they fail to yield results, can be made more severe. Engagement is
less rhetorical. It is covert rather than overt. Lack of obvious results means pressure
to reverse rather than strengthen the policy - with the resulting mix of sticks and
carrots "sending confused messages" to the victim nation.
Both options suffer from the difficulty of assessing leverage. Policy options tend
to be discussed in terms of their ease of imposition, not the likelihood of their
altering events on the ground in South Africa. Yet leverage is a function, not just of
its own force, but of conditions at the other end of the lever. These conditions have
been frequently misread by analysts in the two decades since Sharpeville.
Despite continuing, growing lawlessness, South Africa is not in a pre-revolution-
ary state. There is no alternative elite to seize power, as in Iran, or to mount a
countervailing military challenge to a still-coherent white rule. Any coup in South
Africa at present would more probably be from the right. Events are most likely to
unfold as follows:
• Disorder rises and falls but on an upward graph, with the police/army exercis-
ing less authority over black homelands and townships.
• Black self-rule will spread de facto, but on a strongly tribal basis. Political
barter will develop between white, coloured, Indian and black leaders, sup-
planting much of local government and fragmenting black power.
• Intertribal violence will increase - including between the whites. There will be
a rise of militarism among Afrikaners and a return to romantic Kommando
traditions. White terrorism will grow as will police indiscipline.
57
• Parliamentary and other freedoms will diminish. Society and the economy will
become more besieged. South Africa's world image will mutate from that of
hated developed nation to one more appropriate to a conventional African or
Latin American state.
External leverage on this process will be limited and will decline as security deteri-
orates. Embattled regimes customarily become more introverted, their rulers
increasingly obsessed with sustaining a constituency of home support. Afrikaner
Nationalists are xenophobic - unlike the English-speakers by whom westerners
tend to judge South African morale. External measures taken against them must
therefore meet two criteria: they must be capable of implementation AND they
must demonstrably shift the Nationalist power structure in the desired direction.
Measures directed primarily against English-speakers are unlikely to promote
change and may have counter-productive side effects. (Recent pressure has seen
liberal opposition to apartheid demoralised yet left formal apartheid largely
unscathed.)
THE TOOLS OF LEVERAGE
(1) DEFENSE/DIPLOMACY. Since the arms embargo, external leverage over
South Africa's security policy is limited to ad hoc intervention, for instance in
detention and passport cases involving prominent citizens and foreigners. Pretoria's
defense policy is now autonomous. Washington has supported Pretoria's diplomats
against its.soldiers in searching for a settlement in Angola/Namibia and in Mozam-
bique. Whether this has helped or hindered the quest for peace is doubtful. Presi-
dent Botha and his senior generals are strongly anti-American. The Nkomati
accord, in which Dr. Crocker was involved, was ineffective since America was not
in a position to enforce it. Moscow's deployment of SAM missiles and jets in
Angola has probably had more impact on the balance of power between hawks and
doves on Pretoria's State Security Council than Washington's constructive
engagement.
(2) CULTURAL PRESSURE. The sports boycott of ten years ago worked at first
(though only on sport, not on politics) but faded when its conditionality was not
honoured by overseas sports bodies. Cultural and academic disengagement empha-
sizes isolation, but mostly hurts English-speaking liberals. Recent changes in petty
apartheid are almost entirely the result of internal socio-economic pressures, nota-
bly from urbanization, not from external opinion. They have made little impact on
the innate segregationism of Afrikaner society. Cultural engagement can claim
modest gains, for instance scholarships for South Africans abroad and assistance
for black education in the townships. Sponsored schools, law centres and training
courses have gone some way to boost black morale, defend blacks against oppres-
sive measures and develop new black leadership. ,
(3) TRADE SANCTIONS. The familiar "blunt instrument" of international
pressure. Recent surveys suggest they "work" only when imposed briskly and
intensely and where the victim both must and can concede at once. Left in place too
long, they produce antibodies. The 20-year arms embargo against South Africa has
drastically restricted defense leverage as self-sufficiency has risen from 40% to 85%
(the rest is m.et through leakage). South Africa needs air defense equipment but is
not likely to 'get it, so there is little scope for leverage here. Similarly in energy
supplies, a combination of leakage and import-substitution has brought South
Africa within sight of self-sufficiency.
Embargos hurt by increasing the cost of trade, but any future sanctions would be
unlikely to hurt more than the past three years of recession and 60% devaulation,
from which the economy is recovering. The student of trade sanctions must distin-
guish a developing country's enjoyment of imports from its dependence on them.
58
ite living standards may decline as imports become more expensive, assuming
value of the rand takes the strain. But it is wishful thinking to see such belt-
tening as leading the white electorate towards radical reform.
he import component of black expenditure is correspondingly less. Trade sane-
s may cost some black jobs (and create others with import substitution) but any
matic rise in unemployment will be mitigated by "third world" effects: a reduc-
in the pace of urbanization, a decline in the informal economy and an impover-
1ent of the homelands and remittance country economies. There is no evidence
declining black incomes (were sanctions ever to have such effect) would lead to
k political advance, peaceful or violent. Trade sanctions would be met by a
bination of import substitution, franchising and leasing, exchange controls, the
af front-line states as intermediaries, and the collision of Latin America, Israel
the Far East. At the same time, Afrikanerdom's anti-industrial bias and belief
ationalization and regulation will limit any impact sanctions might have on
:y-making. South Africa is an inappropriate victim for this sort of
1gagement.
) DISINVESTMENT. This implies leverage only insofar as it can be manipu-
1AND insofar as that manipulation can be given political bite. Foreign invest-
'. in South Africa (85% from Europe and North America) is mostly immobile
vulnerable to nationalization. Much recent disinvestment (for instance in the
ted car industry) has assisted an overdue industrial rationalization. To many
h African economists, the time has come to "decolonise", repatriate and Afri-
;e foreign-owned and fragmented manufacturing businesses, to become more
mfficient. Though South Africa is short of management and technical skills,
approach has developed great appeal for Afrikaner ·politicians and soldiers.
y now regard the departure of foreign capital as beneficial to their security in
the short and long term. This renders Pretoria largely impervious to the threat
sinvestment.
iile the flight of foreign industry would do nothing to erode apartheid (proba-
he reverse, where Afrikaner bureaucrats are put in to run newly-nationalized
nvested" companies), its pressure would appear beneficial. The Sullivan and
odes of employment have played a part in black industrial enfranchisement.
gn firms have led the way into unionization. This has fed through into black
rship and helped cohere black communities which apartheid would have kept
!n and migratory. Though the imposition of Sullivan remains patchy, this is
1bly the most effective form of external intervention in South Africa, a "sanc-
)f engagement". It must be accepted that its acceptability as a policy is now
eroded by organized black opposition to the presence of foreign companies -
:h this opposition is not supported by all black unions or their members.
FINANCIAL SANCTIONS. The issue here is not whether limits on borrow-
y South African public and private institutions can hurt - they can - but
'ar that hurt can be turned to political account. The 1985 debt repayment crisis
•recipitated by private bankers reacting against the rise of township violence
ack of reform, at a time when shareholder pressure for disinvestment was
e: i.e., both domestic political and sovereign risk elements were involved.
Africa called a moratorium on outstanding capital repayments, which were
)tiated in early 1986.
· crisis shocked the South African banking and business community. It has
.ssumed itself to be a "first world, good risk". For a few days it appears to
mnerved President Botha, whose understanding of financial markets is lim-
{et it had no apparent longer-term impact on policy-making. Mr. Botha was
led as having overreacted by his cabinet colleagues and the influence of the
:ss/financial community has declined. South Africa's strong current account
Jling a $2 billion repayment this year. Total overseas liabilities are about $16
59
Jillion, but the debt-service ratio is sound at below 101l7o. There is no comparison
vith, for instance, Mexico or Brazil. The debt crisis has apparently passed for the
The case for financial sanctions hinges on South Africa's need for trade service
.ime being.
finance and new capital inflows. Limits on the former are costly and inconvenient
to traders and would have the same effect as trade sanctions or import controls.
New capital inflows have been falling steadily since the recession two years ago,
though new loans were being floated in London and Zurich even after the morato-
rium. A ban on new loan finance would affect those companies which have relied
on injections of foreign capital for expansion. But a switch to domestic sources
would not seem a serious short-term problem - corporate savings are high - and
the chief effect would be on business morale.
This morale has been battered over the past year, and led business to take a more
radical political stance. But this is not a sufficient condition for change in South
Africa. Radicalized businessmen have in the past made little impact on Nationalist
politicians, officials and soldiers. No one in South Africa would welcome a finan-
cial siege, but it is wrong to assume that distortions to financial markets would have
any dramatic impact on South African politics. We must remember: sanctions must
have a dramatic impact to be effective. Siege economies can swiftly adjust to altered
circumstances. The case for financial disengagement as a weapon against apartheid
is hard to sustain.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
(1) Though disengagement policies have better tunes than engagement ones, they
fare worse under scrutiny. The past 18 months have seen unprecedented pressure on
Pretoria from as large an international lobby as is likely to be sustainable. It has
been more intense than the last "big stick period", under President Carter. Presi-
dent Botha's Durban speech and its aftermath showed an imperviousness to outside
pressure. This was reinforced by the attacks on Pik Botha and the resignation of
PFP leader, van Zyl Slabbert. Although a ragged reform programme has been on
the president's agenda since his 1983 referendum victory (indeed long before it),
negotiation on fundamental power-sharing with blacks is still distant. Legal aparth-
eid remains, with segregation, homelands, group areas, and separate electorates.
Where there has been reform, such as to the race classification acts, it has been low
key, when Mr. Botha has felt strong rather than weak. The abolition of the pass
laws in April 1986 was a significant step away from classical apartheid, and one
that has been signalled for years. No domestic observer, even those totally opposed
to the government, have attributed it to more than domestic pressure.
(2) The engager's approach indicates a more genuine commitment to confronting
apartheid than the disengager's washing of hands, yet it 'can show few publicisable
results. Its best ally is the steady erosion of apartheid under the pressure of industri-
alisation and urbanisation. But the case of engagement is mostly negative: that it
does not seek further to impoverish an already poor sub-continent nor falsely raise
black expectadons. It seeks to promote dialogue rather than engender further con-
frontation and violence. It is the more "moral" policy. Yet in the past, both enga-
ger and disengager have suffered from overstating the coercive influence of western
governments on events inside South Africa. The American lobbyist, Mr. Randall
Robinson, claimed recently: "We have the power to dismantle apartheid". He is
cruelly wrong.
(3) South Africa's white politics are entering a period of leadership rivalry and
policy turmoil. The far right has yet to show its hand. More substantive concessions
to the blacks are unlikely. There will be changes, for instance in influx contro.l,
residential rights and revenue sharing with the townships. But these will come rn
60
response to internal events such as boycotts and strikes. The means of concession
will be administrative action rather than the formal changes demanded by Congres-
sional "conditionality". External pressure will have little impact on an increasingly
ad hoc policy process.
(4) Under these conditions, western governments are likely to keep their sights on
the domestic and international fronts. They will probably lean towards further
ostracism but with little conviction. Politicians will be content to delegate policy to
bodies such as the UN, EC, Commonwealth and pan-Africanist organizations,
where it will become less relevant to events within South Africa.
Other questions to consider include:
• Might it be feasible to acknowledge a reduction in government and official
engagement with South Africa, yet promote private engagement of all kinds?
• Is there further scope for foreign companies to adopt anti-apartheid pro-
grammes, and what are the extra-territorial implications of enforcing this?
• Can the West pursue a more active diplomacy with the frontline states to foster
a more integrated southern African economy (rather than the false separatism
of the SADCC anti-South African alliance)?
• Could we construct a package of "micro-sticks and micro-carrots" whereby
desegregation can be recognised internationally independent of specific legisla-
tive changes? Sport might be one area; cultural and academic contact another.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, /.
There is a consensus among our countries on our aversion to the system of
apartheid and on the strategic importance of South Africa for the West. Where
there is some disagreement is on the role the outside world should play in bringing
about peaceful change in South Africa.
The interest of the international community has been sharply focused on South
Africa since the constitutional reforms of 1983-84, which granted political rights to
the colored and Indian population, but specifically denied them to the black major-
ity. Since that time, events have moved quickly and resistance to apartheid has
received a clear impetus. In the United Nations, South Africa has been an issue for
25 years, with various resolutions being passed each year. An arms embargo was
adopted by the Security Council in the late 1970's, but then discussion of sanctions·
subsided until 1983-84.
Only in 1985 did the EEC decide to send an official mission to South Africa to
talk to the government, the opposition leaders, unions, journalists, representatives
of the business community, and numerous other groups, both black and white.
Afterwards, the EEC initiated a common, dual-track approach, combining positive
measures, such as assistance to groups working for peaceful change, and restrictive
measures, such as an oil embargo, a ban on nuclear cooperation, and the recall of
military attaches.
It is wrong to think we are helpless to influence the situation. There is an inter-
mediate possibility between engagement and disengagement. Constructive engage-
ment is not enough. Nor is total disengagement leading to a policy of excluding
South Africa a good idea. The sort or engagement we should attempt should not
exclude contact with the South African government, whose cooperation for peace-
ful change is essential. We should make it clear that economic sanctions can't be
61
avoided unless there is fundamental, timely change.
It is wrong to say economic sanctions are counter-productive. The South"African
government will always say that sanctions only hurt the black community. But the
mere discussion of sanctions has led to some significant moves by the government.
The threat of sanctions erodes the political and economic credibility of South
Africa and has an effect on the business climate. Sanctions provide a_n economic
pressure to which the government cannot remain indifferent.
The positive signs of movement in South Africa include the dismantling of
various discriminatory laws; the proposed restoration of citizenship to inhabitants
of the black homelands; abolition of the pass laws and the release of those arrested
under them. There has been discussion of more equal opportunities for education
and employment. The government has given support to the experimental multiracial
government in KwaZulu in Natal. It ::ias been announced that many more laws will
be dismantled.
The fundamental question is whether the systematic dismantling of discrimina-
tory laws will continue. It is a race against the clock. What can we do to keep the
process going and induce the government to do more? The EEC has called for such
things as the lifting of the state of emergency, the release of Mandela and other
political prisoners, and the unbanning of the ANC. Without the participation of the
banned organizations, there can be no real national dialogue.
The approach of the EEC is to maintain pressure on the South African govern-
ment, to keep the threat of more severe measures, and to remain in close contact
with groups, both black and white, that have an important role to play in a peaceful
transition process.
Opening Remarks from the Panel, JI.
In trying to understand the nature of the various political problems and crises in
southern Africa, and in searching for solutions, it is useful to take a global view of
the situation in the region. There is a high degree of interdependence among the
countries in southern Africa, resulting from geography, the way in which the means
of communication and transportation were established, and unequal economic
development.
In political terms, the independence of Namibia is linked to the situation in South
Africa and the question of apartheid. It is also linked to the civil war in Angola and
SWAPO's presence there. Nor can apartheid be detached from the situation in
Mozambique and the armed struggle of the RENAMO rebels. This struggle has
resulted in aid to the Maputo government from both Zimb
1
abwe and Tanzania, even
as the Maputo government is a co-signatory with the South African government of
the Nkomati Accord. There is also an inter-relationship between these problems and
developments in Lesotho and Zaire.
South Africa, the strongest regional power, is under internal and external siege.
Internally, tensions grow every day and reduce the government's room to maneu-
ver. They threaten the most moderate elements of the black opposition, giving way
to radical and extremist elements.
What is going on in Mozambique has a great impact on the collective destiny of
the region. Mozambique's present difficulties can be aitributed to a number of fac-
tors. Among them are the accumulated mistakes .of the initial phase of inde-
pendence; the inability of the political system to address traditional social and
cultural values; the heavy .Political and military pressure exerted, first by Rhodesia,
62
id then by South Africa; the very negative results of dependence on East Bloc
1untries; the structural problems indigenous to African societies; and finally the
suits of colonization and a long colonial war.
The vast size of the territory is conducive to the activities of various guerilla
'Oups. The Mozambiquan army is weak and lacks information, means of commu-
cation, equipment, training, motivation, and food. Furthermore, the population
growing weary, deprived as it is of essential goods. It is more inclined to concen-
ate on its own survival than on political fidelity.
Thus, there are major clouds in Mozambique's future. It is a closed society,
here the war effort is the first priority. The continuing ai:med struggle aggravates
·.e deep economic crisis. The authority of the state is disrupted, and the lack of an
:ganized structure prevents the implementation of any serious attempt at economic
:covery. The effect of foreign aid programs is blunted by the lack of a means to
rstematically gather and transport products. These same factors inhibit foreign
1vestment.
.RENAMO is largely responsible for the present state of affairs. Assisted by sup-
ort from Malawi and to some extent South Africa, it has been able to consistently
taintain the military initiative, and is capable of great mobility. It can operate by
ieans of short engagements and achieves spectacular results from disrupting com-
mnications, access routes, and energy supplies. But it lacks the credibility to pre-
mt itself as a political alternative. Because it was conceived as a tool of alien
1terests (Rhodesia and South Africa), it has been unable to achieve a political
;ructure parallel to its military potential. It lacks an ethnic base, a consistent pro-
ram, and leaders with popular appeal.
Nevertheless, presented with the vulnerability of the government, coupled with its
wn military successes, RENAMO has assumed the role of an opposition move-
1ent. It is a force that must be taken into account in any serious attempt to reach a
,egotiated settlement in the area. If it cannot be defeated, it must be a part of that
ettlement. Otherwise, Mozambique faces the prospect of being "Uganda-ized."
The survival of the Machel government is primarily due to his own personal and
1olitical qualities. It is his leadership that has maintained the cohesion and unity of
::ie regime. His personality is a key factor in holding the government together. He
.as been able to take advantage of the absence of a qualified political opponent,
'.nd to project his· authority beyond national boundaries. He has used a flexible and
1ragmatic foreign policy and the disenchantment with cooperation with the
;ommunists to approach the West, specifically, the U.S., Portugal, Italy, and the
J.K. He has done this without doing anything to jeopardize the interests or pres-
nce of Eastern countries who naturally do not wish to be excluded from the region.
Machel has also been able to maintain Jinks with the front-line countries and to
:stablish military pacts with Zimbabwe and Tanzania, which gave him the credi-
>ility to enter into the Nkomati Accord. That agreement was a heavy blow to the
;oviet Union's strategy of siege of South Africa.
For all of this, Machel deserves our support. However, the Nkomati Accord did
10t yield the political, diplomatic, and economic help that Machel expected. He
'inds himself increasingly on the defensive, and a feeling of mistrust has surfaced in
iis government with regard to Pretoria's and Washington's real aims. The failure
)f the Nkomati Accord is a warning also to other countries in the area. Washington
ms been unable to act as the guarantor of the agreement, and Machel and the other
;ront-line countries are now doubting the sincerity, and even the power, of South
'\frica.
63
Opening Remarks from the Panel, III.
It is true that there is change going on in South Africa, and that the South
African government doesn't always get credit for change. But it is also true that
some of the change that has occurred has a dynamic of its own and will lead to
further changes quite different from those intended by the government.
It is clear that the government has no intention to make structural changes, how-
ever much it may talk about dismantling apartheid. The government understands
that the language of reform is the language of the day. Its moves constitute a search
for a more modern and acceptable way to maintain white dominance. It gives on
such points as mixed marriage and mixed politics, which are not much in the way of
concessions. There have been reforms whose real significance is questionable. The
pass laws have been abolished, but the Group Areas Act, the new identification
documents, and the absence of acceptable housing indicate that the effect of the
laws remains. The state of emergency was lifted, but new proposed legislation
allows a virtually constant state of emergency without its being formally declared.
Even the government's calls for negotiation are within the structure of apartheid. It
calls for negotiations with designated leaders, but are they the true leaders? The
government does not intend to negotiate with Mandela, with the ANC, with Bishop
Tutu, or even with Chief Buthelezi.
There is a credibility gap with regard to the South African government's state-
ments about reform. The "double-speak;' the reprimand of the foreign minister,
and the violation of the Nkomati Accord and Lusaka Agreement all raise questions
about the government's intentions.
Meanwhile, there is a profound series of events going on. Opposition to apartheid
has moved from the professional, educated middle class to a group of young, impa-
tient, daring blacks who sense that the government is weaker than it appears to be.
They feel they are making the sacrifice their parents never made. They have learned
to hate. They are anti-West, anti-capitalist, and anti-American, and, particularly,
anti-Reagan. They see the U.S. and the West as selfish, if not racist. They cannot
understand or accept the rationalizations of the inability of Western countries to
influence the situation. They know that we can and do intervene in many places
around the world, and that we can and do use sanctions, even while we say they are
ineffective.
The South African populatipn, within the black community and to some extent
within the white, is becoming increasingly radicalized. The moderates are trying to
keep up with the radicals. Violence is increasing and will continue to, the lifting of
the state of emergency notwithstanding. Many of the whites feel the government
has not been tough enough. Among blacks, there is a tendency to strike out at other
blacks - policemen and councilmen, who are seen as symbols of white power - in
an effort to make the townships ungovernable. There is also increasing black
rivalry, as various groups jockey for position.
The debate about South Africa in the U.S. and Europe is quite "sterile and
beside the point.'' Both sides in the divestment debate tend to overstate their argu-
ments. South Africa is not going to fall or survive over the disinvestment question.
There have been some positive steps, such as the Sullivan principles. But the con-
tinued presence of foreign corporations is a contribution to the continuation of
apartheid. South Africa gets some advantage, even if it is only psychological, out of
being thought to be pro-Wes.tern and capitalist.
There is probably more disinvestment going on than meets the eye. Most corpora-
tions are ready to cut their losses if it comes to that. The nuisance value of operat-
ing in South Africa, especially with low profits, is increasing.
The action in South Africa is inside the black community. At some point the two
sides will have to come to some accomodation with one another. Will that happen t
ll
64 '
A
at a time when the situation is badly polarized, or will there be an effort to build a
political consensus early on? We in the outside world have more influence than we
are inclined to admit. It is important that we avoid getting involved in the disputes
among blacks. We ought to promote a dialogue, a search for a consensus, and
participation of all groups. We should not support black majority rule, necessarily,
but rather promote a political consensus growing out of whatever majority might be
put together. We should not support those actions of the South African government
whose objectives are not clear. it was a mistake for the U.S. to support the new
constitution; that contributed toward the negative image of the U.S. in South
Africa. We need to stress to the South Africans that the important thing is negotia-
tions, and they can't take place until the government does something credible
enough to persuade the blacks to come to the negotiating table. Change in South
Africa will come through a multiplicity of forces, including violence.
Discussion
The two fundamental questions that framed the discussion of South Africa were:
What was the significance of current developments inside South Africa and what
should Western policy be toward South Africa? There was considerable divergence
of opinion about whether real progress was being made in South Africa and about
what means we ought to use to influence the situation.
A Canadian wondered what the "philosophical attitude" of the South African
government was toward apartheid. His contacts with some South African leaders
led him to conclude that Botha was convinced apartheid had to go and was dis-
mantling it, virtually by stealth because of pressure from his right wing. A British
speaker agreed, saying there seerPed to be a "peeling away of the onion of
apartheid, layer by layer." Was it not logical to conclude it would get smaller and
smaller and ultimately disappear? The situation in South Africa was rapidly evolv-
ing, added an American. Even in the minds of the leaders, the end of apartheid was
inevitable.
A Briton felt that developments in South Africa over the past three or four years
had been "considerably better than anyone dared hope.'' Various reforms, such as
eradication of the pass laws, and references to power sharing represented a "poten-
tial sea change" in white attitudes. This was the only way in which we could expect
change to begin. It was unrealistic to expect an overnight conversion of whites. But
it was clear that the white establishment and the Botha government had lost faith in
apartheid. The government was now seriously prepared to contemplate power shar-
ing among the various ethnic groups. South Africa was entering a "realm of negoti-
ation and compromise, or a gradual shift of power away from white domination."
But other participants were less sanguine about the demise of apartheid. A Dutch
speaker doubted whether the government was prepared to eradicate it. A Briton
pointed out that apartheid and white supremacy were inextricably linked. Apartheid
was essential to maintaining white supremacy. The government was deeply commit-
ted to white supremacy, and there really was no question of abolishing apartheid.
We could demand that another government be installed, but we could not realisti-
cally expect the current government to abolish apartheid.
An American conceded that there had been change in South Africa, but the ques-
tion was what kind of change and was it going fast enough to outrun the growing
violence and radicalization. Structural change, in the speaker's view, was not taking
65
place. Recent developments were not very encouraging.
A number of speakers were concerned that South Africa would soon be con-
sumed by violence, in the manner of Lebanon. Was it reasonable, wondered a
Canadian, for the government to set as a condition for the release of Mandela and
the un-banning of the ANC that they abjure from violence? It was a British view
that the government would only release Mandela if doing so would decrease the
violence. A Dutch speaker argued that it was unreasonable to expect Mandela to
forswear violence when the government itself was part and parcel of the violence.
They way in which the government reacted with its police force was repressive and
gave impetus to the spiral of violence. In any event, Mandela was more of a threat
in jail than out.
A British participant thought that perhaps the situation in South Africa was qual-
itatively different in the sense that it was no longer stable and could start to deterio-
rate quite suddenly. Weren't the townships going to be an increasing problem in
this sense, he wondered.
A particular concern brought up by several speakers was Communist involvement
in South Africa, in particular in influencing the ANC. It would be easy, said a
Portuguese participant, for the Russians to exploit the "explosive situation created
by apartheid." The degree of Communist involvement, felt an American, would
depend on how fast change took place. In any event, we should not appear to be
more concerned about the Soviet Union than about the general situation, lest we
make the Africans in the region even more disenchanted with the West and depen-
dent on the Russians. A Briton agreed, warning that if "misperceived strategic
interests [led] the West to identify with the whites, the Russians in the end would
make the strategic gains."
But, in the opinion of another British participant, the situation in South Africa
was not particularly worrying from the point of view of the West's strategic
interests. The country was not about to dissolve into anarchy and lawlessness. The
situation was not so much like Lebanon as many other countries the West dealt with
in Latin American and the Far East. It was not a situation the Russians could
expect to make much impact on. The future government of South Africa was likely
to be a "shifting military coalition," still dominated by whites, and able to maintain
at least a "rudimentary state of law and order:' There would be no "one man-one
vote," and the system could continue for a long time.
It was ridiculous, continued the speaker, to talk of time running out. That hac
been said for 25 years and had always been wrong. Nor did it help rational discus.
sion or analysis of what was happening in South Africa. There was no qualitativt
change in the violence in South Africa. Morale was as low as it had been in the las.
1960's and 1970's; it tended to go in cycles. South Africa was not qualitative!)
different from other societies in crisis that had shown they could sustain conflict fo1
a long time without collapsing into anarchy. The real crisis in South Africa was "ir
the liberal conscience of the rest of the world."
In trying to determine what Western policy should be toward South Africa, ar
American said we had to ask what was the "final destination" we visualized. In th1
name of what were we supposed to bring pressure on South Africa, other than "ar
abstract statement of abolishing apartheid?" It was the task of the West, answerec
a countryman, to help the South Africans achieve a sense of certainty about when
the process was heading. In the battle against segregation in the U.S., the Constitu
tion had provided the destination; the white community at least knew where th1
process was going. We ought to help the South Africans "determine what the ulti
mate allocation of rights and responsibilities would be!' We had to work out som1
fundamental structure which would give both sides confidence.
The policy of the U.S. toward South Africa, as described by an America1
speaker, was aimed at helping design a political framework so that South Africa'
66
political future would be congruent with Western interests. The role of the West
should be to stimulate dialogue and political negotiation in order to shape the
future and determine who would have political power. We had to first insist on
basic conditions, such as the release of Mandela, the un-banning of the ANC, and a
clear blueprint for the ending of apartheid. But we also had to "find ways to steady
the government's nerves and see that power inside South Africa is not undercut:'
Botha was the only one who could "deliver the white side of the equation." We
needed to provide South Africa with incentives for change. Nor should we pick and
choose future leaders. It was important to let the ANC know that an increase in
their commitment to the Soviet Union and use of violence were antithetical to West-
ern interests and views.
In seeking a solution, continued the speaker, we should not neglect the regional
dimension. Southern Africa was a "seamless web." We could not settle the prob-
lems of South Africa without involving such countries as Mozambique, Angola,
and Namibia. A Portuguese participant agreed, saying we should diplomatically
ally ourselves with the front-line states in an effort to obtain settlements to conflicts
within them so that a "ring of stability" could be formed around South Africa.
Several speakers observed that domestic political pressure was playing an impor-
tant role in shaping policies toward South Africa. Political pressure in the U.S.,
said an American, had brought about an evolution in policy from a sharp dichot-
omy between the executive and legislative branches to a coordinated policy. The
current U.S. approach was an "interim policy" between the constructive engage-
ment advocated by the President and the more extreme measures favored by many
in Congress. The elements of U.S. policy were a condemnation of apartheid, the
imposition of limited sanctions, the establishment of a list of goals by which to
measure progress, and the threat of future sanctions if progress was not achieved.
A Swede agreed with these policy elements, but argued for a much stronger
emphasis on economic sanctions. Sweden had prohibited new investment, imposed
an arms embargo, banned nuclear cooperation, stopped importing agricultural
products from South Africa, and was urging its businesses to cut back on trade. Yet
popular sentiment in Sweden demanded more. Tough sanctions, if the Western
countries joined forces, could be effective. South Africa should be "cut off from all
gold markets and denied access to export markets."
A Briton felt that the private sector sanctions applied in the past 18 months had
had an effect on the South African government. A Dutchman agreed, saying that
the notion that sanctions would hurt the wrong people was not valid. Even the
threat of sanctions had instigated certain moves. And sanctions were one of the
only peaceful means left of promoting change.
Indeed, the question of economic sanctions, and disinvestment in particular, pre-
sented Western companies with a dilemma. Most speakers who represented compa-
nies doing business in South Africa felt they could make a greater contribution to
changing the system by remaining in South Africa than by leaving. Yet public senti-
ment in the West was against staying.
An American. reported that his company had a range of policies that assisted
blacks, including equal pay, efforts to increase the number of black employees,
legal aid, health care, and educational programs. Its current intention to stay was
motivated not by profitability, which had deteriorated, but by concern for its
employees. The company had never laid off employees anywhere for economic rea-
sons, and the speaker hoped it never would have to for political reasons.
A British speaker reported that whites were "lining up to buy his company's
business." It had received no pressure from whites to stay or from blacks to leave.
Leaving, he felt, would not help the situation. Another Briton complained that the
case for engagement was not being publicly supported. Until it was, there was a
danger that major companies would leave South Africa.
67
An American predicted that his company would likely leave because of pressure
at home. The effect on its business in the U.S. would be more of a determining
factor than any deterioration in South African business conditions. A measure of
public sentiment against South Africa in the U.K., a participant pointed out, was
that consumers were increasingly rejecting South African goods.
Yet, for all the gnashing of teeth going on in the West, Botha, said a Briton, was
not very worried about sanctions. South Africa was going through a period of
"third world-ification." Many Afrikaaners were anxious to see foreign businesses
withdraw. They wanted the economy repatriated and Afrikaaners controlling the
businesses. It was "ludicrous for the West to pretend that that process would
frighten them." We should recognize, when considering economic measures that
purported to destabilize the South African government, that apartheid was a labor
movement, rather than a capitalist one. The people who ran South Africa were
"old-fashioned socialists." They did not care if their businessmen were in revolt.
They were "unmoved by the things people in the West [felt] should move them:•
There were, at the same time, many courageous people in South Africa, contin-
ued the speaker. They were engagers, who were struggling for the cause of black
advancement, as much against Europe and the U.S. as against the white govern-
ment. They had done a great deal of good in South Africa. It was difficult to "see
the morality in our just giving up and going home."
Several speakers felt it was a mistake for the West to have excessively high expec-
tations about change in South Africa. Nothing was going to happen quickly. And in
the last analysis, said a Briton, the views of the rest of the world were, for all
practical purposes, of marginal significance to what happened in South Africa. The
future would be decided by the people who lived there.
CLOSING REMARKS
Lord Roll closed the 1986 Bilderberg Meeting by expressing, on behalf of all the
participants, appreciation to those who had made the conference a success. He
noted, in particular, the efforts of John Sainsbury and Andrew Knight, the British
members of the Steering Committee, and of the staff of the Bilderberg Secretariat.
He also acknowledged the comfortable accommodations and excellent cuisine pro-
vided by the management and staff of the Gleneagles Hotel, and the efficient secu-
rity arrangements carried out by the Tayside police department. Finally, the
Chairman thanked the working paper authors, moderators, panelists, participants
from the floor, and the interpretors.
.~
I
