. , . , 1 I'
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBUCATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
WOODSTOCK
CONFERENCE
23 - 25 April 1971
ti:'
.....
t"'
t;
t':I
~
I"'
0
ti:'
t':I
0
0
I"'
to
z
0Q
"°
.
1-rj
tJ
~
to
tr:!
(.]>
CFl
t':I
~
'
i
O
~
t':I
>-j
~
tr:!
0
.....
~
z
0
z
<O
Q
-J
0
~Ul
~
tr:!
CONTENTS
List of Participants
5
Introduction . . .
9
First Item of the Agenda
"The Contribution of Business in Dealing with Current
Problems of Social Instability"
Introduction to and Summary of the American Working Paper 13
Introduction to and Summary of the Italian Working Paper. 23
Discussion . . . . • . . • . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3I
Second Item of the Agenda
"The Possibility of a Change of the American Role in the World, and its
Consequences"
Introduction to and Summary of the British Working Paper. . . . . 49
A General Reaction by an American Participant to the Working
Paper . . 57
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
"'
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H. R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON
OBSERVER:
H. R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX OF THE NETHERLANDS
ALLISON, GRAHAM T.
ANDERSON, ROBERT 0.
AuMONIER, ANDRE
BAHR, EGON
BALL, GEORGE w.
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BENDETSEN, KARL R.
BENGTSSON, INGEMUND
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
B1RG1, M. NuR1
BOURASSA, ROBERT
CARSTENS, KARL
CARTIER, RAYMOND
CASSERINI, KARL
CATHERWOOD, SIR FREDERICK
CITTADINI CESI, MARCHESE GIANG.
COCKROFT, JOHN
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
CORSON, JOHN J.
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
SWEDEN
UNITED KINGDOM
TURKEY
TURKEY
CANADA
GERMANY
FRANCE
SWITZERLAND
UNITED KINGDOM
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
5
DEAN, ARTHUR H.
DUCHENE, L-FRANCOIS
DUNLOP, joHN T.
DUSTER, DONALD L.
ELLIOTT, OSBORN
ENCKELL, RALPH
FRASER, DONALD M.
FRELINGHUYSEN, PETER H.B.
GAZZO, EMANUELE
GLISENTI, GIUSEPPE
GRIERSON, RONALD H.
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s.
HAUGE, GABRIEL
HEALEY, DENIS W.
HEINZ II, HENRY J.
H0EGH, LEIF
HUGHES, THOMAS L.
lnENBURG, PETER]. A.
]ANN, ADOLF w.
JANSSEN, DANIEL
JuuN, jACOB VON
KAISER,. KARL
KISSINGER, HENRY A.
KLEINWORT, SIR CYRIL
KoHNSTAMM, MAx
KRAIJENHOFF, J ONKHEER GuALTHERus
LAMBERT, BARON
LEMAN, PAUL H.
LuNs, JosEPH M. A. H.
MACDONALD, DONALD s.
MACDONALD, GORDON].
MACGREGOR, IAN K.
MARTINET, GILLES
MAUDLING, REGINALD
MERKLE, HANS L.
MIGONE, GIANG.
MOYERS, BILL
NETHERLANDS, H. R. H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE
0TTONE, PIERO
PEASE, ROBERT
6
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FINLAND
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
CANADA
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
NORWAY
UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS
SWITZERLAND
BELGIUM
FINLAND
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
INTERNATIONAL
NETHERLANDS
BELGIUM
CANADA
NETHERLANDS
CANADA
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
ITALY
UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS
ITALY
UNITED STATES
,,
PERKINS, JAMES A.
PIAZZESI, GIANFRANCO
REUSS, HENRY s.
RIEGLEjR., DONALD W.
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID
ROCKEFELLER IV, jOHN D.
ROLL, SIR Eruc
ROTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE
ROTSTEIN, ABRAHAM
SCHLEIMANN, j 0RGEN
SCHRODER, GERHARD
SIMONET, HENRI
SLATER, JOSEPH E.
S0RENSEN, SVEND 0.
SPOOR, ANDRE s.
STEIN, HOWARD
STEVENSON III, ADLAI E.
STONE, SHEPARD
TERKELSEN, TERKEL M.
THOMSON, GEORGE
TIDEMAND, 0. GRIEG
TUTHILL, joHN W.
UMBRIGHT, VICTOR H.
VANISTENDAEL, AUGUST A. j.
VOGT jR., jOHN w.
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
WISCHNEWSKI, HANS-JURGEN
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO
IN ATTENDANCE:
STONE, ROGER
VERNEDE, EDWIN
UNITED STATES
ITALY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
FRANCE
CANADA
DENMARK
GERMANY
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
UNITED KINGDOM
NORWAY
INTERNATIONAL
SWITZERLAND
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
SWEDEN
GERMANY
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS
7
I
INTRODUCTION
The twentieth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Woodstock Inn, Wood-
stock, Vermont (United States) on 23, 24 and 25 April 1971 under the Chair-
manship of H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 92 participants from the United States, Canada and twelve
Western European countries as well as from various international organiza-
tions. They consisted of members of governments, politicians, prominent in-
dustrialists and bankers, lawyers, journalists, national and international civil
servants and outstanding representatives of the academic world and other
groups.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization to which they might belong. In order to enable
participants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were
confidential, with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. The Contribution of Business in Dealing with Current Problems of Social
Instability
II. The Possibility of a Change of the American Role in the World, and its
Consequences
The Meeting was opened by H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands, who
expressed the gratitude of all the participants to their American hosts. His
Royal Highness read telegrams which he proposed to send to President Nixon
and to Governor Davis of Vermont.
The Prince read a letter which he had just received from Professor John
Pesmazoglou, expressing regret at not being able to attend the Conference,
his request for a passport not having been granted by the Greek authorities.
His Royal Highness was pleased to announce that Mr. Joseph Johnson,
although retiring this year as President of the Carnegie Endowment, had
agreed to continue as Honorary Secretary General for the United States of the
Bilderberg Meetings.
After recalling the rules of procedure, The Prince turned to the first item
on the Agenda.
9
......
THE CONTRIBUTION OF BUSINESS IN DEALING WITH
CURRENT PROBLEMS OF SOCIAL INSTABILITY
The background for the discussion on this subject was provided by two
working papers, prepared by an American and an Italian participant, which
had been distributed prior to the Conference.
INTRODUCTION TO AND SUMMARY OF THE AMERICAN
WORKING PAPER
In introducing his working paper, the author remarked that the manifes-
tations of social instability varied from country to country. In the us today,
they would include problems relating to the Vietnam war, poverty, the plight
of the blacks and other minorities, crime in the streets, drug abuse, college
unrest, "consumerism", the women's liberation movement, and environmental
pollution. These manifestations were indeed so diffuse that they certainly
pointed toward some common underlying causes.
One group of these causes, in the author's view, could be categorized as the
"fallout" of the extraordinary economic advance enjoyed by many countries
during the last generation; the solution of previous problems had generated
new ones. At the same time, there was a growing emphasis on what was summed
up in the phrase "the quality of life". Affluence was increasingly regarded,
not as an end in itself, but as an instrument for realizing non-material values.
This new mood had brought a hazardous challenge to the work ethic which
had been so strong in American society.
In considering the potential of business to contribute to the resolution of
social instability, it was fair to begin by saying that the credentials of business
were in good standing. In the us, this was due to the performance of the post-
war economy and to the fact that business had shown a greater capacity for
change than had some other institutions, notably the universities, the churches,
and government itself. But the price of a congenial business climate kept rising.
The prodigious discharge ofsocial responsibilities involved in the extraordinary
production of the variety of goods and services demanded by the market had
come to be taken for granted. It was a back-handed compliment from its critics
to assume that business would continue this production, but henceforth with
"job enrichment" and without impairing the environment, and that it could
go on to tackle many other social problems which had not previously been on
its agenda.
In confronting these challenges, business had to defend itself on several
fronts at once. While safeguarding its cost-effective approach, or "profit mo-
13
JI
tive'', it had to contend with the durable myth that "making money" was
somehow incompatible with the exercise of social responsibility. It also had to
deal with increasingly activist consumers and shareholders, whose concern
with its policies was being expressed in novel ways. These new challenges to
business were matched by a growing disenchantment with the capabilities of
the public sector, which had led the sociologist Kenneth Clark to conclude
that "business and industry are our last hope in America because they.are. the
most realistic elements of our society." ,
The author suggested a number of questions which might be dealt with in
the discussion of this subject: ,
r. How seriously was o.ne prepared to take the problem? How much time
were individuals prepared to devote to correcting the deficiencies ofthe present
system? This was a fundamental question, since developing new devices and
institutions would be a waste of time if there was no general resolve to make
them work.
2. Howfar could one go in the dilution ofcost-effectiveness, or the profit motive,
without undermining incentives for good management?
3. In what situations was it unreasonable to expect business to provide the
whole solution to a given problem?
4. To what extent could business be relied on to cooperate voluntarily, without
the threat of coercion? Was there not a need for precise rules and guidelines,
within the framework of which competitive forces would be free to operate?
5. Should the business community feel a sense of responsibility beyond the
requirements of the law, or was this an area to be left to the judgment of
each individual or company?
* * *
The author began by saying that the roots ofsocial instability in the us were
many and complex, but that he would deal with two in particular: a new
awareness of the side effects of unprecendented economic growth of the last
generation; and the awakening to a new emphasis on the quality oflife, as a
result of the affluence that had been achieved for most, although not yet by
any means for all.
American society was both beneficiary and victim of a unique growth in
quantity. Per capita income had increased eight-fold during the past century,
while population had grown five-fold and in cities over one million by seventy-
fold. It was no accident that urbanization and population growth had accom-
14
panied the gain in productivity. Since 1950 real GNP in the us had doubled,
the median education of the adult population had risen one-third, and the
proportion of the labor force in professional and technical jobs had nearly
doubled. Meanwhile, the stock of automobiles, for example, had more than
doubled. Congestion and pollution had increased at least as fast, while life ex-
pectancy had remained virtually unchanged. And so the question was in-
creasingly debated as to how much the sum of human happiness had risen,
and whether economic growth was not creating problems faster than it was
solving them.
Awareness of the quality oflife and emphasis on protecting the environment
constituted unfinished business carried over from the material surge ahead in
recent decades, as did the elimination of residual poverty and lack of oppor-
tunity, the rural lag and urban blight. Consumerism, another aspect of this
unfinished business, was the gospel ofproductive efficiency from the perspective
of buyer and user instead of producer and seller.
There was another, more forward-looking side to social instability. The long
struggle against want was well on the way to being won, and many people
were floundering, not only because their choices were so much wider, but also
because widespread material prosperity was regarded as no more than an
instrumental value. After having oriented our economy and society for so
long, it was so near achievement that it could no longer serve as a guide in
any simple way. From the search for new priorities and instrumental values
derived much of the social instability of the day.
High levels of output and continued growth nowadays were usually taken
as given, and even the elimination ofcongestion and pollution as accomplished,
because these were not values or goals of life, but only conditions for their
fulfillment. We knew that racial discrimination was wrong, and we were
working on the moral equivalent of a heart transplant. We knew what a city
should not be, and were proceeding to eliminate its flaws. But we had yet to
learn what a city should be. We knew what a corporation should not do: dis-
criminate, pollute, exploit. But what should it accomplish, besides efficiently
producing a product or service the public wanted?
BUSINESS TODAY
Many business leaders had for generations carried their social responsibility
into practice. They were once damned as paternalistic for their trouble, but
attitudes had changed, and what some businessmen had always done by per-
sonal choice was now increasingly accepted as a civic duty. The concept of
the public interest had been transformed, while beliefin the power oforganized
society to set and reach goals had escalated expectations, propelling many
15
I
I
!I
11
ii
11
fl
"
formerly passive citizens to raise their voices and sometimes their fists. They
saw business as a major influence on the course of events, and sought to take a
hand in its direction. The clear separation of roles as worker, as citizen, as
consumer, that once characterized Americans, had become blurred.
At the same time, the family firm had been largely replaced by the corpora-
tion whose products and markets were constantly changing, as were its tech-
nologies, plant locations, employees and stockholders. The owner-founder
had usually been succeeded by professional managers who were responsive to
several publics, sharing a broad perspective as to the place oftheir corporation,
and of business at large, in society. Multiple objective management was the
pride of the modern corporation, and the fact that some objectives were social
rather than financial did not seem to overawe the well-schooled business ad-
ministration graduate. Large modern corporations, run by such managers,
supervised by directors chosen by stockholders, and constrained by creditors,
governments, employees and customers, were as complex as many govern-
ments and typically more dynamic. They provided most of the research and
technological progress that on one hand complicated the environment, human
health and social welfare, and on the other hand provided the resources to
counter these threats, with affiuence and security to spare.
EVOLVING ROLE OF BUSINESS
Because of their overall performance, corporations were increasingly being
asked to extend their activities beyond the core function of efficient production
and marketing ofgoods and services. There were even some demands that they
become political supermarkets, establishing and enforcing a full line of foreign
and domestic policies.
The emergence of the corporation as the change-agent of society reflected a
questioning judgment on government. When the self-regulatory functioning
of the economy broke down in the Ig3o's, government had stepped in. Now,
after a generation of nearly uninterrupted economic growth, business had
reestablished its credentials. In fact, what had caught public attention in
recent times was the inefficiency of government programs in such diverse
areas as education, welfare, postal service, medical care, poverty and malnu-
trition. Although some still believed that the public establishment was omni-
competent and that business did not care, many had begun to doubt that
government could carry out the great remaining domestic missions, and were
turning hopefully to business as the only feasible alternative.
Business, of course, was already discharging enormous social responsibilities
in performing its accustomed tasks. Without its income and wealth-creating
power, we could not afford the tomorrow that our people aspired to. The dilem-
I.6
~1·
i)~
'./
'
ma was that by expanding the agenda of business into unprofitable areas, we
tended to undermine incentives to efficient performance or to checkmate man-
agement with takeover efforts and stockholder suits.
REDEFINING THE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUSINESS
In redefining its social responsibilities today, business faced two main chal-
lenges: to broaden its system ofaccountingtoincludethefullsocialandeconom-
ic costs of production and growth, so as to better harmonize its incentives
and the welfare of society; and to utilize its special competence to deal ~ith
priority problems of the day. ·
Social Costs of Production. Some social costs not incorporated in economic
decisions, such as the cost of untreated waste discharged into the air or water
or upon the land, were borne by the community and society, not by the pro-
ducer responsible or by consumers of his product. Other social costs, such as
litter, could be laid at the door of consumers, as costs of consumption not paid
by the user, but by those who shared his environment. Some social costs, how-
ever, were joint costs which no system of accounting could sort out but which
also had to be reflected in economic choices. For example, the worst congestion
and pollution in our large cities was a combination of industrial location, con-
centration of urban population, commuting by car, labor migration from
farming, federal subsidies for suburbanization, population growth, and failure
of planning by urban governments. These were the social costs ofour freedoms
and our institutions-nobody's and everybody's fault.
Environmental issues had commanded little attention until recently because
few people had been aware ofsome problems until they hit the headlines, such
as oil spills; or because their full consequences went unrealized, like the auto-
mobile; or for lack of an appropriate authority, as was still the case with in-
ternational waters. Public opinion was now in the process of veering from one
extreme, with social costs of economic activity largely ignored and falling on
society as a whole, to another, with exaggeration of these unmeasured costs
and a disposition to charge them to the producer. Apathy was giving way to
overkill.
It was widely agreed now that business was accountable for the social costs
of its production. But it did not follow that business could include among such
costs those which it did not create, or could not control. The voracious national
appetite for electric power to operate household appliances, quite as much as
for industrial plants, spewed pollutants into the air. And our love affair with
the automobile, rather than any machinations of Detroit, was really what con-
gested and befouled our cities. Americans-who consumed 40 percent ofworld
I7
II
'I
resources produced-junked seven million cars, 48 billion cans and 20 million
tons of paper annually, but the limitations of the environment now challenged
their personal freedom in this regard. Who in the end was to be accountable
for a "buy, use and throw away" economy? Ultimately this question had to be
answered by a political decision which business could help implement but
could hardly make.
Costs of Growth. There were special costs of economic growth, such as declin-
ing industries, distressed communities, displaced people and obsolete skills.
The innovative firm that often contributed to these problems did not pay for
most of these costs, and it was not suggested that it should, lest economic pro-
gress be discouraged. Only recently had society begun to accept responsibility
for distressed communities and retraining of workers, and the allocation of
this responsibility between government and business was still open.
Society had yet to face the full implications of metropolitan growth, whose
social costs were the consequence of a dynamic technology and a free society.
A regimented society could of course cope with congestion, pollution, slums
and urban unemployment by restricting the mobility of its people. Freedom,
on the other hand, came at a cost, not a profit, and it was the responsibility of
society to keep the price as low as possible. Business was the instrument that
would build and rebuild, and possibly share in the running ofcities, but citizens
through government had to make the decisions, including the vital compromise
between freedom and order.
Social Accounting. The accounting practices of government, like those of busi-
ness, had failed to take account of many of the social costs of production and
growth. We had no measure of net social product. Yet in assuming new re-
sponsibilities, business, no less than government, had to specify its goals, and
to establish yardsticks for measuring goal achievement, however crudely. In its
own interest it had to let all affected parties know just what it was doing and
how well.
In the narrower area of corporate philanthropy, most companies prepared
an annual contributions budget, and a growing number had established com-
pany foundations to separate philanthropy from dependence on the fluctuating
fortunes of business activity. Corporations in the us were now contributing an
average of almost one percent of their pre-tax earnings to charitable, educa-
tional and related purposes, a sum approaching a billion dollars a year, which
was many times the amount and twice the percentage prevailing before 1952.
Beyond these sums, devotion of corporate executive time to community service
doubtless would also continue to grow, and this tithe of time was a valuable
contribution.
18
Institution Building. New institutions were frequently needed for new re-
sponsibilities, and business had to find ways of reconciling productive efficiency
with new concepts of the public interest. New forms of business-government
partnership would develop, but the burden of innovation and reform could
not fall wholly on business. Governments too were subject to the new social
audit.
The first priority in institutional reform might well be that of local govern-
ments in metropolitan areas, since the major problems of cities required the
combined efforts of all levels of government involved. This might take various
forms, including government consolidation, the Council of Governments ap-
proach, and the special-function agency. None of this precluded a key role for
business in urban rebuilding and investment, or even in the operation of the
vital organs of cities, but a business-government partnership was not very
productive where government did not govern. Many other variations of in-
stitutional reform had been devised in the us in reaction to new responsibilities,
including the federal-state Appalachian Regional Commission; various inter-
state compacts; state and local hybrids of government and business; and com-
pletely private institutions. The federal government had created several "for-
profit" corporations to carry out business activities fraught with public interest
whose conduct required government-like powers. Examples were the Com-
munications Satellite Corporation, the National Corporation for Housing
Partnerships, and the National Railroad Passenger Corporation.
In this process the dividing line between the private and public sectors be-
came more obscure. Governments had been making wider use of business
methods, as shown by the tendency toward more realistic pricing of services to
identifiable beneficiaries, such as users of local utilities or students at state
universities; the efforts on behalf of cost-effectiveness analysis in public bud-
geting; and the Lakewood (California) Plan, whereby smaller local govern-
ments saved by buying services from larger ones. Public corporations such as
the Tennessee Valley Authority and the new u.s. Postal Service offered another
example of business-type operations which financed themselves through the
sale of services and recourse to the capital market and were ultimately re-
sponsive to the consuming public rather than to governmental bodies.
Much, of course, could be accomplished with minimal institutional inno-
vation. The taxing power of government could be linked with the productive
energies of business by contracts for services which business had not been in
the habit of selling, nor government of buying, as was being tried with some
educational projects. Business had often organized on a wider scale for special
social goals, such as the training of hard-core unemployed, the financing of
minority-owned businesses, and mortgage lending in central city areas. Business
19
~· '"
groups in most cities were providing the leadership for community improve-
ment in all its aspects, and had been doing so for many years. That was how
downtown Pittsburgh had been rebuilt and air pollution there reduced, long
before urban decay and air pollution had become national issues. The paper
and packaging industries had pioneered similar initiatives years ago. These
efforts; to be sure, were piecemeal and had not kept pace with the growth of
the problems, but they provided the background against which more concert-
ed efforts were taking shape.
Beyond Legality. A difficult aspect remained: business management had to
make value judgments concerning its activities beyond the criterion oflegality.
Should a company sell to South Africa? Lend to a pornographer who was
operating within the law? Buy from a supplier who was polluting the atmo-
sphere? Deal with a union which discriminated against blacks? The direct
answer was that corporations were legal entities free to exercise their judgment
within the law. Usually legality, morality and the economic advantage of the
firm coincided. In some cases, there might be no economic advantage, no
matter how broadly construed, and there might be a penalty. Here a manage-
ment would make its jugdment on grounds that were important to it and to
its constituencies. For instance, certain us mutual funds would not invest in
liquor or tobacco shares, or in companies making munitions. Others as a mat-
ter of policy sought investments which would assist racially integrated housing
or the solution of urban and population problems.
These and similar judgments a business might make, and the tools of public
persuasion were always at hand to seek an increase in the number doing so.
But a view that could not muster enough support to become the official policy
of a representative government should not be imposed on a company or any
other organization. Coercion should be a public monopoly, sparingly used. In
our pluralistic society, nothing was unanimous, which is why we made do with
majority rule. Judgments or programs that were uncongenial to the majority
might, and often did, find a haven in some city, county, corporation, or
charitable fund. As part of this tradition, a business should be free to make its
own way within the limits of the law and its own power.
AMENDING THE SOCIAL CONTRACT
There were many approaches to enforcing the new Social Contract: incen-
tives and subsidies for desirable behavior; penalties or taxes for undesirable
performance; regulations setting standards and forbidding certain actions;
and encouragement of new technology. No single approach was best, since
conditions varied, but a pair of rules should guide the choice of methods.
20
First, whatever approach government selected should fit the framework of
incentives for productive efficiency. We had not yet discovered a substitute for
the factors of risk and return and competitive pressure, and these same incen-
tives could be directed toward alleviating our social problems. The role of
government was to modify the choice among alternatives, but to leave busi-
ness free to arrange its own affairs, subject to a revised set of standards, recog-
nizing that business needed a considerable measure of freedom if it was to
function at its best.
The second rule was that government should not penalize compliers nor allow
a competitive advantage to violators; only here was government intervention
really needed at all. Most firms would be willing to abide by the new Social
Contract if they were assured that their competitors would do likewise. But a
sort of Gresham's Law of pollution came into play: dirty plants and dirty
cities drove out clean ones by underpricing them. In setting new standards or
changing old ones, enough time had to be allowed to avoid unequal treatment
of existing capacity and new investment, of plant and equipment of different
ages. Where a burden could not be distributed equitably, and within a reason-
able period of time, it was better to resort to incentives rather than to general
regulation. This principle would also apply to the extra cost of hiring and
training disadvantaged workers.
Standards. The mobility of the population and of business itself, as well as the
extensive area over which goods were transported and marketed, called for
national standards, supplemented by local action. No one community had the
power adequately to protect its people, and it would be penalized for enforcing
standards within its limited area ofjurisdiction which were much higher, and
therefore more costly, than standards prevailing in competing jurisdictions. A
series of air and water quality acts had been building up the power of the
federal government to set and enforce standards, and it was proposed that the
Environmental Protection Agency be given regulatory authority in a number of
areas, includingautomobile engine emissions,intra-statenavigablestreams, ocean
dumping, excessive noise, and pesticides and new chemicals. State and local
governments also had a full legislative hopper on environmental regulation.
The recent surge of interest that had produced these environmental stan-
dards should not blind us to the longer history of progress in other areas, such
as labor standards: wages, hours, and working conditions, unemployment
compensation and social insurance. The Nixon Administration was seeking
from the Congress. major revisions in the programs of public assistance and
medical insurance, and the difficulties of enforcing standards of nondiscrim-
ination in hiring had not precluded progress in fact and in legislation.
2I
•
Underwriter efLast Resort. Businessmen were used to taking risk; every new
venture in research or marketing entailed the limited risk of losing their
investment. What management could not do, though, was assume open-end
commitments, such as to employ the entire disadvantaged group or to renew
central cities. The continued economic viability of businesses depended on
their costs and their revenues in a competitive market. Only governments had
revenue sources sufficiently independent ofimmediate consumer satisfaction or
cost-effectiveness for such undertakings. As the underwriter of last resort,
government had to bear the open-ended risks which were not a necessary
condition ofdoing business but a social obligation of all. This was the case with
most insurance for central city slum areas, housing and medical care for the
poor, and financing for marginal minority business. The banking and insur-
ance industries had pooled their responsibilities and resources for these ends to
a degree, but there was a limit to their employment of other people's money
when the problem was not simply a wider sharing of risk, but in fact much
higher risks and costs.
International Dimension. The jurisdiction of the new Social Contract had to
reach around the world. Swordfish and tuna caught on the high seas could be
contaminated by industrial wastes. Health hazards could cross international
boundaries through trade: farm products containing dangerous pesticides,
TV sets emitting unshielded X-rays. Some nations obviously could impose
cocial costs on others, as well as their own citizens. On certain health problems
there was already a measure of broad cooperation, through the \Vorld Health
Organization. On industrial pollution, the US State Department had established
an Office of Environmental Affairs, which was examining international aspects
of problems in such fields as automobiles, pulp and paper and power plants.
The OECD had established a Committee on Environment. The UN Economic
Commission for Europe had scheduled a conference to coordinate national
environmental policies. The NATO Committee on the Challenges of Modern
Society had activated a three-year study of methods of controlling pollution
of inland waterways. In 1972 the UN would hold a World Conference on
Pollution in Sweden at which the us might propose the creation of a World
Environmental Institute.
It was clear that trade could be seriously affected. The nation whose food
products were contaminated, or whose manufactures were unsafe, might find
its exports barred. On the other hand, the nation that took the mort compre-
hensive measures to protect its environment and its citizens might find its
products priced out of international markets, or even threatened by imports.
Investment could be redirected to countries with lower standards and lower costs.
22
Common standards was the ideal, but until that was achieved, domestic
standards had to be protected, at least by applying them also to imports. But
exporters concerned about their social costs would still be at a disadvantage,
whenever their higher standards were reflected not in the intrinsic value of the
product but solely in meeting the costs of various domestic social objectives.
It was probably not too sweeping to say that achievement of environmental
equality called for international cooperation as far reaching as that required for
the atom.
EVOLVING SOCIAL GOALS AND PRIORITIES
Between nations there was no consent of the governed, only common inter-
ests of sovereign states. Within the nation, the Social Contract had been under-
going revision because of a change of circumstances and a related change of
heart. Along with other parts of society, the role of business was changing
because the goals of society were being re-examined. Although business could
be relied on to aid in rebuilding cities in conformity with new technology and
population needs, it was not for it to make the vital choices between diffuse
suburbs and skyscrapers, or between subways and expressways, or to devise
land use plans and zoning codes. Business provided the tools and the alterna-
tives and therefore should have a voice. It was the whole citizenry, however,
that had to choose and govern.
As most people became affluent by past standards, each generation would be
free to define its own concept ofthe good life. Goals and priorities, once hemmed
in by universal scarcity, now shaped by industrialism, urbanization, and the
population explosion, would in time become freer of these constraints. We
could not predict the future, but we could do our best to hand on a strong,
productive economy and a mechanism of social choice in good working order,
so that succeeding generations might fulfill " ... man's responsibility to bring
the world, that ought to be, into being".
INTRODUCTION TO AND SUMMARY OF THE ITALIAN
WORKING PAPER
The author of the Italian working paper was unfortunately prevented at the
last moment from attending the Conference, and his paper was therefore intro-
duced by a compatriot.
After summarizing briefly the principal conclusions of the paper, the speaker
noted that in many respects they were parallel to the conclusions contained in
the American paper, although the authors had not had an opportunity to
consult each other during the preparation of their texts.
23
..
SOCIAL INSTABILITY: UNREST AND VIOLENCE
Marked social instability was the main trait of the period we lived in, as was
shown by the widespread tendency toward "unrest" from which no Western
country seemed to be spared, and the increasing resort to violence as a political
weapon.
In its extreme form, unrest often had nihilistic targets, aiming simply at
destruction, either as an end in itself, or as a means of tearing down the social
structure, which the forces of unrest optimistically hoped to replace with an-
other, more preferable system. In another common form, unrest often appeared
to fasten on no particular objective, but moved fitfully from one target to an-
other in an erratic display of dissatisfaction. Still another, more subtle, form of
unrest, although non-violent, managed to slow down the operation ofthe system
and pave the way for the explosions to come. This was the "malaise" experienced
by so many individuals and groups, whose feelings toward society ranged
from scepticism to distrust, from fear to repressed hate. This "malaise" resulted
in a sort of depressed, idle detachment, from which individuals might emerge
destructively at the first opportunity.
Since 1969, additional manifestations of unrest had appeared, including
worrisome symptoms ofsocial instability within individual industrial firms. In
Europe, the traditional demands and actions of workers, led by the labor
unions, had recently given way to a more fundamental challenging of the very
institutions, procedures and criteria on which the contemporary business
system was based. This was accompanied in some cases by uncontrolled unrest
for the sake of unrest, but was more generally marked by the subtle malaise
which hindered production through absenteeism or the support of agitators.
At the same time, the use of violence had become increasingly widespread
and intense. We had been accustomed to thinking ofviolence in the context of
power struggles-to be used either by those trying to usurp power or by those
striving to maintain it at any cost in the face ofopposition. What was surprising
today was the use of violence within basically pacifist frameworks, not to take
over, but to confront legal power in an attempt to demonstrate the insuffi-
ciency, weakness and illegitimacy of authority. It was in this context that the
author would refer to violence.
According to Sorel and Pareto, the attraction exerted by violence was
directly proportional to the amount of bureaucratization and centralization of
public life. In almost every part of the world, young people had turned to vio-
lence as a form of political protest against what they considered to be ineffi-
cient, abusive, and arbitrary systems, which no longer served the needs and
wishes of the citizens.
24
SOCIAL INSTABILITY AND THE ROLE OF THE COMMUNIST PARTIES
These symptoms were the signs of deep social unrest, whose roots had to be
analyzed ifit was to be treated. Before proceeding, though, the author wanted
to emphasize that in some European nations, including his own, unrest was
marked by particular traits resulting from the existence in those countries of
powerful communist parties, whose avowed aim was a radical change of the
present economic and social system. Yet it would be a mistake to attribute
instability solely to the activities ofthose parties. In France and Italy, for exam-
ple, it seemed as if the success of the communists with the electorate was more
the result of a vague dissatisfaction, channeled by those parties, than of a
conscious adherence to the objectives of communism. Moreover, a number
of violent, extraparliamentary political groups in these countries opposed the
communist party as an oligarchic and bureaucratic movement.
THE UNEXPLAINED SOCIAL MALAISE
What was "social instability"? It had traditionally been defined as a dis-
turbance ofrelations between society at large and certain groups ofindividuals.
Beyond a given threshold of tolerance, which might vary from one society to
another, this disturbance caused conflicts which menaced the orderly operation
of the social system, entailed a waste of resources, and challenged the welfare
ofsociety byjeopardizing its economic expansion. But this definition was inade-
quate to explain the widespread and serious social phenomena of the last few
years. It might have served to describe the "deviant" attitudes of individuals
and small heretic groups of the past, but it could not be applied to the recent
manifestations ofprotest which were oftenshared by large segments ofimportant
social groups (students, workers, farmers, tradespeople, etc.) in an extended
geographic area. Nor was this traditional definition applicable to the recent
intensification of the political use of violence to assault the limitations of legal
power.
Perhaps the very concept of "social instability" was no longer useful in ·
interpreting these events, because of this problem of definition. Only the tradi-
tional rural societie~ and some of the underdeveloped societies could be defined
as "stable" by contemporary sociological criteria. The principles generally
referred to in Europe to characterize an expanding society unhindered by
serious internal conflicts, are those of"integration", of"pluralistic democracy'',
of "balanced" and "harmonious" development. But even without the aid of
clear-cut definitions, one could try to reconstruct the foundations of this trou-
blesome unrest, and the author proposed to do this from the viewpoint of
business.
25
j
SOCIAL CHANGE AND HISTORICAL BEHAVIOR OF BUSINESS
For too long we had overlooked the intimate relationship between our
economy and the social order, assuming mistakenly that we could accelerate
the rhythm and dynamism of the economic process while maintaining the
soda! and institutional structures of a static society. In Europe, this had meant
intensifying industrialization and mass production in the midst of a society
whose people were still attuned to a rural way of life. In hindsight, it was
evident that the objective of econoltlic progress without social disturbance was
unattainable. The old way oflife had been completely disrupted by the massive
transfer of manpower from agriculture to industry, the exodus from the coun-
tryside and the formation of sprawling urban agglomerations. Unfortunately,
the countries where industrial growth was later in coming did not utilize the
experience of their precursors to avoid the causes and consequences of this
disruption.
On the other hand, the behavior ofbusiness had tended to propound material
prosperity as an intrinsically desirable social objective, whereas its value was
really as an instrument. In time, this had opened the way to a painful reap-
praisal of the whole system ofvalues upon which the social order had rested for
centuries. While business had taken an active part in the economic transfor-
mation of society, its role as an agent of social change had been played in a
passive way, because it was either unaware of or unconcerned with the social
problems of an accelerating economy.
Today's business world of mass industry and services relied on productive
innovation and continuously expanding markets. However, it faced a social
environment guided by institutions devised to manage rural societies, and a
culture oriented toward history and the hereafter rather than the medium-
range future. Business had furthermore to cope with value systems providing at
best a sort of catechism suited to repetitive behavior, rather than a few funda-
mental moral criteria adaptable to new experiences. All in all, in many
European countries business wa~ finding itself in conflict with the culture and
institutions of society. And if businessmen felt beset by difficulties, what of the
plight of others who were much less able to take the initiative to change
things? What about the quandary of all the people who, without being protag-
onists either of change or of resistance to change, had to suffer their conse-
quences, pulled asunder by the contrasting forces of economic dynamism and
cultural and institutional stagnation?
26
BEHAVIOR OF INSTITUTIONS AND CULTURAL ATTITUDES
The Western world, and particularly Europe, were thus seen to be passing
from an economically static society, having a basically rural character and a
culture oriented toward the past, to a dynamic society based on mass production
and the industrialization of services, with a forward-looking culture. But the
full implications of this transformation were insufficiently understood, with the
result that changes in the social sector were being pushed through haphazardly,
without the benefit of informed cultural and political leadership.
If business had clone little to renovate our culture and institutions, cultural
and political leaders were also at fault.' Many of the social problems of the
industrial age, such as urban congestion and pollution, were not unavoidable
consequences of economic growth itself, but were the result of a disorderly
process of development.
Our culture and our institutions were not equal to the task of guiding and
governing a developing industrial society; in the author's opinion, this was our
most serious deficiency. We needed scholars who could restore a proper sense
of values, identify new priorities and suggest new ways in which social groups
and institutions (family, community, nation) might better fulfill their func-
tions. We al5o needed statesmen who could propose general objectives accept-
able to individuals and groups alike.
PSYCHOSOCIOLOG!CAL INTERPRETATION
Contemporary sociologists and psychologists had concluded that the accel-
erated change from an essentially rural society to an industrial society was at
the roots of social instability. To begin with, change in itself was a factor of
instability. To have to change one's habits and way of thinking; to find that
knowledge or skills acquired with great effort had become obsolete or insuffi-
cient: all this was hard on the individual, sometimes leading him to reject the
society that had inflicted such changes upon him without explanation or
preparation.
This "shock of the future", to borrow the title of a bestseller, was an espe-
cially dramatic experience for those past their prime, who no longer had the
intellectual flexibility or the energy required to adapt. But it also caused an-
guish in the younger people, who could not rely as much as the preceding
generations on the help of their elders. In the ancient rural tradition, for
example, the father based part of his moral authority on his educational func-
tion, as it was from him that his son learned his craft. Today, the father was
often out of touch with reality, supplanted by progress, so that one of his own
seats of authority was seriously impaired. Thus, the swiftness of change was a
27
centrifugal force, isolating individuals from the groups, such as the family, that
used to be the repository of tradition and hurling them toward new groups,
which were disoriented and held together only by fear and negation.
Another factor of instability was society's inability to master the precipitous
evolution of science and technology. A classic example of this was nuclear
energy, an inexhaustible, promising treasure, but at the same time a direct and
immediate threat to the future of mankind. Fortunately, the citizens of the
more industrialized countries were increasingly aware that the improvement
in their standard of living brought about by technological innovation was
counterbalanced by deadly effects on the ecological balance of the environ-
ment.
According to social scientists, the present crisis of authority, coupled with
the acceleration of history and the ambivalence of progress, gave man the
feeling of being hurtled along the road on some contraption lacking control
and direction. Undoubtedly images of this sort, simplified as they might be,
were present in the collective unconscious, and underlay the most disorderly
manifestations of the revolt of the individual.
While giving the impression of not knowing where it was going, society in-
creased its anonymous, collectivistic pressure upon the individual, relegating
him more and more to his little niche and taking away his traditional supports.
As Jung wrote in his last work, "as a social unit, the individual of today is
governed, fed, dressed, educated, lodged in standard dwellings ..., but he
finds himself increasingly deprived of the direction and responsibility of his
own life". The state or the organization had taken the place of God, and man
had lost the tie with his Creator which had enabled him to endure the physical
and moral pressures of the secular world. It was through political action that
the individual now sought to communicate with his fellowmen and to act
within the framework of society. Power and its negation, violence, seemed in
turn to have become the only indispensable means of political expression. The
individual tried to recover through violence the freedom of action of which he
felt deprived. Ghetto strife and campus rebellion gave frustrated people a rare
sense of being able to act together.
In analyzing these motivations, social scientists appeared unsure whether
this rebelliousness marked the appearance of something new, or whether it
was instead the last gasp of a human prerogative that mankind was about to
lose for good.
THE GOALS OF BUSINESS AND THE FUTURE
The accelerated social change brought about by unprecedented economic
28
progress was at the bottom of much present unrest. What could business do to
alleviate this?
First, before they were obliged to do so by law, businessmen should try to
resolve the problems that were closely connected with the productive activity
and which contributed directly to social unrest: air and water pollution;
destruction of the natural environment by mining, industrial centers and trans-
portation networks; and improvident consumption of scarce raw materials.
The first task here was to distinguish the important from the accessory. For
example, if industrial progress was menacing our oxygen reserves, through the
rarefaction of marine plankton, the intensive exploitation of forests, and the
rapid increase in oxygen consumption, the problem was of a much higher order
than that posed by localized pollution. And industry should not simply par-
ticipate in solving such problems; it should help lead the way, especially where
an international solution was called for, since a proliferation of different nation-
al standards could have disastrous consequences on world commerce.
Second, business could improve its administration of human resources in
many ways: by emphasizing the social aspect ofwork and its value as a personal
contribution to the solution of problems; by increasing the use of computers
to automate menial tasks and to evaluate proposals for the improvement of
working conditions; by increasing the responsibility of individuals wherever
possible through decentralization; by reviewing the social consequences of
working schedules on family and group life, the problem of working women,
and the age limits in relation to the period of training and reeducation; and
by doing more in the area of specialized training.
Social unrest also stemmed from our ambivalent attitude toward technical
and industrial progress; it might bring a better life, but it could cause catas-
trophe as well. This anguish, which was the price of man's liberation from the
tyranny of natural forces, could be assuaged once he recognized that technology
was his creation and that it could be controlled and socially oriented. To achieve
this control and orientation, society would need to make some responsible and
adequate choices, which in turn presupposed the availability of suitable polit-
ical instruments. Business could make a unique contribution here in helping
to adapt a great number of European political institutions to the new data,
dimensions and rhythms ofindustrial society. Its cooperation in this area should
be completely open, though, so as not to be considered the unwarranted inter-
ference of a pressure group. Besides political institutions, society's natural
groups and associations were important as means to mediate between tradition
and innovation, and to facilitate the recognition of new values.
The problem of making the appropriate choices was essentially a cultural
one. In spite of the enormous quantitative expansion of knowledge, western
29
•
L~-----'
culture did not seem equal to the task of facing the problems posed by indus-
trial society. Business could contribute to the definition ofalternative choices by
acting as a sort ofmanagement consultant to society: to advise on the technical
feasibility of programs, as well as on their costs and the means to be employed.
It could also suggest how to modify programs to avoid the waste of resources.
Another source ofunrest, which was often manifested in the form of agitation
or violence, was the individual's increasing dependence on society, and his
feeling of having no control over his own destiny. Business could do much to
overcome this through recognition ofa man's dignity in his place ofwork, which
would tend to give him a fuller sense of being a citizen of a free and democratic
society.
Industry could no longer consider its only job to be that of producing goods
demanded by the market at the lowest possible cost. This was still its primary
task, but it now had other obligations to its employees and to society at large.
It was up to society to choose its overall objectives, but business should fulfill
the role of allocating the financial, human and natural resources of society so
that these targets could be attained efficiently.
Business had to cooperate with the political and cultural worlds in trying
to alleviate the causes of social unrest as soon as possible. Ifsocial unrest were
to increase, it would not only hinder cultural development, bringing about
violence and undermining authority, but it would prevent industry from con-
tinuing to develop its productive capacities. In the short term, business had
to be ready to perform its social role in a flexible and open fashion. To accom-
plish this, it had to insure that both its industrial plant and the machinery ofthe
market place were kept in good running order.
Finally, business had a special task to perform in the international field. The
growth ofmultinational corporations served to unite citizens ofseveral national-
ities in a common effort; but until a suitable institutional framework had been
developed for these enterprises, business bore a great responsibility in the politi-
cal and social realm.
The psychological resources of the individual manager would be immensely
important in enabling business to carry out its responsibilities in the difficult
years ahead. Self-confidence and a sense of teamwork were essential, but they
would not be enough. He would need as well a strong commitment to a set of
philosophical values. This implied a heavy future investment in social research,
in the same way that business had invested in technology and the applied
sciences in the past twenty years.
In many ways, the development of science no longer appeared to coincide
with the progress of mankind. "Knowledge", the never-ending race toward
specialization, toward knowing more and more about less and less, seemed to
30
be leading man further and further away from his purpose. Cultural values
alone could bridge the widening gap between man's technological prowess
and his understanding of what he really wanted to achieve on earth.
Only culture could guard us against the fate which Paul Valery feared when
he wrote fifty years ago: "Can we say that al that we know-all that we are
able to do-has ended by working against us?"
*
* *
DISCUSSION
CURRENT SOCIAL INSTABILITY: SOURCES AND SYMPTOMS
The discussion of this Agenda item was opened by a German speaker, who
found that the two working papers evidenced a striking contrast as to the
degree of adaptation to conditions of the industrial world by Europe and
America. The Italian author seemed more pessimistic than his American
counterpart, reflecting perhaps the preoccupation of the Old World with the
lessons of history. Speaking as a European living near the demarcation line
between two radically different political systems, this participant viewed social
instability as a permanent and fairly normal condition, the interplay of con-
servative and progressive elements being necessary for the survival of mankind.
Within the past decade, however, social instability had taken on a dangerously
explosive character, the causes of which would have to be accurately diag-
nosed before a cure could be prescribed. Sociologists were no longer reliable
as diagnosticians, since their political orientation often warped their analysis.
A major cause suggested by the Italian working paper-the massive transfer
ofrural workers to industrial regions-had taken place too long ago in Germany
and elsewhere to explain the current social instability. Neither could it be
traced to a decline in the "quality oflife", which had in fact improved during
the age of industrialization, in the speaker's view. He was more inclined to
blame the general affiuence and economic instability produced by over-in-
vestment and over-employment, which might have been avoided with a better
industrial policy and more careful business forecasting. Although the speaker
was an advocate of higher wages, it had to be admitted that, above a certain
level, increased earnings were not correlated to human happiness.
A similar viewpoint was expressed by a Turkish participant, who argued
that a certain amount of instability was a necessary ingredient of a healthy
society. The dynamics of development were accelerated by the continuing
pressure of unstable social groups, and the doctrine of foll employment was
31
.,.,
in this sense inimical to growth. Without satisfactory economic growth, society
would not have the resources to improve the education ofthe mass ofits people,
which was essential to long-run stability. But, asked a Canadian speaker, did
we really want to continue with the untrammeled growth which our system
had demanded in the past?
An American participant pointed out that the very freedom ofopen societies
rendered them particularly susceptible to instability; social problems were less
manageable because it was "difficult to discover who is in charge of anything".
In contrast, a Danish speaker was of the opinion that the welfare state, while
it did not prevent instability, provided a "safety net" for individuals, and took
the edge off many social conflicts, creating an atmosphere in which problems
could be approached in a reasonable frame ofmind. It was disturbing to many
that one man should have power to decide another's destiny. This situation
could never be avoided, but in the welfare state its psychological effect was
mitigated somewhat. A Belgian participant said he would have preferred the
term "imbalance" to "instability'', to reflect the social aim of balancing facts
and expectations. He suggested that the experience of Latin America tended
to disprove the assertion in the Italian working paper that stability today was
to be found only in the underdeveloped world.
A number of speakers referred to the fact that progress in science and tech-
nology had far outstripped the advance of human knowledge and experience
in the social and political fields, leaving individuals frustrated and bewildered
in the face of gigantic industrial and governmental bureaucracies. A British
participant observed that the old disciplines which had held society together,
such as mass unemployment and grinding poverty, were disappearing and
that no new disciplines had been devised to replace them.
Several commentators alluded to the special problems and attitudes ofyoung
people. An American speaker said that this generation ofyouth in his country,
having had the luxury of time to reflect, was turning away from the goal of
material upgrading. Seeing that worldly success had not saved their parents
from unhappiness, they were "looking for things more spiritually nourishing".
The business system had lost the power to inspire them, and they were dis-
appointed as well with the failure of the public sector to solve problems within
its domain. A Canadian participant thought that young people had grown
bewildered and violent out of a sense of their own obsolescence; modern
technology had made them feel socially irrelevant and personally insignificant.
Comments from a British and an American speaker lent support to this as-
sessment.
Another American participant discussed the growing scepticism in the us-
especially among young, middle-class whites-about prevailing values in the
32
market place. Their mood had been anticipated by Thomas Huxley a century
ago, when he said during a visit to America: "I cannot say that I am at all
impressed with your size or your wealth. Size is not grandeur, and territory
does not make a nation. The overhanging question is What are you doing to do
with all these things?"
Many young blacks today, on the other hand, were still striving to acquire
their share of the consumer goods which were being scorned by many of their
white contemporaries. As one young black leader had told the speaker: "It
seems we're crashing in the front door just about the time the middle class is
going out the back door".
The contradictory nature of these attitudes complicated the search for so-
lutions, as was pointed out by an International participant. The "revolt against
economic man", in the name of individual self-fulfillment, which was born of
the discontent ofthe affluent, implied less productivity and more unemployment.
This might satisfy the talented and creative people who were able to take an
expansionist view, but it would only reinforce a feeling of frustration and iso-
lation among the less fortunate. The result might well be an increase in social
instability, as was suggested by a Canadian speaker.
The "communications revolution" was partly to blame, according to a us
participant. The average American school child had undergone thousands of
hours of television watching. Its whole notion of the social context often came
from TV, which was displacing the parent as the preceptor of morality and
thought. A Danish speaker joined in this criticism of the mass media, which he
said created many problems by imbuing the public with utopian ideas.
A British participant felt that insufficient emphasis had been put on the
population explosion as a contributing cause to many social problems, in-
cluding violence, environmental pollution, poor housing, and inadequate
schools.
A Canadian speaker, referring to the fact that 60% of the manufacturing
industry in his country was controlled by foreigners, expressed concern that
the erosion of a national business class because of absentee ownership could
produce instability which would spill over into other sectors of society.
An American participant residing in Western Europe had detected a wide-
spread feeling among both intellectuals and businessmen there that their whole
social and industrial system was under attack. Even those who strongly be-
lieved that the present system had performed more effectively for more people
than had any other system were uneasy about the concentration of industrial
and political power. They foresaw that a more socialistic orientation was in-
evitable, and were concerned to preserve the best values and institutions of
the present system. The speaker wondered whether the European participants
33
_j
shared this impression that profound social changes lay ahead.
This question was touched upon by many speakers during the discussion.
One comprehensive answer was given by a French participant, who said that
the old "social contract" was being challenged by four different groups:
1. The "sub-intelligentsia", who received a smattering of higher education
but whose capacities did not equal their pretensions. This group was often
supported by literary elements of the traditional intelligentsia with an anti-
industrial bias. Together they were responsible for many of the negative mani-
festations of the social confrontation: regression toward primitive Christian
and oriental values, Rousseau-ism, and espousal of the obsolete aspects of
Marxism.
2. A growing layer of technicians which threatened to engulf the working
class and which was insisting on a share in decision-making, especially in tech-
nologically advanced industries.
3. The increasing ranks of rural workers moving into industrial labor, who
did not have the experience and outlook of the traditional urban working
class, but who were quite sensitive in their own way to the balance of power in
industry.
4. Groups within certain religious institutions, notably the Catholic Church
in France and Italy, who were questioning the established order and the prop-
erty system.
Contemporary European political analysis turned, in the speaker's view,
on an assessment of the impact of these groups.
DEFINING THE ROLE OF BUSINESS
The term "business" being broad and inclusive, several speakers cautioned
against imprecise formulations in thinking about this subject. An American
participant remarked that one had to distinguish not only between businesses
of varying size, but also between manufacturing firms and those in the finan-
cial, service and communications fields, whose scope was quite different. A
Danish speaker also warned against putting too much emphasis on industry
as the expression of business, to the neglect of such sectors as agriculture and
construction, whose activities touched the lives ofmost citizens. A Frenchspeak-
er suggested that "business", in the sense under discussion, could be thought
of simply as that part of life in which people worked, a concept broad enough
to cover public as well as private ownership. (During the discussion, however,
the participants seemed to take "business" to mean non-governmental enter:
prises of a reasonable size.)
34
According to a British participant, business in most western countries had
been compelled almost from the beginning of the industrial age, either by
employees, consumers or shareholders, to accept social responsibilities not
directly related to the maximization of profit. This fact did not conform to the
common assumption of a model corporation acting exclusively to increase
shareholders' earnings. An interesting contrast was provided by Japan, where
the dynamic free enterprise industry took excellent care of its own employees,
but did not assume responsibilities toward the rest of society, with the result
that environmental pollution, for example, was worse there than in the
us.
While concurring with an American opinion that business generally had
taken on broader social responsibilities and had improved its sense of priorities,
a Swiss participant felt that the private economy in Europe had been derelict
in failing to anticipate the future effects of its decisions, and should therefore
share the blame for pollution, housing shortages, and other urban problems.
An American speaker claimed that us business had not effectively discharged
its social obligations in the past. He cited the flight of companies from inner
cities to the suburbs; discriminatory practices against blacks and women in
hiring and promotion; and the failure of the business community to exert any
significant leadership in implementing the recommendations of the Kerner
Commission on us racial conflict. In the speaker's view, white racism had per-
meated the American business community. The fact that the upper echelons of
management itself were virtually all white refuted the frequent charge that
labor unions were primarily responsible for discrimination in industry. Although
key business decisions were confirmed in board meetings, they were in truth
fashioned within the private social club structure, to which blacks were still
denied admittance.
Another American expressed serious reservations about the credentials of
business in his country. The stability of every free society had to depend, not
upon a coerced respect for public institutions, but upon a deserved respect.
Yet people were losing confidence in the ability ofboth government and business
to respond voluntarily to their needs. Many felt particularly that business had
"had its chance many times", but had always placed its profits above any
conflicting interest. The social awareness of a few firms merely served to under·
score the unconcern of many others.
A parallel European attitude was described by an Italian participant, who
said that the reaction from industrial management in his country was essen-
tially negative to any reforms sponsored by the trade unions, even those aimed
at achieving goals which had been advocated by the business community and
conservative politicians. In the speaker's view, this reflected management's
35
resistance to a redistribution of power within Italian society, more than a
concern about profits.
A compatriot said that the Italian experience illustrated the general Euro-
pean framework, which was very different from that in the us. Whereas all
major groups in American society supported the economic system, differing
among themselves only as to the means of improving it, in Europe the oppo-
sition to the capitalistic system had been well entrenched at the heart of the
enterprise since the beginnings of industrialization. This opposition rejected
incentives for greater efficiency or productivity, which it regarded as devices
to strengthen the corporation, the very nerve cell of the system it sought to
abolish. Against such a background, management was naturally suspicious of
trade union initiatives, since the yielding of any concessions might alter the
balance of industrial power. More was at issue than simply the adaptability of
business to change; the fundamental values of the capitalist system had been
called into question. The task of modern business was to confront this problem
squarely an.cl to identify and try to reinforce those values which it deemed were
appropriate to our times.
The assumption that business as a community should try to solve social
problems was contested by another Italian speaker, who referred to events in
his country in the immediate post-war period. As the political authorities were
then too weak to function adequately, several large Italian companies had
undertaken to provide such things as housing and schools for their employees.
Although this seemed at the time like an enlightened approach, it produced a
sort of nightmare for many workers, who had no life outside the world of their
industrial employer, to whom they looked for everything. For corporations to
take on new social responsibilities today, when they were being questioned
increasingly on their economic and ideological position, would only be to
enlarge the area of their vulnerability. But individual businessmen, acting as
citizens, could contribute to the solution of social problems through the exercise
of political pressure, as the trade unions themselves were already successfully
doing in Italy.
A British participant endorsed this view that a wide role should be played
by businessmen, not business corporations. It was up to individual business
leaders to create the new challenges needed to bring out the best in human
nature. It was doubtful ifthe spirit of idealism could survive the "comfortable
society''. An American speaker agreed that the emphasis should be on the role
of individual businessmen, but he was pessimistic about their capacity for
effective social leadership. Many businessmen were "prisoners of their success,"
isolated from the travail and anguish of ordinary life. They were not heartless
or lazy, but were unable to feel and to come to grips with concrete social prob-
36
!ems. A fellow-countryman added his opinion that business leaders deliber-
ately chose their isolation to avoid unpleasant involvement.
Another American speaker reminded the meeting that this Agenda item
might have been worded to deal, not with business, but with some other seg-
ment of our society-labor unions, religious organizations, universities. His
point was that, in all of these groups, there were those who sought to divert
the group from that which it was most competent to do. Within the us labor
movement, for instance, the aut~ workers' union had been led onto broad so-
cial ground, wheras the teamsters' union had concentrated on rather narrow
and specific economic goals. The lesson, according to the speaker, was that the
teamsters' union seemed to have a brighter future. Likewise, the comparative
advantage of universities lay in placing their resources directly at the disposal
of promising young men, not in seeking.to maximize social welfare through the
manipulation of their investment portfolios. And, he said, "our churches' in-
roads into these questions have not done very much for the spiritual life of our
time."
By the same token, large business organizations had tomake a realistic as-
sessment ofthe contribution they could bring to the solution ofsocial problems.
In the speaker's judgment, their strength here was two-fold: they had talented
people, and they were experts in the development of organizations. As the
dividing line between the public and private sectors of our society grew in-
creasingly blurred, new forms of organization would have to be devised, and
business could transmit to society useful administrative expertise.
It was important to remember also that the reconciliation of private and
public interests always had a time dimension; accomodation might be more
difficult in the short run than in the long run. By pursuing its own long-run
private interests, the business community was likely to come closest to serving
the long-run public interest.
BUSINESS AND HUMAN NEEDS: EDUCATION; JOB ENRICHMENT; PARTICIPATION
Turning to the subject of human relations in the business world, a French
participant regretted that "paternalism" had acquired a perjorative meaning.
Employers used to feel responsible toward their employees in the same way
that parents did toward their children, which was a valid social concept.
Neither blue nor white collar workers were adequately trained now to take
pride in their jobs or to understand the social importance of their work. Edu-
cation was still too often geared to classical subjects unrelated to modern life.
An English commentator agreed that much remained to be done in this field,
even if one did not aim to achieve Japanese-style paternalism.
37
•
An American speaker said that training was one of the missing links in the
transition from rural to industrial society. In the us there was a surplus of
unemployed liberal arts graduates, but a shortage of people trained to repair
automobiles and household appliances. A German participant remarked that
the training problem in his country was aggravated by the fact that 25-30%
of the students in highly populated areas were dropping out of school before
receiving their certificates. Since they were consequently unable to get jobs in
first-class companies, they gravitated to secondary firms which were not equip-
ed to train them properly. Although leftist propagandists sought to blame this
problem on industry, the fault lay with the schools and their weak links with
professional training. This situation was creating unrest among the young ado-
lescents who would soon be of voting age.
Several speakers agreed that ways had to be found to enrich jobs so as to
give workers a stronger sense of accomplishment and satisfaction. Employees
needed to feel a personal relationship to .the enterprise, and the enterprise in
turn had to improve its identification with its surroundings, according to a
Swiss participant. A British speaker said that the questions of job content
and the organization of work were intimately tied up with the "style" of
business and its management function. These were not responsibilities which
could be assumed by the state; as a practical matter, business "governed"
in this are, since it had charge of the working force for most of the working
day.
A Canadian participant approved of the suggestion in the Italian working
paper that the responsibilities of individuals in business be increased through
decentralization of the organization, but he sensed that the author was reluc-
tant to pursue the full implications of his analysis. The same point had been
hinted at by the author of the American working paper in his phrase "corpo-
rate democracy". In short, to what extent could the malaise ofsocial instability
be reduced by a general redistribution of power within the corporation? A
Belgian spokesman observed that the notion of "participation" by employees,
which was mentioned so often nowadays, would entail just such a sharing of
power and authority, and he wondered whether management was really pre-
pared for this.
An Italian participant agreed that this dilemma was not easy for manage-
ment, but he asked, on the other hand, whether it made sense for trade unions
to insist on more participation if they themselves were still organized on author-
itarian or "Stalinist" lines. On this point, a Swiss speaker acknowledged the
need for democratization within the unions, as well as in industry as a whole
from national to plant level. At the same time, international labor councils
38
were required to deal with multi-national companies on a world-wide basis.
The freedom to shift productive activities from one country to another should
entail a corollary measure of social responsibility to workers and host com-
munities, he said.
Another Belgian speaker stressed that more was required than the injection
of a "feeling ofparticipation". The participation had to be genuine-evidenced
by such things as management by objectives andincreaseddelegationofauthor-
ity. In addition to these internal reforms, this speaker advocated improving
the relations between corporations and those in the outside community who
were in contact with their products or by-products. All too often, as in the
matter of pollution, the corporate bureaucracy neglected to communicate
with the public about its problems and the details of proposed solutions (alter-
native costs, time required for accomplishment, etc.)
A Netherlands participant, who worked a good deal with young people,
had noted an encouraging change in their attitude during the past few years.
The atmosphere in the universities today was healthier, more democratic, less
hierarchical, than previously. As these students moved into their professional
careers, they could be expected to bring to their work a heightened awareness
ofits social implications, which would help transform many aspects of the busi-
ness world during the ne:x;t decade. In view of this prospect, the speaker found
the tone of the Italian working paper unduly pessimistic.
An American participant summed up by saying that the world society's
best chance of emerging intact from this difficult period, with a philosophy
acceptable to youth, lay in concentrating on the protection and development
of the individual as the ultimate social criteria.
BUSINESS AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS
A British participant said that a certain amount of confusion surrounded
the current fashionable emphasis on the problems of environmental pollution,
which were only indirectly related to social instability. One had to distinguish
between (a) pollution resulting from industrial processes, which industry itself
would have to rectify in its own style but under appropriate governmental
standards, and (b) pollution resulting from the impact of a multitude of indi-
vidual decisions, such as the general use of the motor car. In the latter case,
only the state was equipped to intervene, since a wholly new collective problem
was involved.
A German speaker observed that pollution, which was not itself a new prob-
lem, was being exploited today by many groups in his country, including
radical political parties who sought to lay all the blame for it at the door of
39
r
l
11·
I.
11
1:1
~
~li
II
ii
ii
I!
ii
1!
ii
q
1·
11
ii
Ii
11
11
ii
IIft
If
II
II
I'
!I
11
It
I
I
industry. Admittedly, it was frequently impossible to recognize the possible
adverse environmental consequences of new technological advances, and busi-
ness had a responsibility to improve its forecasting techniques, as well as to
promote more international cooperation in this field. At the same time, it
should also try to cool down this rather overheated issue.
A Canadian participant likened the current world economy to a spaceship
voyage, requiring rigorous planning and control. Production in the private
sector had greatly outrun the public facilities for the disposal of wastes, and
the disposal problem was now being passed back to the private sector. Industry
was capable of meeting this challenge, but probably not without some altera-
tions in the traditional market economy, with its maximization of production
and profits. The sum of human happiness might be better served by producing
a few million less automobiles a year. This philosophy was shared by a Swiss
speaker, who thought that we should move from a quantitative to a more
qualitative growth in our economies. Since the present level of pollution re-
flected industrial development without any regard for human consideration,
the remedy lay not alone in anti-pollution measures, but in an overall concept
of social policy as suggested in the American working paper.
The question ofinternational controls was the subject ofseveral interventions.
A German and two American speakers joined in calling for the establishment
of reasonably universal standards to avoid chaotic conditions in world trade.
Some countries placed a much lower priority than others on this problem, but
standards should logically be applied to both advanced and underdeveloped
economies, so as to avoid the emergence of "pollution havens". A contrasting
view was expressed by a us participant who felt that conditions and desires
varied so much from country to country that true international controls were
impractical. Each nation should be left to do the best it could with certain
agreed global "criteria". The disruption in patterns of world trade would be
minimal, as pollution control expenses would be small in relation to total costs.
Another American speaker questioned the good faith of many businessmen,
suggesting that they would not be lending their support to the notion of rules
and guidelines if they believed that government was ready and able to impose
them. This presumption was contested by another us participant, who ex-
plained that industry had a distaste for regulation because it ran counter to
its fundamental tenets. This speaker mentioned incidentally that the biggest
offender in marine pollution was not the oil industry but the us Navy; the
government indeed was the worst polluter in nearly every area.
It was hard to envisage a "total solution" to the environmental problem,
in the view of a British participant. As in all cases involving the confrontation
ofgovernment and the governed, progress would be made unevenly on various
40
fronts. A German speaker cautioned against "ecological laissez-faire"; business
had an important part to play, but there were some choices which had to be
made by the political process and could not be shaped by the price mechanism
of the market.
A Canadian speaker suggested that the comprehensive control of environ-
mental pollution implied a deceleration of economic growth, which might lead
to intensified social conflict. When it became apparent to the public that a
static GNP meant the end of an ever "larger pie", the pressures for a permanent
redistribution of income and reallocation of resources could make the present
instability "look like child's play''. An American participant pointed out that
environmental/ecological issues did not command a top priority among many
of the poor and the blacks, to which another us speaker replied that this was
all the more reason to know the costs of proposed solutions, so that one would
appreciate the economic value ofthe things people were being asked to give up.
INCENTIVES AND DETERRENTS: THE COST-EFFECTIVE PRINCIPLE
With a proper regard for the environment in its broadest sense-both physi-
cal and social-how could society insure continuing economic growth and a
spreading of the national product, while still adhering to the concept of cost
efficiency? This was the fundamental question, as expressed by an American
participant. In his opinion, it was pointless to talk of a compromise between
cost-effectiveness and other principles. Within the private sphere, there was
no alternative to the producer and consumer between them paying for every-
thing. Since the corporation was simply a mechanism for getting things done,
and depended on the consumer for its resources, it was the consumer in the
end who bore all the expense. There was thus no room for a dual standard
whereby industry would look to one kind of return for the manufacture of its
own products and to another kind for doing something described as "social",
In the public sphere, the consumer and taxpayer were the same person, so
again the consumer paid for everything. It did not follow, however, that a
corporation's exercise of its social responsibility meant a dilution in the share-
holder's return on his investment. He was interested in future as well as present
dividends, and there might be none if the company failed to conduct its.el_f in
a responsible, far-sighted way.
A British speaker approached the cost problem with the observation that in
some countries, such as the us, where environmental problems were recognized
to be acute, somehow no concerted effort had been made to deal with them.
It was, therefore, up to political leaders to produce programs which gave hope
of being effective within a reasonable time. Once government had devised
41
I
i
I
11
I
II
'I
11
ii
11
Ii
I
!
I
ii
II
:1
ii
ii
:1
!
!I
ii
I
:[
u
'.[
i:
ill
I
i
I
I
1,1
such programs, did it really matter whether business paid and passed the
price along to the consumer, or whether government taxed the consumer and
did the job itself? This question was answered by an American participant,
who preferred the first alternative, since it would bring competitive forces
into play. He mentioned as well another concept which was being studied in
the us: that of charging industry for its use of resources which had previously
been considered free, such as air and water. Such an assessment, coupled with
minimum uniform standards, would not impede the functioning of normal
economic forces.
Another us speaker objected to the introduction of the cost-effectiveness
concept into the discussion. Even ifthe means ofproductiort were in the hands
of the state, all the costs of doing business would have to be covered. Authority
and responsibility were handmaidens, and undertaking to meet a responsi-
bility without authority would result in failure. Business had the obligation
to deal with the subjects of its impact, and it was accustomed to investing in
non-yielding assets in order to survive. Under our system, though, it could
only recover its costs in the marketplace; for government to subsidize them
would be to aid weak and inefficient companies. The elimination of pollution
caused by industry had to be paid for by consumers in their prices; and govern-
ment had to deal with its own pollution with taxes.
A us participant recommended a third alternative to increasing prices or
taxes: reducing marketing costs. He claimed that the large detergent manu-
facturers might have solved the phosphate and enzyme pollution problem by
shifting a part of their huge budgets from the "foolishness" of advertising to
research on bio-degradable products.
A Belgian speaker alluded to the difficulty of adapting the mechanics of the
enterprise, at the production and distribution level, to a new scale of values in
which efficiency, profitability, and the development of the company did not
occupy a major place.
BUSINESS AND GOVERNMENT AS PARTNERS IN SOLVING SOCIAL PROBLEMS
Various part1c1pants emphasized the need for some sort of partnership
between business and government to deal with the causes of social instability.
A British speaker said that there was a whole range of problems which were
simply too big for the private sector, and an American speaker pointed out that
business was unable to assume the open-end commitments that were often
required. According to a Swiss participant, a dialogue between the private
sector and the public authorities, leading to joint planning and working alli-
ances, was unavoidable, partly in order to still political unrest. An American
42
speaker advocated a revolution in the working relationships between business,
government and the academic world in order to bring our full resources to
bear on problems in such areas as the cities, transportation, health care and
education. To enable experienced people to move about as needed during
their careers, there would have to be a restructuring of compensation and
pension plans, as well as of many institutional arrangements.
On the basis of the working papers and the discussion, a German participant
concluded that American businessmen were more prepared to work with the
state on these problems than were the Europeans, who were perhaps disillusion-
ed with governmental institutions. Most of the participants seemed to agree,
though, that business could play an important role in solving certain problems,
such as environmental pollution. With "academic irreverence", the speaker
suggested that this might be an erroneous assumption, based on an under-
estimation of the scope of the problems. Expenditures in the range of 10% of
a nation's GNP were envisaged, which would require a qualitative jump to
quite a different system-synthesizing science, industry and government-to
which the only analogy was war. This would necessitate changes in the habits
and attitudes ofconsumers, as well as in the institutional framework, and would
result in profound changes in our capitalistic system, since a limited tech-
nocratic approach would not suffice.
A British speaker feared that the foregoing analysis risked creating a false
antithesis of the respective roles of business and government, which were after
all not so different. He was also concerned about the specter it conjured up of
the "corporate state'.', with industry working collectively in tandem with
government, "as a separate estate of the realm". This would entail serious
risks to democratic processes and controls. Another British participant said
that perhaps one did not need to make a choice between two widely conflicting
views about the possible contribution of business. Government was bound in
any event to play the major role, not merely because it was the only agency in
society which could underwrite some risks and costs, but because the political
process alone could decide on priorities. But new instruments were needed to
transmit to politicians on a continuing basis the public's sense of these priori-
ties, and private initiatives in this sphere were to be welcomed.
In this connection, a Belgian speaker noted that European business leaders
were hesitant to speak out on public issues for a number of reasons-lack of a
forum, fear that their motives would be suspected, or simply a feeling that an
airing of their views was inappropriate. They needed to find ways to bring
their weight to bear on the political level, as the labor unions had learned to do.
Another Belgian thought that the business world could assist the political and
intellectual classes in devising new institutions and channeling new sets of
43
,, "
values to respond to the needs of an anguished industrial society which had
lost confidence in itself. On a similar theme, an American speaker said that
public problem-solving in his country could benefit from the skills of more·
businessmen with experience in such fields as systems analysis and data process-
ing, to .counterbalance the excessive number of lawyers in government.
A Turkish and a Belgian participant recommended consideration of "mixed
enterprises" in which both the public and private sectors had a stake. General
value systems were no longer acceptable, and one had to search for pluralistic
approaches.
THE CONTRIBUTION OF BUSINESS: SOME CASES IN POINT
During the course of the discussion, reference was made to various programs
and projects illustrating the sort of contribution which could be made by mem-
bers of the business community.
A British.participant, who attributed many social problems to the decline
of the "Protestant ethic", felt that Christian culture, being a mass movement
organized on the ground to obtain assent, embodied many values which could
aid in the resolution of these problems. This concept had been put into practice
in the UK in St. George's House, i'\lindsor Castle, where British businessmen
met with churchmen of all denominations to discuss the moral aspects of in-
dustrial questions. '
Two American speakers discussed the operations of the Allegheny Con-
ference on Community Development, founded in the r94o's to work on the
rebuilding problems of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Over the years, this organi-
zation had been successful in several fields, including housing, pollution control,
mass transportation, and the training and hiring of inner city blacks. Two
operating principles had emerged from its work: (1) only the chief executives
ofthe sponsoring companies participated, meeting regularly without substitutes
and with the assistance of a small staff; and (2) the Conference had accepted
the need to work with local government at all levels, regardless oftheir competen-
ce orpolitical coloration. By pooling theirinterest, efforts and money, the business
corporations involved had demonstrated the dramatic cost effectiveness that
could be achieved by a private problem-solving organization working along-
side government.
In the field of employee relations, a British participant praised the role of
the German works councils, which were established by law to keep employees
fully informed about such matters as company sales, exports and profits. The
effects were impossible to quantify, but they were certainly of great psycholog-
ical importance. This speaker had been particularly impressed by the evi-
44
ence of good labor relations he had observed in a large German automobile
anufacturing firm.
A French commentator in turn spoke highly of the employee relations pro-
ram of a major British retail merchandising company. The expenditure of a
reat deal of time and effort to establish a feeling of identity between manage-
ent and staff had resulted in an annual personnel turnover rate of only 3%,
ompared with the usual figure of 20-25%·
,·. Another French speaker described an experiment called the European Busi-
.ness University, which had been designed as a forum for a continuing dialogue
'between senior corporate management and executive candidates. The young
men, who were at first diffident and suspicious, usually ended up with a better
·· appreciation, not only of the technical problems of management, but also of
the basic human qualities necessary for business leadership.
An American participant reported that a us group was studying the feasi-
bility of establishing an independent organization, respected by both the busi-
ness community and the public at large, to conduct a "social audit" of the
operations of a corporation, in much the same sense as accounting firms con-
ducted financial audits. It was felt that such an organization could furnish a
more balanced and useful judgment than could a special interest group, which
might tend to look at things from its own viewpoint.
* * *
45
i
I'
j
......
......
·I
,1!
?,!
:1
'l::
)'
a
'.'!;
':N
,,
)I
I
j
THE POSSIBILITY OF A CHANGE OF THE AMERICAN
ROLE IN THE WORLD, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
The background for discussion of this item of the Agenda consisted of
a paper prepared by British participant which was distributed before the
meeting.
INTRODUCTION TO AND SUMMARY OF THE
BRITISH WORKING PAPER!
In introducing his paper, the author expressed surprise that, during the
discussion of the first Agenda item, none of the participants had mentioned
_the undoubted fact that the Vietnam war was an important cause (or at least
a major multiplying factor) ofsocial instability in the us today, and that many
people, particularly the young, felt that resources which should have been
devoted to solving important domestic problems had been diverted for too long
to support an unrealistic foreign policy.
The present Agenda item dealt with the attempt of the Nixon administra-
tion to correct this misallocation of resources and to bring us policy into line
with current realities and with America's true interests. As the stability of us
society was essential to the strength of the whole Western community, Euro-
peans should welcome this new American effort, and should be prepared to
modify some of their own policies if necessary to ease America's adjustment to
her new role.
The author found President Nixon's two reports to the Congress on Foreign
Policy, in 1970 and 1971, most impressive as comprehensive statements by a
government of its approach to major world problems. The analysis underlying
these reports was based on two key conclusions:
l. that the power of the us and the ussR to control events outside their own
borders was now limited, even iftheir ambitions were not; this was especially
so with respect to the Third World, where neither ofthe super-powers had made
any lasting gains over the past quarter-century.
2. that the "Communist Camp" no longer existed as an effective force in world
politics, as there were now as many varieties of communism as there were of
capitalism.
49
11
ii
I
'
[
11:
11.:
I:
!t:
Iii
1;
I'
I
i:
11:
l/f
11:
1l
1
1
11
1:
1:
1:
1:
It followed that the West could afford to take a more relaxed attitude to-
ward political change, particularly in the Third World, where its intervention
might in fact be counter-productive. us commitments for military assistance
could thus be reduced, and defense expenditures cut accordingly. This was the
core of the Nixon Doctrine.
Although the author of the working paper fully agreed with that analysis, he
wondered whether all its implications had been understood and accepted by
those responsible for us policy, and by America's allies as well. He was con-
cerned in particular with four problem areas:
r. The us had already made large cuts in her military capability, without
corresponding reductions in her commitments abroad. If called upon to inter-
vene in the future, it seemed she would have either to interpret her commit-
ments differently or to lower the nuclear threshold and attempt to achieve with
nuclear weapons what she was no longer capable of doing with conventional
forces.
2. President Nixon apparently intended to keep some 50,000 men in Vietnam
after 1972 as part of a defensive air strike force. While this decision was honor-
ably motivated, it might lead America to some appallingly difficult choices.
Ifthe South Vietnamese government could not in time perfect its own defenses,
would the us force be kept there indefinitely? And if air power proved inade-
quate, would the us add ground reinforcements, or resort to nuclear weapons?
Or would she elect instead to withdraw completely, in South Vietnam's
darkest hour?
3. While the us had in recent years reduced substantially the proportion of her
national wealth spent on defense, so far no program had apparently been
devised to redirect these resources toward the solution of domestic social prob-
lems.
4. Would the sound intellectual analysis and comprehension ofworld changes,
as embodied in the Nixon Doctrine, prevail even in the face of new foreign
crises, or would it give way to a renewed American "gut reaction" in favor of
intervention, particularly if there were to be a lessening of the domestic polit-
ical and psychological pressures alluded to in the President's r97 r report?
Although the Nixon Doctrine covered almost every aspect of world affairs,
the author had chosen to focus his working paper on the implications for Europe.
In this connection, he noted that some Americans-outside the administra-
tion-seemed apprehensive about their European allies' undertaking (with
the Ostpolitik, for instance), the same kind of "differentiated approach" to
negotiations with the communists that the us was taking in SALT, the Middle
East, Vietnam, Chile and China.
50
!
l
I
In his view, this nervousness about initiatives toward an Ostpolitik was
unwarranted for several reasons:
r. The Ostpolitik had been fully discussed and endorsed in NATO.
2. Every member of NATO had steadfastly refused to take any further steps in
this matter until the Berlin question had been settled.
3. At the same time, NATO itselfwas demonstrating greater strength and unity.
4. There was no confirmation of the fear that the Ostpolitik would weaken
Western Europe by turning Germany's attention to the east. On the contrary,
the Germans saw their Ostpolitik and Westpolitik as two sides ofthe same coin,
with priority to be given to the latter if a choice were ever necessary.
5. Soviet enthusiasm for the Ostpolitik had been tempered, so there was no
need to worry about precipitous progress.
The author felt that the main potential threat to peace in Europe was the
demand ofthe East Europeans for greater freedom and national independence.
One could not rule out the possibility of a conflict erupting there and spilling
across the Iron Curtain, provoking a confrontation between NATO and the
Warsaw Pact powers. The Ostpolitik sought to reduce this risk by persuading
Russia that she could come to terms safely with the political changes resulting
from East Europe's "de-colonialization" without the West's taking military
advantage of her.
This initiative might produce a satisfactory Berlin settlement, which in
turn could lead to a European Security Conference with discussions of mutual
and balanced force reductions. Such a conference, in the author's view, would
seek to substitute cooperation for competition to achieve security in Europe,
just as the SALT negotiations were trying to do globally at the strategic nuclear
level. The conference should not be expected to produce rapid progress toward
concrete agreements. It would constitute rather a learning process aimed at
producing a slow change in the climate in which decisions were taken in the
various national capitals, and eventually to some modification of national and
collective policies.
While the resultant adjustment in thinking might at times be painful, one
did not need to fear its consequences, so long as the nations of the West contin-
ued to discuss the process and to harmonize their approaches, as they had
in the past.
* * *
In presenting "A New Strategy for Peace" in his first Report on United
States Foreign Policy for the 1970s, President Nixon had based his new posture
<t.
'I
primarily on the radical transformation in world politics since President
Truman first committed the us to an active role overseas. He had pointed out
that the Cold War was no longer the decisive factor in international relations.
Western Europe and Japan had recovered from the ravages of World War II.
The Third World had proved unexpectedly immune to Communist penetra-
tion and the Marxist dream of international Communist unity had disinte-
grated. America and Russia had recognised a vital mutual interest in halting
the dangerous momentum of the nuclear arms race. The 1970s were to be an
era of negotiation.
The President's second report, "Building for Peace", in 1971, reaffirmed
this analysis of the outside world but was more candid about the internal
factors which had made inevitable some revision in America's foreign and
defense policies. "To continue our predominant contribution might not have
been beyond our physical remurces", he explained, "-though out own do-
mestic problems summoned them. But it would certainly have exceeded our
psychological resources." So "we will look to others for a greater share in the
definition of policy as well as in bearing the costs of programs. This psycholog-
ical reorientation is more fundamental than the material redistribution; when
countries feel responsible for the formulation of plans they are more apt to
furnish the assets needed to make them work." On the other hand, "we only
compound insecurity if we modify our protective or development responsibil-
ities without giving our friends the time and the means to adjust, materially
and psychologically, to a new form of American participation in the world."
None ofAmerica's allies could complain about the redistribution of material
and psychological burdens which the President proposed in such balanced
terms. None could contest the validity ofthe arguments he adduced. Indeed the
domestic pressures for change were much more powerful than he admitted. At
a time when America's internal problems, particularly in the cities, risked
becoming insoluble for lack ofresources and the absence of policies devoted to
them, the pressure of military expenditure on the economy had become intol-
erable. It was not wholly an accident that in the last decade economic growth
in the developed non-Communist world was in inverse proportion to the per-
centage of GNP devoted to defense.
Meanwhile public support for American military action overseas had shown
a startling decline. Although the steep drop in American military casualties
had reduced the temperature of the opposition to the Vietnam war there was
little evidence that it had reduced its size. The postwar commercial and polit-
ical entanglements of the us with the outside world might forbid a return to the
isolationism of the Thirties, but the role of world policeman was no longer
acceptable and the domestic retreat to the suburbs had its counterpart in a
52
revulsion against foreign responsibilities. Yet, whatever the immediate risks to
their own security, America's allies could only welcome this shift in American
priorities ifit led to a greater concentration of effort on social and environmen-
tal problems, which had been dangerously neglected since the New Deal. The
stability ofAmerican society itselfwas the precondition of any useful American
role in the world.
The Nixon Doctrine had already had a dramatic effect on American military
spending and deployment overseas. The defense budget had declined from
9% of the GNP to under 7%· 400,000 men had been brought home, nearly all
from Vietnam and other Asian countries. It was the President's intention to
r.ut the armed forces from the 3.5 million of 1968 to 2.5 million by 1973, and if
possible to dispense with the draft altogether. So long as America retained the
capacity for assured destruction of an aggressor after absorbing a surprise
attack, she no longer demanded a superiority in strategic nuclear weapons; in
SALT she was seeking agreement with the Soviet Union to maintain the balance
of mutual deterrence at a lower level of forces on both sides, and if possible
to control the development of new strategic systems.
It had been clear ever since the seminal speech in Guam that Asia would
bear the brunt ofthis planned reduction in American capabilities, and President
Nixon had in fact promised to make no cuts in America's combat strength in
Europe during his present term of office. The national review of NATO strategy
he commissioned seemed to have confirmed the desirability of maintaining the
so-called strategy offlexible response as agreed by NATO in 1967 and developed
through the Nuclear Planning Group in later years. This strategy rejected alike
the "tripwire" concept of immediate and automatic nuclear response which
had become unacceptable to the us, and the alternative of a wholly convention-
al response even to an all-out Soviet attack, which had never been acceptable
to the Europeans. Instead, NATO aimed to hold anything but a major deliberate
invasion without recourse to nuclear weapons, and in the case ofa major attack
to introduce nuclear weapons into the battlefield in such a way as to enable
and encourage the enemy to stop the fighting ifhe did not want to risk an all-out
strategic exchange.
It was not certain that the present strategy offlexible response would remain
acceptable to both America and Europe ifthere were a unilateral reduction in
NATO's overall conventional capability. America's agreement to maintain
existing force levels for the present followed on Europe's agreement to make a
slightly greater conventional contribution to NATO and to spend a billion dollars
on new infrastructure-the first concrete example of a European defense
identity in practice. But America's longer term intentions were unknown, and
there was significant Congressional pressure for cuts in her NATO forces. None
53
of the European countries was finding it easy either to maintain existing levels
of defense expenditure or to provide adequately trained soldiers in sufficient
numbers.
If a fall in NATO force levels made the present strategy appear invalid, a
dangerous and divisive argument might open between America and Europe;
Europe would try to commit America to a more automatic nuclear response,
and if rebuffed would probably be torn between the desire for an independent
strategic nuclear deterrent ofits own, despite the risk ofprovoking the Russians
and the difficulty of accommodating the Germans, and the desire for a recon-
ciliation with Russia at any cost. Such a prospect was of course a powerful
incentive for maintaining existing force levels-but it should also focus atten-
tion on the prospects ofnegotiating mutual and balanced force reductions with
the Warsaw powers, as the foundation for a new European security system based
on cooperation rather than confrontation between the blocs.
It was at this point that the Nixon Doctrine would under go its most severe test
so far as Europe was concerned. If its fundamental analysis of the new world
situation was not just rhetoric devised to cover a retreat from responsibility
imposed by domestic pressures, if the era of negotiation was to be taken seri-
ously, and the European partners were to play their promised share in the
formulation of allied policy, then America must be prepared to see Europe take
the initiative in some areas of discussion with the Communist states, just as
America had already taken the initiative in others, notably SALT and the
Arab-Israel conflict.
So far President Nixon's style had been immensely welcome to Europeans
who had been irritated by the tendency of the previous Administ~ation to
present them with unilateral decisions on major issues of allied policy and then
to reverse those decisions with the same indifference to their views-witness
the tragicomedy of the MLF and the somersaults on NATO strategy and on ABMS.
None would contest the wisdom of the President's general approach towards
multilateral negotiations with the Soviet Union as presented in the European
chapter of "Building for Peace".
The confrontation with the Warsaw powers was now passing from static
trench warfare to a war of movement; the problem was to exploit the need for
independent initiatives by individual countries on both sides without losing
control of the campaign as a whole. Yet this analogy was imperfect; for the
aim of the battle was not victory but reconciliation, and the construction of a
new security system which would permit Russia to come to terms with the
colonial revolution in Eastern Europe without fears for her defense. It was not
easy for individuals weaned on a vision of the Cold War as a zero-sum game, in
which one side could gain only if the other lost, to readjust their thinking to the
54
new world situation as President Nixon described it; for an alliance like NATO,
the readjustment was more difficult still.
At present the problem was best illustrated by the differing attitudes to
Chancellor Brandt's Ostpolitik; given an agreement on Berlin, the preparation
ofa European Security Conference would raise similar issues even more acutely.
Opposition to the Ostpolitik was confined so far to individuals and groups who
did not hold Government power in their own countries-notably a large part
of the cou/csu in Germany (though not Dr. Schroeder, at present its most
popular leader) and certain retired officials in the us.
Some distinguished Americans from the "Occupation Age" clearly found
it difficult to come to terms with a world so different from that in which they
had been able to determine the policies not only of the us but ofGermany as
well. More significant was the attitude of those whose doubts about the Ost-
politik stemmed primarily from fears that it might prevent closer unity in
Western Europe. According to this view, the Ostpolitik was engendering com-
placency and wishful thinking about the prospects of restoring the unity of
Germany and Europe as a whole; this was distracting the West Germans from
the urgent need to enlarge the European Economic Community by including
Britain and the other applicants, and to strengthen it by giving its central
organs supranational powers.
Ofcourse it would be idle to deny that such dangers do exist. But no one with
a real concern for Europe's future could afford to ignore the popular demand
for reconciliation between Eastern and Western Europe and the explosive
pressures inside the Communist states for greater individual freedom and na-
tional independence.
The postwar division of Europe was seen increasingly, on both sides of the
Iron Curtain, as an unnatural mutilation and impoverishment. No one now
believed that Russia could be rolled back by military force, as many pretended
they did twenty years ago. If the necessary climate of mutual trust was to be
created for a voluntary loosening of Russia's grip, it must start with the exor-
cising of the German demon in Eastern Europe and continue with a mutual
exploration of the security problem. A growing number of Germans seemed
unable to renounce the ideal, however distant, of reunification, and the
evidence now seemed clearly against the thesis-held by many during the
Fifties-that the West Germans would be prepared to lose their national
identity in a West European federation.
Whether it was President de Gaulle who had killed this possibility, or whether
it had always been too ambitious a dream, it was clear that the European
Economic Community would not assume significant supranational powers in
the near future whether Britain joined or not. The idea that economic co-oper-
55
~
ation would in itself force political unity was now seen to be mistaken. If
political unity was to be achieved on any major issue of foreign policy, it
would be around the general approach to Eastern Europe which was embodied
in the Ostpolitik. Unless the concept of West European unity was open to the
East, it would be unacceptable to most West Europeans.
It was equally true, as Chancellor Brandt had so often insisted, that the
Ostpolitik was less likely to attain its long-term objectives unless the Community
was enlarged so as to achieve a better internal balance and greater overall
strength. In fact his Ostpolitik and his Westpolitik were two sides of the same
coin. As he often pointed out, his first important diplomatic initiative had been
directed not Eastward but Westward-to develop Common Market unity on
Britain.
In Germany itself, however, the onslaught against the Ostpolitik from
opposition politicians was based primarily on national rather than Euro-
pean grounds. Herr Birrenbach, for example, argued in the Bundestag foreign
affairs debate: "The interests of quite a few other countries are not identical
with those of the Germans. Ifthe nation itrelfdoes not pursue its own interests
with the necessary vigour, we cannot expect foreign governments to protect
them on our behalf."
Yet the view that the Ostpolitik was selling West German interests down the
river did not stand up to examination. Chancellor Brandt's strongest opponent
among the Communists was Herr Ulbricht; in general he aroused misgivings
even more among the "hawks" of the Warsaw Pact than among the "hawks"
of NATO, and in the immediate aftermath of the Polish riots Soviet diplomatists
had tried to undermine him by leaks in Washington and Bonn.
Western criticism of the Ostpolitik was coming from men who were out of
power, and who in the case of Germany might have party political motives for
their attacks. The nearest thing to criticism which the Ostpolitik had encoun-
tered from governments in the West was the reference in "Building for Peace"
to the dangers of what was described with uncharacteristic opacity as "a
differentiated detente". Yet oddly enough the same document took exactly the
opposite view on the same issue when it said: "In the era of Communist soli-
darity we pursued an undifferentiated negotiating approach towards Commu-
nist countries. In the new era we see a multipolar Communism marked by a
variety of attitudes toward the rest of the world. Failure to respond to this
diversity would have ignored new opportunities for improving relations.
Negotiation with different Communist countries on specific issues carries more
promise."
These were wise words. But if a differentiated negotiating approach were
successful, it could only lead to a differentiated detente. Ofcourse the Western
56
"
countries should conduct their policies in harmony and with mutual consul-
tation-as they did. But a failure to make progress in one area could not be
treated as a reason for not making what progress was possible in others. Dead-
lock in the Paris talks on Vietnam was not regarded by the us as an argument
against America's trying to get agreement in SALT or in the Middle East talks.
It should not be allowed to obstruct her allies' efforts either.
Ifthe Nixon Doctrine meant what it said, it should not only permit but even
encourage America's allies to make progress in negotiations with Communist
powers where progress was possible without damage to the Western community
as a whole. The Russians had often in the past used negotiations with the West
not in order to reach agreement but solely to divide and confuse their adver-
saries. They might often seek to do so again. But the author believed that the
West was now sufficiently mature to resist this type ofdeception, while the new
tensions between Russia and her allies exposed the Communist camp to greater
risks in multilateral negotiation. The outstanding success of the December I 970
meeting of the NATO Council compared with the confusion at recent meetings
of the Warsaw Pact illustrated this point. But the NATO Council could not have
displayed such unity and strength except in the context of its prior agreement
to press toward a European Security Conference on sensible terms.
The critical test of the prospects for the new wave of Western policy repre-
sented by the Nixon Doctrine, the Ostpolitik and the movement for a European
Security Conference would be, as so often in the past, Berlin. If a satisfactory
improvement in the Berlin situation were reached through the Four Power
talks and the simultaneous contacts between Bonn and Pankow, confidence in
seeking further progress would be immensely strengthened. We were of course
entering unfamiliar territory. The us would remain uneasy about losing that
central control of Western policy which had been the first commandment ofits
postwar theology. Some of the allies would find it painful to have to think
for themselves. As the old landmarks crumbled away, many on both sides ofthe
Atlantic would long for the comfortable pseudocertainties of the Cold War.
But the real test of the achievement of those remarkable men who shaped
American policy in the heroic decade after the defeat of Hitler would be the
ability of Europe and America to live on equal terms in a world in which
external pressures no longer shaped and guaranteed their unity.
A GENERAL REACTION BY AN AMERICAN
PARTICIPANT TO THE WORKING PAPER
A general reaction to the working paper was offered by an American partici-
pant. He began by saying that, while the picture ofemerging events in Europe
57
\"
I
i ..
111
l1
. I:
Ii
I
I
1'
Ii
11
II
/I
I
i
· 11
I
!
• i
:
"!'
as painted by the author was an attractive one, he did not believe that the
process described would work in the way suggested. In the speaker's view, the
authormisassessed Soviet objectives and ignored the hard realities of power pol-
itics. The central postulate of his position was that the Soviets maintained a
frantic hold on Eastern Europe primarily out offear ofa revanchist Germany, the
implication being that Soviet expansionist objectives were matters of the past.
The author apparently believed that the discontents and stifled aspirations in
the satellite states were generating such pressures that, if only we could create
what he called a "climate of mutual trust" with Moscow, the Kremlin would
voluntarily "loosen its grip" on its empire in apparent imitation of Britain's
benign policy toward its own empire over the past half century. At the same
time, he seemed to brush aside any serious prospects for progress toward
political unity in Western Europe, asserting that "if political unity is to be
achieved on any major issue of foreign policy, it will be round the general
approach to Eastern Europe which is embodied in the Ostpolitik".
In the judgment of the speaker, this represented an attempt to return to a
status quo ante-bellum-but this time with the major difference that, while
Western Europe remained a congeries of small and medium-sized nation
states, the Soviet Union loomed at the other end of Europe as a military and
industrial giant of overwhelming dimensions armed with all the weapons of
nuclear death. To assume that the Soviet Union would go to hazardous lengths
to enforce the Brezhnev Doctrine-as it did less than three years ago in Prague
-purely for the purpose of maintaining a buffer against a Western threat, but
that it would willingly see its empire dismantled once that threat were neutral-
ized by a series of non-aggression pacts seemed quite fanciful. There was in
fact no serious evidence that the Soviet Union had discarded its expansionist am-
bitions or that itwould not take advantage ofany available opportunity to extend
its power and influence. Perhaps it was now driven more by nationalistic than
ideological motives-that was a matter for argument-but twentieth century
European history had proved that nations could have expansionist ambitions
with no ideology whatever.
What was the position of the Soviet Union today? the American participant
asked. Within the past few years it had taken giant strides toward making its
weight felt around the world. It was now far more powerful than ever before in
history. It had realized the ancient Czarist dream of becoming a Mediter-
ranean power. It had established a firm beachhead in Egypt to which it had
deployed large quantities of trained manpower and the most highly sophis-
ticated weapons. It was strengthening its presence and influence at the mouth
of the Red Sea as a staging platform for politlcal subversion in the developing
vacuum of the Persian Gulf and in East Africa. For the first time in history it
58
was on its way to becoming a major naval power, with the prospect of fleets in
all the oceans of the world-including the Indian.
Nor was its Eastern European empire in any foreseeable danger of blowing
apart. Again and again (East Germany in 1953, Poland and Hungary in 1956,
and Czechoslovakia in 1968), individual member states ofthe empire had made
heartbreaking efforts to loosen the bonds that held them. Each time the Soviets
had ruthlessly intervened. Could anyone sensitive to the hopeless despair in
Prague today seriously believe that Czechoslovakia was again on the verge of
breaking out? Instead it seemed that the Kremlin was never more determined
to enforce the Brezhnev Doctrine-its own special version of the colonialist
concept of limited sovereignty-with all that implies.
The speaker was inclined to agree with the forecast that, no matter what
pressures might build up in the satellite countries, the Soviet Union would never
relax its hold on its empire until there had been a complete change ofdirection
in Moscow, a change of direction possible only with a fundamental alteration
in the system and structure of the Soviet regime. Yet what were the chances of
that? Today the Kremlin housed a government of old men facing a succession
problem that, in a dictatorship, could be resolved only by a crisis. With great
good luck such a crisis might possibly bring in a somewhat more liberal leader-
ship but, given the brutal politics of the Soviet system, it was quite as apt to
bring to the fore a new Stalin.
The speaker's central point was that the might and purpose of the Soviet
Union could be realistically dealt with either by a continuance of the present
system of American power on the continent or by effective progress toward the
building of an indigenous structure of power in Western Europe-or, prefre-
ably, for some time to come-by both. But it could not be safely countered by
individual national diplomacy on the part of Western European states which,
acting alone, necessarily dealt from weakness. So long as Western Europe re-
mained divided into separate states with a long history ofrivalry, such national
initiatives were more likely to fragment the West than to liberate the East from
the relentless discipline of its tyrannical master.
In pressing for a European Security Conference, the Soviet Union had sought
to encourage exactly that process-to halt progress toward European unity and
to attempt to pry America out of Europe. In the end, it quite clearly hoped to
hasten the dissolution of NATO on the seductive contention that such a free
alliance is an appropriate trade-off for that shoddy and factitious sham, the
Warsaw Pact. Up to the time ofthis meeting, the Soviet Union had made quite
clear that it did not see the mutual and balanced reduction of forces as an
appropriate subject for the agenda of such a conference.
The speaker emphasized that his doubts about Chancellor Brandt's initia-
59
-~ n
tive toward an Ostpolitik did not relate either to the motivation or good inten-
tions of the Chancellor or his government. On the contrary, the speaker was
convinced that Chancellor Brandt was irrevocably committed to Western ideas
and indeed to Western European unity, and one could only sympathize with his
desire to do whatever could be usefully accomplished to ameliorate the personal
hardships flowing from the brutal division of his country.
The speaker's concern was rather with the political and psychological effects
of the treaties with Moscow and Warsaw. He feared that they might tend to
engender a deceptive euphoria-the public impression that a major break-
through had been achieved with the East, when, in fact, the substantive con-
tent of the treaties was de minimis. Was there not, he asked, danger that such
euphoria could, if continued for any length of time, lead a new generation of
Germans, unconditioned by the war and its aftermath, to reject the exertions
necessary for a protracted holding of the line against the elemental, though
presently frustrated, objective ofthe Soviet Union to push the boundaries ofits
empire farther to the West? Would they be prepared to exercise the necessary
patience, particularly when European complacency would inevitably build
pressures in America for some phasing out of her own overseas deployments?
Instead of depending uncritically on one's confidence-no matter how well
justified-in the government now in power in Bonn, one should squarely face
the possibility-that present initiatives shrewdly exploited by the Kremlin might
set in motion forces that could in time lead to dubious results. The present was
after all only a brief moment in history, and one dared not either ignore the
future or neglect the past. Europe had for centuries been an area of fluid
alignments and shifting alliances, and if one sought to look beyond tomorrow
he would do well to observe what happened before yesterday. One should not,
therefore, wholly forget the fact that German politics had from the beginning
been marked by two distinct schools of thought: one emphasizing Eastern ties
and the other Western. These intramural debates had generally been won by
the "Easterners", favoring a German foreign policy facing eastward for secu-
rity and "compensation". Many tend to forget that Adenauer's commitment
to "the Western link" was thus a radical break in the continuity of German
policy, that it was not the norm but something quite new in the world.
Yet the speaker did not wish to overstate his anxieties-merely to note them
as a useful caveat. He conceded that the treaties with Moscow and Warsaw might
well have some limited usefulness. If the conditions for ratification were not
achieved, that development might help demonstrate to German youth that
detente was not just around the corner, as they tended to believe. If the trea-
ties were ratified, it would presumably be because they had served as a lever
to secure some improvement in the Berlin arrangements.
60
What he principally regretted, though, was that the Federal Republic's
initiative appeared to be premature. What had been lacking was a well
thought-out sense ofsequence and priorities; for, once Western Europe were to
concentrate on building a solid structure of power, it could create a base from
which truly effective negotiations with the East might be conducted. IfBritain
adhered to the Rome Treaty, the way would be open to bring the diverse
peoples of Western Europe together in a great common enterprise enabling
them to speak to the East on a solid basis of equality. But, ifthe counterweight
of British power were not available to secure a stable balance, centrifugal
forces could become dangerously operative. Then, and under those conditions,
continued Western German initiatives with the East could seriously strain the
fabric of Europe, inducing in France a defensive introspective mood and con-
tributing to the worrisome psychological and political problems of Italy, a
Mediterranean power no longer washed by an exclusively Western sea.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
The discussion which followed dealt with the background and formulation
of the Nixon Doctrine, as well as with a number ofsubjects related closely to the
change of America's role in the world.
THE NIXON DOCTRINE: ITS ORIGINS AND OBJECTIVES
An American speaker explained that the objectives of the Nixon Doctrine
were essentially two-fold:
1. To elicit a broader sense of participation from other nations in the shaping
of international policies. For too many countries, the conduct offoreign policy
in the post-war years had come to consist mainly oflobbying in the Washington
decision-making process, with the hard choices left to the us. A more creative
part in building the world order ought to engender a greater interest in main-
taining it.
2. To reallocate responsibilities so that the us in some areas of the world would
cease to play the principal role of confrontation. There was no "cook-book"
with recipes for every conceivable situation, but it was clear at least that
America did not propose to engage herself with ground forces in future civil
wars. There was necessarily more ambiguity about what the us role might be
in externally-organized civil wars which faded into conventional wars.
6r
..
The speaker referred to two questions raised in the introduction to the work-
ing paper. First, he considered it extraordinarily unlikely that the present
administration would order a new us military intervention without having
first attempted thoughtfully and systematically to relate it to overall national
and world interests. Thus the recurrence of a Dominican-type involvement
could be excluded.
Second, he said that substantial cuts in us forces abroad did not need to
entail a choice between reinterpreting commitments and lowering the nuclear
threshold. Most of the troops brought home so far had come from Vietnam;
many others had been withdrawn from areas where their presence was larg-ely
symbolic, such as Korea. The new us analysis sought to relate the sufficiency of
forces-American or indigenous-in a given area to particular tasks to be
performed there in the face of foreseeable dangers.
The speaker went on to observe that America's interests generated her
commitments, not the other way round. It was her perception ofthese interests,
and of related dangers, that got her involved abroad; formal commitments
were the result, not the cause of her involvement. The us was involved in
Europe, for example, not because of treaty obligations, but because of a net-
work of relationships which had evolved and which she believed should be
strengthened. It would be useful one day for America to conduct a national
debate about how she perceived her interests with relation to other countries.
As the world changed, America's relationship to other countries naturally
changed. Consequently, it might be envisaged that, for the first time in history,
all commitments would remain uninterpreted for an indefinite period of time.
Turning to the domestic background against which the Nixon Doctrine
had been formulated, this participant said that the psychological factors
emphasized in the President's 1971 report, to which the working paper had
alluded, should not be understood as referring to the current stresses exem-
plified by protest demonstrations. The reference was rather to the serious
strains which were bound to be felt in the longer run if the us tried to carry
indefinitely the burden which only she had had the resources to assume in the
aftermath of World War II-that of being concerned simultaneously with
every important security and development problem everywhere in the world.
This task could now be shared with many other nations.
Another American speaker regretted that the Nixon Doctrine did not embody
a clearer distinction between "conventional wars", which should have an
early claim on the forces of the us and other nations under the UN Charter, and
civil wars growing out of ideological differences, where outside intervention
should be discouraged. Furthermore the us, while promising now to look
"primaril)>'' to an embattled ally to provide the manpower for its own defense,
foi
seemed to reserve the option of intervening with American troops whenever
necessary. Viewed in the light of such ambiguities, did the Nixon Doctrine
really represent a new departure, or did it instead fit exactly the pattern of us
involvement in Vietnam? A fellow countryman was similarly sceptical,
wondering if the us would not again "sneak in and escalate until something
works.''
A German participant conceded that developments had justified some modi-
fication of America's role in the world, but he cautioned the us against the
illusion that she could be relieved of the obligations and burdens of a super-
power. The Nixon Doctrine would not alter elementary facts and circumstances,
and there was no substitute for the guarantees the us had given. But there were
no signs that America intended to reduce her commitments, and the new us
role might turn out to be simply the old one at a somewhat lower cost.
A Norwegian speaker, while recognizing the political burden us leadership
had to bear in the face ofisolationist tendencies at home, could still not see how
America would be able to change substantially her world role on her own
initiative, without conciliatory actions on the part of other world powers.
An International participant also found it difficult to foresee a fundamental
change in the us role. The world had need of a "measurable policy", which
America had sought to supply up to now by acting as a policeman, ready to
step in to correct imbalances of power. Ifshe abandoned this job for too long,~
it would certainly be taken up by another power, which would leave the us
little alternative but to retreat into isolation.
An American participant, who said he spoke for many young intellectuals
and politicians, wished to emphasize the depth of their instinct against inter-
vention abroad. This was due in part to the fact that, not having experienced
invasion or seen communism at first hand, they-perhaps wrongly-did not
fear the Russians in the way many Europeans did. But it also stemmed from
a sense of social unrest and a feeling of the need for a profound moral renewal
in the us. To this generation, diplomacy was not an art, or a chess game, or a
delicate balancing ofpower; it was a human enterprise which should be govern-
ed by a moral understanding of the links between peoples.
This younger group was strongly anti-militaristic, and was not concerned
with problems of image or credibility. It did not believe in the political con-
tinuum, that what had been must be. The New Hampshire presidential pri-
mary of 1968 had demonstrated that morally-based action could reverse
historic trends. Although this attitude might result in certain inconsistencies,
and even in a withdrawal from some foreign obligations, it should be recognized
as a hard emerging fact of American political life, and not be dismissed as
romantic rhetoric.
63
~ ..
f
This forecast was endorsed by two fellow Americans. One said that, unless
us actions abroad were moral and appropriate, a revulsion would build up
among young people against all foreign intervention. The other speaker felt it
would be difficult to exaggerate the change in Americans' attitudes-young
and old-about foreign policy and the us role in the world. Today there was
very little willingness to pay the price ofblood and treasure for the maintenance
of international order.
This outlook made a number of European participants uneasy. A Nether-
lands speaker characterized it as "a fervent plea for isolationism, wrapped in
somewhat different clothes", and a Norwegian participant hoped that it was
shared by only a limited number of young Americans. A Dane professed to.be
"simply horrified" at the prospect of an increasingly moralistic us foreign
policy; what was needed was more rationalism and less moralism.
PROSPECTS FOR DETENTE WITH THE COMMUNIST WORLD
As was pointed out by an American speaker, one's viewpoint about most of
the questions raised by this Agenda item depended largely on one's assessment
of the Soviet Union's likely intentions and actions during the next decade.
There was a wide divergence of views on this subject.
In the opinion of a Turkish participant, the basic imperialistic aims of the
Russians had not changed. There had been some modification of tactics, but
the cold war was not over. It had merely become unilateral, with the Soviets
still resorting to it whenever they deemed it convenient. The West could try
to achieve detente on a piecemeal basis, by taking advantage of Russia's need
to change her methods, but "we must know to whom we are talking". It was
especially important that Western public opinion be on guard against wishful
thinking, lest support be lost for the defense expenditures that were still neces-
sary.
A Norwegian speaker, who said he had always been a strong advocate of
realistic negotiations with the Soviet Union, could find no recent cause for
optimism about Russian designs. He cited the Brezhnev Doctrine, the Prague
intervention, ICBM developments and increased military expenditures, from
which he concluded that we were far from an era of mutual understanding.
This cautious approach was endorsed by a British participant, who saw tl1e
Soviet military presence in new areas ofthe world as the vanguard of increased
political penetration. Transitory disunity among the communist nations did
not mean an end to the dangers of recent decades. If relations with the East
had eased somewhat, it was in fact thanks to Western strength and unity.
While one could hope for a true detente, policy planning had to be based on
64
the worst contingencies. The West should therefore be prepared to seize op-
portunities for accommodation as they appeared, without letting down its
guard.
A French speaker remarked that, while there was less anxiety now about a
direct military confrontation in Europe, the fundamental antagonism between
the Soviet system and the West was the same as it had been twenty years ago.
The Russians had shown with their tanks in Prague how quickly and brutally
they could resort to the use of armed force. And the Czech and Hungarian
interventions were mild compared with what nearly happened last year in
Poland. One could only conclude that the Russians would never loosen their
grip on the strategic, economic and ideological empire which had fallen to
them in 1945. They would use all the force necessary to prevent a satellite
from escaping their orbit. In the eyes of free men, this in itself amounted to
aggression. The threat to European security might have been damped, but it
could not be extinguished, since it sprang from an irreconcilable conflict.
A British commentator warned that domestic revulsion from the role of
world policeman could push Western governments into a rationalized estimate
that detente was in view. "The wish becomes father to the thought." He also
took issue with the assertion by the author of the working paper that neither
the us nor the USSR had made any appreciable gains in the Third World in
the last quarter-century. Russia could boast of successes in Cuba, Egypt, Tan-
zania, Guinea, Congo-Brazzaville, Ceylon, and the Mediterranean and Indian
Oceans, whereas the West had only developments in Indonesia and Cambodia
on the credit side of the balance sheet. In the speaker's estimate, there had
been a constant nibbling-away of the us peace-keeping role, and an erosion of
the Western position in general.
An American participant listed some of the pressures moving the Soviet
Union toward negotiation: the emergence of China as a geopolitical and ideo-
logical rival; an appraisal of the risks of thermonuclear war; and an assort-
ment of domestic social and economic problems. At the same time, she was
inhibited by certain countervailing forces, such as the rigidity of her bureau-
cratic structure and the uncertainty as to what the reactions would be in East
Europe to any change in the status quo.
Most troublesome for the ussR was her dilemma as a great communist power.
Detente with the West, although it would leave her freer to concentrate on her
difficulties in the East, entailed risking her claim to ideological leadership,
especially if she appeared to go too far in accommodating the principal capi-
talist country. The Soviet Union might be relieved of this dilemma by settling
partially with some Western countries while retaining undiminished hostility
toward others. Such a "differentiated detente" would be antithetical to Western
65
l
solidarity, and the best insurance against it, in the speaker's view, was for each
nation undertaking individual negotiations with the ussR to consult fully with
its allies, as indeed the us was being careful to do in the SALT talks.
Along the same lines, an International speaker warned that strongly em-
phasizing East-West conciliation over Western integration could weaken
confidence between allies or between social groups within the alliance.
A British speaker was encouraged by the possibility that the us and the ussR
might share a peace-keeping role in the Middle East, but a French participant
feared that a multi-power peace-keeping force there would only produce
"another Berlin ... a disaster".
Leading the discussion onto a more philosophical ground, a Netherlands
speaker disputed the assumption that an era of mutual trust and cooperation
was to be desired as a return to "normalcy". International tensions were
produced not so much by wicked or stupid leaders as by conflicts of interest,
which were the norm of dynamic societies. Well-defined negotiations could
help to keep these tensions from exploding, but in many areas confrontation
would go on. As an American participant put it, "the world is still a dangerous
place", and force in its deterrent form or in its actual employment on occasion,
was still useful in holding together, or building, a better world, given the state
of the human material.
WEST GERMAN INITIATIVES TOWARD AN OSTPOLITIK
A French speaker said that he would have no misgivings about a "normali-
zation" of Germany's relations with her eastern neighbors if that meant simply
an improvement in border procedures, an easing of travel restrictions, and an
increase in cultural exchanges. To expect to go further than this, though,
would be to court disappointment and even danger.
He sketched in the historical background as he saw it. Adenauer had been
resigned to the division of Germany; he may even have welcomed it in a way.
European integration and the Western alliance meant more to him than Ger-
man reunification, and his successors had followed much the same line. Chan-
cellor Brandt was taking a different approach, for two main reasons. The first
was simply the politician's inclination to depart from the path of his predeces-
sors. New initiatives were regarded as ends in themselves, even though true
political wisdom often called for inaction. The second reason had to do with
Brandt's Social Democratic affiliation. This highly unitary party had been
revived after the war by Ernst Schumacher, a man obsessed with reunification.
As much as he hated and scorned communism, he probably would have ac-
cepted it in exchange for German unity. Although Brandt was not governed
66
by the same passion, the history of his party went far in explaining his position.
But the division of Germany had become a fact of life, accepted by the
Russians as well as the Germans. The Soviets would welcome neither rappro-
chement nor reunification of the two Germanies, even under a communist
flag, as this might present them with a major European schism. On the other
hand, the speaker thought that, as long as the Federal Republic remained a
faithful member of the Atlantic alliance, its Ostpolitik was doomed to insignif-
icance or failure. Germany had been exemplary since the war in her demo-
cratic practices and in her attachment to the West. "It would be a very great
mistake to awaken in her now other aspirations."
A German participant was convinced that Russia could not be dislodged
from her position in East Europe by a conciliatory Ostpolitik any more than
she could be by military means. She looked to the Ostpolitik in fact to rein-
force her presence there.
A Netherlands speaker claimed that the aims of the Ostpolitik were really
rather modest: improved relations with Poland and Czechoslovakia and a
re-affirmation of West Germany's rights in Berlin. He did not agree that the
Russians had lost interest in the Ostpolitik; it was simply that they had not
been prepared for the enormous nuisance value which Ulbricht was exploiting
to the full.
Arguing in support of the Ostpolitik, a German speaker challenged three
assertions made by the American participant who had led off the discussion.
First, that Germany's history suggested that her basic orientation might again
turn eastward. This notion underestimated the extent of the integration of
the two Germanies within their respective systems. The economy and society
of the Federal Republic were now profoundly western, and the flexibility of
Germany's "national option'' as a middle state open in both directions had
been lost forever.
Second, that the timing of the German initiative was premature. The speaker
recalled that Herr Schroder had opened debate on these issues in Ig66, and
that the signature of the Moscow treaty had been preceded by over a hundred
hours of top-level discussions. Complaints about timing could therefore not
refer to lack of preparation. Ifthe critics meant instead that a settlement about
Berlin should have come first, they should realize that the process would have
lost all its momentum. The preceding four-power negotiations on Berlin had
in fact become stalemated and were adjourned in favor of the German-Soviet
talks.
Third, the implication that the Ostpolitik would tend to undermine security
by, for example, complicating the case for continued us involvement in Europe.
67
,,
The speaker rejected this argument, saying that one should have greater con-
fidence in the sophistication of us legislators and policy-makers.
The American participant replied that his fundamental concern about the
treaties with Poland and the Soviet Union was their lack of any.real substance.
Meaningless as they were, though, they could still become a sort of hostage.
The political investment in obtaining them and in presenting them to the
German people could be exploited by the ussR by way of threats to modify or
revoke the treaties.
In the judgment of an Italian observer, Chancellor Brandt's initiatives to-
ward an Ostpolitik had performed the great service of putting to rest the old
alibi about German revanchisme. For years this had been a cement ofthe Eastern
bloc, providing both Ulbricht and Moscow with an ideological and political
justification, however mythical, of the unity of Eastern Europe. But the Ost-
politik made sense only within a European framework. Chancellor Brandt
could not have waited indefinitely for greater Western European integration
before proceeding, but if such integration were not eventually achieved, the
Ostpolitik would be simply another passing episode. An American intervention
lent support to this view.
A German speaker emphasized that the Ostpolitik represented Germany's
special contribution, within the Western alliance, to the effort to achieve a peace-
ful transformation of the East-West conflict, which could not be resolved by
doctrine or force. A contrasting view was expressed by an American partici-
pant, who found the source of the Ostpolitik in the will and aspirations of the
German people. This was related to an increasing world-wide assertion of
human needs and feelings, which would serve to diminish the interventionist
role of the super-powers.
Another American pointed out that the us had been saying for a decade or
more that negotiations with the East could begin only when Germany was
ready. Americans should therefore welcome the Ostpolitik instead of criticis-
ing it, and should hope that it would lead to a Berlin settlement and a united
approach to a European security arrangement. This sentiment was echoed by
an International speaker, who also predicted that both European integration
and East-West cooperation would develop at such a slow pace that there would
never be a time when utterly incompatible decisions would have to be faced.
An Italian participant expressed sympathy with the aims of the Ostpolitik,
but compared the philosophy ofsome ofits advocates with that of the Cliveden
set of the Thirties. This was, in his words, the "typical English attitude of
treating foreign dictators as if they were mixed-up kids" who just needed "to
be treated nicely".
68
~
l
THE PROPOSED EUROPEAN SECURITY CONFERENCE
Scepticism about the value of a European Security Conference was voiced
by two participants for opposing reasons. A Netherlands speaker felt that the
West was not really enthusiastic about it, and had expressed an interest only
as a matter ofcourtesy to the East Europeans, rather than the other way around.
The issues which the West wanted to discuss, such as disarmament and cultural
exchange, could not be dealt with authoritatively by the "minority govern-
ments" of East Europe.
On the other side, a Turkish participant doubted that the Soviet Union
sincerely sought disarmament. She would merely use such a conference to
achieve a tactical gain by weakening the defensive solidarity of the West while
preserving her own position. The Russians had already gained three advantages
over the Westin connection with the proposed conference: (r) they had manag-
ed to associate the conference with the general idea of detente, so that those
who had any reservations about the former could be accused of opposing the
latter; (2) they had implanted in Western public opinion a kind of"conference
complex", which made it difficult for Western governments to propose sub-
stantive agenda items without appearing to be sabotaging the conference; and
(3) they had achieved an implicit acceptance of the Brezhnev Doctrine, since
the "conference complex" inhibited the West from bluntly rejecting it.
A Finnish speaker, taking a more positive view, said that the term "Euro-
pean Security Conference" was perhaps misleading. For one thing, it would
not be exclusively "European", although it would have to deal with matters
affecting conditions in Europe, and specifically with East-West divisions. For
another, it was wrong to convey the impression that such a conference would
deal with the main problems connected with security; the name was too am-
bitious. (It was worth noting that the Russians had of late omitted the word
"security" when mentioning the conference at home and in communications
to Western governments.)
Despite these limitations, such a conference could be useful ifit were thor-
oughly prepared and well attended. One had already heard of a good many
hopes, preconceptions and prejudices about the conference. What was need-
ed now for planning purposes was a survey of the topics and procedures which
the Western governments would be likely to find acceptable, and the speaker
was in fact exploring this matter.
In any negotiations which might develop with the East, the West should
not yield any basic positions without obtaining equal concessions from the
other side, according to a German participant. And he would not categorize
an improved climate as a sufficient concession, since the political climate was
as changeable as the weather.
69
IMPLICATIONS FOR NORTH ATLANTIC DEFENSE ARRANGEMENTS
A number of European participants were concerned that a change in the us
role in the world might have important repercussions on North Atlantic defense
arrangements.
A Norwegian speaker said that the possibility of us withdrawal was "a
nightmare for some ofus, brought about by some well-known American politi-
cians". He was particularly worried about the strategic implications of a
reduced American naval commitment in the North Atlantic, which would
enable the Soviets to outflank the allies with their northern fleet and to exert
serious political pressure on North European governments. He was encouraged,
however, by President Nixon's estimate that a coherent strategy of European
defense would continue to require mutual transatlantic support. A Belgian
commentator added that a diminished us presence in Europe could only be
contemplated "with a tremor".
A German participant remarked that, so long as America continued to
recognize that she and Europe had common interests vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union, there was little cause for concern about Europe's defense. But the gap
between European and American military strength was getting wider, not
narrower, so that the credibility ofthe us commitment was essential in deterring
Soviet expansion. The Federal Republic was pleased to note in this connection
that the present strength of American forces in Germany was to remain un-
changed until the end of 1972, and the speaker hoped that "what is sensible
until 1972 will not be considered senseless or stupid afterwards''. To reduce
defense expenditures, one could also hope for eventual multi-lateral force
reductions-"to raise the Iron Curtain, without risk, an inch or two"-but
the more one aimed at that, the more energetically one should oppose any
unilateral force reduction.
Another German speaker expressed confidence that the Americans, as well
as the British and the French, would stand by their treaty commitments con-
cerning the Federal Republic. On this subject, a Netherlands speaker pointed
out that the Germans would continue to be dependent on the us for their
defense unless they were to increase their military expenditures six-fold, which
was a political impossibility. Only so long as she had this American shield
would Germany be free to maneuver with the ussR.
In the eyes of an International participant, the shift in the us role in Europe
would consist essentially of a change in style. There had been no official dec-
laration of a change in attitude, but the Americans now seemed to feel that
Europe must shoulder additional burdens and responsibilities as a result of
its unification. At the same time, the us appeared indifferent to the problem
of where European power would be centered, and one feared that this might
70
conceal a preference for a big-power vacuum. An American speaker saw this
us indifference about Europe as part of a popular international trend leading
to less and less coherence of attitudes within national boundaries.
Another American participant favored maintaining us forces in Europe if
theirwithdrawalmighthave adverse political consequences which could threat-
en the continued existence of democratic, open societies. But he feared that
American domestic support for NATO could be jeopardized by events in Greece,
where the destruction of freedom had been combined with a full measure of
military aid to the government. Were we sufficiently aware, asked the speaker,
that the principal requirement of mutual security was the political health of
the nations with whom we were allied?
The withdrawal of most us troops from Europe after 1972, or at the outside
after 1976, was foreseen by another American participant who said that "most
Americans find it very difficult to understand why-26 years after World War
II-Europe must continue to be a security ward of the us". His rhetorical
question was answered by a French speaker, who attributed this anomaly to
the failure of NATO. Not that it had failed to keep the peace in Europe, but
that Europe had failed during the long respite provided by NATO to build
adequate defenses of its own. The blackest day of that period, in the eyes of
the speaker, was the 28th August, 1954, when the French Chamber killed the
European Defense Community.
It had been the presence ofus forces in Europe, not NATO, which had checked
the Russians. And now President Nixon, despite contrary domestic pressures,
was promising to maintain existing troop levels in Europe until mid-1972. In
the long run, though, the defense of Europe was the business of Europeans,
not Americans, and it required the creation of a federal power with supra-
national authority. The only force which could insure for Europeans their
defense and their future was a united Europe. And if this real unity failed
for one reason or another to come into being, then the best hope was that the
expedient ofNATO-with the abnormal but indispensable presence ofAmerican
soldiers on the continent-would last as long as possible, to permit Europeans
to die free, and of a natural death.
A Netherlands participant took exception to the above allegation that Europe
was living as a sort of protectorate of America. European governments had
complete liberty of action, and it was only as another partner in the alliance
that the us made its position felt. Even ifone accepted the notion that American
troops should and would depart one day, it would be unwise of Europeans to
hasten the process. This speaker also took issue with a Canadian participant
who had played down the recent NATO budget increases by claiming that the
European states would have spent that money anyway during the five-year
71
..
Ii
[i
:I
:1
H
d
:1
ii
d
II
11
11
~~
period. The Netherlands speaker could assure him that these increases were a
substantial burden for several countries, and were only enacted in the last
instance in recognition of the straitened us position.
On the same topic, a Danish participant warned that the "unilateral re-
duction in NATO's overall conventional capacity" posited in the working paper
might not be the result of a us withdrawal, but of the refusal of European
governments to underwrite the necessary future defense costs. The speaker
was all for "continentalism", and even for Europe's ultimately developing
the nuclear capacity existing in Britain and France, as a basis for sustaining
and expanding its self-reliance. But many who advocated such a course, es-
pecially the European and Scandinavian left, were paradoxically unwilling to
underwrite the required political and military costs of true independence. A
French intervention lent support to this idea ofa European nuclear deterrent-
within ten years, if not five-as the price of equal partnership with the us.
In the view of two British participants, Europe would not in the foreseeable
future be able to stand on its own in a nuclear conflict with the Soviet Union.
Therefore, it would be a prodigious waste of human resources for it to try to
build up an apparatus of nuclear power on a scale with that of the us, even if
this were possible.
The American participant whose general reply to the working paper had
raised some of the questions covered in this part of the discussion said that he
had not meant to be understood as proposing a substitute West European
nuclear force, which he agreed would be wasteful. He had simply intended
to point out that the maintenance of us forces on the continent had a special
meaning during the period in which Europe moved toward a better coordi-
nation of her own defense efforts. Once the Europeans were able to speak in
political circles with more unanimity, America could contemplate the rede-
ployment ofsome ofher forces with less severe consequences. Domestic pressures
in favor ofsuch redeployment were likely to mount, and the speaker therefore
cautioned against the presumption that the us would, for its own self-interest,
maintain existing force levels on the continent regardless of the actions of its
European allies. And if it became increasingly difficult to focus American at-
tention on European problems, the Soviet Union might be encouraged in some
political adventures which could in time result in military involvement as well.
ENLARGEMENT AND STRENGTHENING OF THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY
A great many participants alluded to the prospects for enlarging and strength-
ening the European Economic Community. While that subject was only in-
directly related to this Agenda item, it touched on it from a number of differ-
72
ent angles, and was therefore frequently mentioned. There was a consensus
that the weeks and months ahead were crucial ones for Europe and the entire
Atlantic community, and this gave a particular sense of urgency to the dis-
cussion. As it turned out, many of the questions raised were subsequently
answered in the Luxembourg negotiations the following month.
A German speaker remarked that the central issue today was the appli-
cation of the UK, Norway, Denmark and Ireland for membership in the EEC.
This was of the utmost importance for Europe and the us, and he hoped that
all those present would do everything in their power to insure the success of
this endeavor. These views were echoed by several other speakers, some of
whom pointed out that even the enlarged community would still have a long
way to go to reach political unity and a common foreign policy.
An American participant said that the economic, political and security
reasons for an enlarged and strengthened EEC were as compelling today as
ever. British contributions from within a united Europe could be especially
valuable in cases where a regional approach was to be used as a building block
in tackling problems which required a trans- or supranational solution. For
example, international control of the exploitation of the seas was an area in
which Britain's experience would be extremely useful. Other subjects calling
for a global approach included communications, population, energy, the en-
vironment, and inadvertent weather modification. In addition, an expanded
EEC would be effective in seeking common approaches to common problems,
such as the rebuilding of cities, the restructuring of education, and the pooling
of expensive new research.
A British commentator observed that those of his compatriots who were in
favor ofjoining the Common Market, especially the young, had been persuad-
ed by political and defense considerations as much as by long-term economic
advantages. This view was endorsed by another British speaker, who said that
what was being discussed was not really the price of butter, but the price that
Britain and Western Europe were willing to pay to achieve a more equal part-
nership with the us and to be able to play a more effective role in world affairs
generally.
The peculiar difficulties of enlisting public interest and enthusiasm for
enlargement of the European Community, despite the undoubted advantages
it offered, were discussed by three British speakers. One of them felt that the
national mood in his country had been unable to absorb within one generation
two such momentous developments as the dismantling of the British Empire
and the building up of Europe. Gifted politicians were sometimes able slowly
to change these national moods, but the transformation ofinertia about Europe
into enthusiasm would have to be aided by extraordinary economic and politi-
73
cal pressures. The second speaker noted that the long delays associated with
the previous unsuccessful negotiations between Britian and the EEC had in-
evitably'produced considerable boredom on both sides of the Channel.
The third speaker, while conceding that succcessive British governments had
been too rigid in their approach to those negotiations, found fault with the
Europeans as well for not having evinced a will to get on with the construction
of Europe. The EEC had not really evolved beyond "a customs union with a
highly protectionistic, highly complicated, and not terribly intelligent com-
mon agricultural policy". It had failed to tackle such relatively simple prob-
lems as a common policy about company law, capital movements, and
relations with the underdeveloped world, not to mention more difficult mat-
ters such as a common currency. All this could prove disheartening to those
who had to persuade their people to join in the European enterprise.
A Belgian participant said that "the only way to get the European citizen
to look beyond his daily chores is to get him to believe that Europe still has a
role to play on the world stage". He was seconded in this by a Netherlands
speaker, who admitted that the Common Market had not made as much
progress as had been expected by now, but said that the political apects of
enlarging the Community were still paramount. On this point, a British partic-
ipant said that, if the negotiations on the transitional arrangements were used by
the EEC to weaken the UK's competitive power, the British people would wonder
where the idealism was that was needed to make a political community work.
An Italian speaker looked to the non-communist left to restore the impulse
toward European unity that had once been provided by strong us advocacy
and by European business interests. New political institutions were needed
to enable the working classes to check the predominance of the technocratic
and the commercial elements within Western Europe. This process would
also accelerate the emancipation of Europe from American and Soviet in-
fluences, with resultant reverberations in Eastern Europe.
A French participant agreed that the socialist parties bore a great responsi-
bility in the construction of Europe. Even if one were pessimistic about the
prospects for the left, it was only from that direction that one could expect
leadership in shaping the political and social content of the European edifice.
Linking the idea of historical change with that of social progress could be ap-
pealing to the Eastern European countries as well as to the Western free enter-
prise system, and it was not coincidental that the Ostpolitik was being pursued
by a socialist chancellor. But, to capture and hold the attention of the other
camp, the West would have to be seen to be the bearer of new ideas and solu-
tions, and the speaker did not expect this from the Americans, who seemed to
him to be bent on defending the status quo.
74
VIETNAM AND ITS LESSONS
Referring to the military aspects of Vietnam, an American participant said
that it was a mistake to think of it still as a guerilla war, which it had been in
I965. Since then, it had become a war between well-equipped main line forces
on both sides. Regular units now accounted for well over 50% of North Viet-
namese forces, up from less than I5%, and these troops were equipped with
the sort of sophisticated weapons that would be used by any units anywhere.
This deliberate transformation of the nature of the war by the North Viet-
namese had made them heavily dependent on their supply lines from the north.
The recent campaign in Laos and Cambodia was an attempt to seriously disrupt
those supply lines, and time would show it to have been successful.
The speaker, who had been associated with the American military effort in
Vietnam, said that had it not been for us air power the enemy would have
long since won the war. At the same time, the us had bent over backward to
avoid hitting civilian population areas, and charges of indiscriminate bombing
were unfounded. Each administration had adhered strictly to this policy of
self-restraint, which in the speaker's view had made the war longer and more
difficult to wage, as the enemy had not hesitated to terrorize civilians and burn
villages.
Another American speaker said the fact remained that more bombs had
fallen in the course of this war than in all previous wars combined and "cluster"
bombs and fire bombs were still killing civilians, in Laos and Cambodia as well
as in North and South Vietnam. Continued bombing was not the answer. In its
details, the war in Southeast Asia was "as savage and inhuman as anything
the communists have ever produced", and the speaker wondered if America
could live with these precedents if one day they were to be directed at her own
people by the Third World or the Eastern powers.
Looking to the future, this speaker argued that maintaining a residual Ameri-
can force in Vietnam was without moral or strategic justification, and would
leave the us exposed to various threats in Southeast Asia. There would be
domestic consequences as well, since a recent poll showed that 73% of Ameri-
cans were in favor of ending us involvement during 197r. This was tantamount
to a national mandate, and the speaker predicted that President Nixon would
be defeated in 1972 if he kept a residual force in Vietnam.
Two other American speakers expressed reservations about such a residual
force. One could not perceive that any substantial us interest would be served
by remaining, and the other felt sure the Congress would respond negatively
if asked to approve any such plan.
To a Canadian participant, the issue now was whether the us was prepared
to be involved in a political settlement in connection with its withdrawal.
75
':~·
If so, the danger to the remaining force might be greatly reduced. In the ex-
perience of an American speaker, however, protecting an outpost of 50,000
men would not be easy, either militarily-since the native Vietcong would
have access to better intelligence-or diplomatically-since any guarantee
agreement would be subject to endless bickering and misinterpretation. It was
hard to predict and adhere to an exact withdrawal schedule, but the speaker
was convinced that the President was making every effort to disengage the us
honorably, and that a majority of the American people would support him
ifthe matter were explained carefully and candidly to them. In view of China's
influence in Indochina, it would be difficult, even with us help, to establish a
durable regime in South Vietnam. It was worth trying, though, for otherwise
a large part of Southeast Asia might eventually be deprived of free trade and
free access.
An American participant commented at some length on various aspects of
the Vietnam situation. He believed that the war as a moral and practical issue
was finished. No sensible person could imagine that it was not being wound up;
the only question was at what rate, and why some favored a slower rate than
others.
Despite demands from many people for an immediate and total withdrawal
from Vietnam, there could be no question ofthe us simply abandoning millions
ofpeople, of whom a significant percentage had thrown in their lot with the us
on the basis of arguments that they had no reason to disbelieve. Their suffering
had to be measured against other casualties of the war. The speaker asked
what the international impact would be if an American administration per-
mitted some domestic demonstrations to drive it off a course it believed to be
right, especially when that course was tending in the direction advocated by
most people.
Although many claimed that the Vietnam war was at the bottom of nearly
all of America's domestic troubles, the speaker felt that even more serious
problems would emerge when the war was over, and it turned out that much
of the unrest which had fastened on Vietnam stemmed in fact from deeper
causes in modern society, including non-economic problems. Many Americans
would then be disappointed to find at the end of the road, not utopia, but only
themselves.
Ending the war as an act of governmental decision was important for the
long-range health of American society. The young people who could not be
reached today would eventually judge their government, not only by their
anguish of 1971 or 1972, but also by their anguish of 1974 or 1975. Then per-
haps some measure of confidence in authority could be restored, and magna-
nimity offered on both sides.
76
At the present rate of withdrawal from Vietnam, the speaker thought it was
evident that a mistake in assumptions would produce a debacle. In that case,
the administration would obviously have failed. If on the other hand the plan
succeeded, it should not be regarded as a victory, but as the securing of a base
from which to address the longer-range problems in a more united way. The us
was already at work on these important issues of the next decade, in the SALT
talks, in detailed NATO studies, and in the new China policy. However the
Vietnam war ended, we were moving into a new international era, in which
one's position in the world had to be redefined.
What lessons were to be drawn from the Vietnam experience? A British
speaker was joined by an American in concluding that the application of
Western military power was inappropriate in the Third World, but another
British participant hoped that the us would not in the end be pressured out of
all Southeast Asia.
A Danish speaker identified himself as an early foe of us involvement in
Vietnam but said he was refraining from criticizing the us because it was
sincerely trying to extricate itself. To him, though, the lesson of Vietnam was
"the absurdity and practical impossibility of 'substitute nationalism'". The
Americans could never effectively substitute their idealism for the nationalism
of the native Vietnamese. Trying to do so only earned them the enmity of
all sides. The speaker cautioned against the fallacy of an over-all "Indochina
view", and said it was tragic that the us, for domestic political reasons, was
no longer able to support the truly representative governments of Laos and
Cambodia. This view was endorsed by one American participant, but another
one replied that foreign advocates ofus assistance for Laos or Cambodia should
try to enlist resources for that from their own constituencies. Another American
speaker recalled that the us had not received any measurable degree of help
from its allies when it had intervened in Vietnam in furtherance ofthe principles
of the Western coalition. America had thus been obliged to wage a long "Tv
war" virtually alone, hobbled by self-imposed restraints, and had paid a very
high price at home for this.
A Netherlands participant reminded the meeting that the fact that the Viet-
nam war had caused social instability in the us did not necessarily mean that
it had not been in accord with us interests. But the main problem now was for
the us to preserve its credibility as an ally, and it was thus essential that any
Vietnam settlement not look too bad on paper. us actions and attitudes in the
Far East would continue to be most important, as was demonstrated by the
Cambodian incursion. There was evidence that Moscow believed that domestic
dissent had paralyzed the us from taking any action unless she were directly
77
threatened. In disproving that, Cambodia had given the Russians sobering
second thoughts about their Middle Eest tactics.
ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL ASPECTS
A British participant pointed out that the economic and social health of the
us had immense significance for Europe and the rest ofthe world. It was impor-
tant for America to keep its strength as a great consuming and investing power,
and to not have to resort to a new series of restrictions on international trade to
shore up its economy, which could entail serious international consequences.
Furthermore, America was considered an exemplar of the free capitalist
society, so that weaknesses in the us were taken as automatic and inevitable
consequences of the capitalist system.
After providing a briefresume of the evolution of the us economy during the
past decade, an American speaker ventured some predictions. Although the
economy was still sluggish, he felt that by the end of 1971 it would be well on
the way to recovery. A number of favorable indicators were already pointing
the way. Housing starts were up sharply in recent months, and department
store and automobile sales had shown improvement. Expenditures by state and
local governments were exerting a stimulating effect, and the stock market had
recovered three-quarters of the decline suffered during the preceding two
years.
There was some evidence that inflation was beginning to yield before the
wise and balanced economic policy of the present administration; the consumer
price index for the first quarter of the year was rising at an annual rate of 3%,
down from 6% the year before. On the other hand, the unemployment rate
of 6% was unsatisfactory and recent wage settlements in some industries,
especially in construction, had been unhealthily high. However, wage increases
in the non-organized working force, representing 75% of American labor, had
been occurring at a less inflationary rate.
The speaker found the balance of payments picture less encouraging. There
had been a large scale outflow of short-term capital in response to interest rates
which were declining more rapidly in the us than in Europe. To halt this out-
flow, the Federal Reserve, in the month preceding the conference, had taken
steps which had succeeded in halting the decline in us short-term interest rates.
In the longer run, though, it was hard to see how America's chronic balance of
payments problem could be corrected in a significant way within the next
five years. According to some economists, future deficits could run at annual
rate of$ 2.5 billion. The task was to discover what level of us deficits would be
accepted by other nations, and how these deficits could be absorbed. The
78
willingness offoreign central banks and private corporations to continue to hold
dollars on a large scale was open to question. The speaker was hopeful, none-
theless, that an accommodation for another period of time would be found
within the framework of the existing international monetary structure, so that
major changes in that structure would not be required. In sum, he did not
foresee that the us economy, within the next few years, would constitute a
significantly disrupting or unstabilizing force in the world.
Another us participant said it had been shown that fiscal and monetary
measures were not enough to solve America's economic problems. He endorsed
the oEcn's recommendation that modern industrial nations aiming at full
employment witho.ut excessive inflation should adopt an incomes policy as well.
Several speakers alluded to the point raised by the author of the working
paper about the need to reallocate the reductions in military spending to urgent
domestic needs. An American participant said that, although there had been
little progress in many areas, it would be an unfair misapprehension if Euro-
peans were to believe that the us was doing nothing about these problems.
Hundreds of programs had been devised and billions of dollars committed.
In the words of the author of one of the working papers for the first Agenda
item, what was being asked ofAmericans was "the moral equivalent of a nation-
al heart transplant." This was going to be accomplished, but the time scale
was bound to be longer than anyone would wish.
A fellow countryman was less optimistic about the chances of significant
sums being diverted from the military to the civilian budget. When and if the
us withdrew from Vietnam, there would still be a continuing demand for mili-
tary spending to prove that the balance of power would be maintained.
Moreover, if the proposed volunteer army did not attract enough men, in-
creased expenditures would be needed on the research and development ofmore
sophisticated weaponry to maintain the "strategic sufficiency" referred to in
President Nixon's report.
Another American speaker observed that the problem of relating defense
priorities to domestic priorities-which had become a major political issue in
many countries-could not be easily resolved, especially since the complexity
of strategic questions rendered a sensible public debate virtually impossible.
The concept of "strategic sufficiency" was an attempt to define a level of mili-
tary force that responded to foreseeable dangers in a responsible way, based on
the realization that items in the defense budget could not be traded for domes-
tic priorities indefinitely. If the defense budget fell below a certain level, one
might as well not have one at all. An inadequate defense, taken advantage of
by the other side, could produce a political collapse, which would not enhance
the achievement of domestic priorities. This was all the subject of a legitimate
79
debate, but the speaker felt that it would have to be conducted, not in abstrac-
tions, but in terms of a concrete analysis ofthe nature of the dangers and the
adequacy of the response.
Concern was expressed by a us participant that unenlightened international
economic policies might have serious repercussions on the security and strategic
issues under discussion. He cited several problem areas which called for urgent
attention if dangers of economic and trade deterioration were to be avoided:
I. Agriculture, which for example was costing the EEG countries 3% of their
GNP in subsidies, compared with 4% for defense. Yet farmers were still rioting,
which indicated that the price support system was a failure internally as well
as being disruptive internationally.
2. Foreign investment and the activities of multi-national corporations.
American labor, traditionally positive and constructive on international trade
questions, was now becoming protectionist, especially with regard to foreign
investment.
3. The role of the dollar in world trade.
Existing international machinery, such as GATT negotiations on non-tariff
barriers, was too specialized to deal with these problems. A new initiative was
needed for a broader approach, including Japanese participation. If economic
"backsliding" were not averted, Western defense arrangements might easily
suffer, as legislators responsible for military appropriations came under pressure
from economically distressed constituents. Another us participant emphasized
the key role of the Congress in determining-sometimes only in a negative
way-national directions and priorities, especially in economic matters.
An American speaker advocated "new Kennedy Round legislation tailored
to the problems of the next 20 years", aimed at diminishing both tariff and
non-tariff barriers. The absence of such a trade initiative in recent years had
created a vacuum into which us protectionists had moved. The speaker thought
that the Mills negotiations with the Japanese had probably dampened pro-
tectionist sentiment somewhat, but he could not be enthusiastic himself about
an arrangement which seemed to encourage the Japanese to expand further
into sophisticated industries, such as electronics and optics, in return for which
the us would be allowed to keep a large share of one of its most decadent and
moribund industries, textiles.
The previous speaker intervened to say that another Kennedy Round along
the lines ofthe last one would not suffice, since a number ofsubjects would have
to be included now that were not covered then. He mentioned the growth of
80
multi-national companies; internal agricultural problems; exchange rate policy
questions; and relations with the less-developed countries.
A Canadian speaker feared that the emergence of two very large, powerful
and protectionist trading partners could spell the end of the multi-lateral
trading world, carefully and painstakingly put into place over a period of 25
years under the GATT. As a representative of a smaller nation that might be
caught in the middle, he did not look upon this prospect with equanimity. A
compatriot added that many Canadians were apprehensive about the legiti-
macy of certain economic instruments which the us might use in response to its
international financial problems.
These two participants also dwelt on the subject of the multi-national
corporation, which so far was largely an American phenomenon. This had
proved to be an effective instrument for expanding us influence abroad, but it
had also been to a certain degree a political liability, especially in Latin
America, where its economic role had been enormous. The wholly us-controlled
company might be economically efficient, but it was often "a source of psychic
dissatisfaction in the host country". One of the speakers suggested that a form
of partnership should be devised in which the us company would contribute
technology, capital, and in many sectors access to profitable markets, while
yielding physical control of the investment to local partners. Unless such an
adjustment were made voluntarily by us interests, American influence abroad
would be faced with the same difficult kinds of questions which us policy in
recent years had not very adequately dealt with in Latin America.
Trends in world food production and their implications for the existing
balance of power were described by an American speaker. Unlike the Western
nations, with their agricultural surpluses and subsidies, the ussR, China and the
Third World were troubled with underproduction. While only 3% of the us
population was engaged in agriculture, the comparable figure for the Soviet
Union was 50% and for China 95%. This meant a greatly diminished effective
labor force. Russia's inability to master her food needs accounted for many of
her difficulties and for her failure to move ahead more strongly during the past
decade.
This fundamental disequilibrium was likely to be complicated by the emer-
gence of a phenomenon which the speaker, together with a group of meteo-
rologists, had been studying for the past few years. This was inadvertent weather
modification, or man's impact upon our climate. Increasing consumption of
fossil fuels, to which the world was committed for its energy needs, was causing
a fundamental change of the earth's upper atmosphere. The result would be to
shorten the growing season in the northern hemisphere and to produce periods
of sustained drought throughout the central latitudes. Conditions in the Third
81
ll
'I
1,
_..J
World would be directly affected, with the USSR and China close behind.
Detrimental effects could even be anticipated for Europe and North Ame1·ica.
The geopolitical implications of the resulting food shortages were difficult to
predict. The ussR and China, preoccupied with this domestic problem, might
adopt a lower profile; or they might instead feel pushed to bolder and more
reckless action on the world scene. In any event, this was a situation requiring
urgent study, especially as the effects of the phenomenon described were
thought to be irreversible.
Turning to the broader socio-economic implications of the changes afoot
in the world, an International speaker said it would be a mistake to assume a
continuation of the same basic global context. The growth of a larger number
of organic societies with a sense of their own identity would make interven-
tion more difficult, and the pluralistic societies of the West would be less able
to impose themselves on the developing nations. But the Soviet Union, China,
and even Japan, might be "much less coy about the use of power" in trying to
shape the world. A new international climate might thus develop, in which the
'West would seem relatively neutral or passive. It would likewise be
wrong to suppose that prosperity linked to international economic cooperation
must continue indefinitely. Greater tensions between the major industrial
societies might in fact be in store, which could in turn strain security relation-
ships just at the time when they needed most to be reinforced.
A British participant was convinced that there was still an important role
for the developed countries of the West to play in the Third World, particu-
larly through trade and aid programs. However, a less interventionist stance
was now appropriate, especially as the former colonies had shown their un-
willingness to be converted either to the West or to communism. Of the 31
independent countries which were formerly members of the British Common-
wealth, for example, not one had adopted a communist government, and
Africa was said to have "broken the heart" of both Khrushchev and Kennedy.
But the speaker was fearful that the agony of the Vietnam experience might
bring the us to define its Third World posture under the Nixon Doctrine, not
as a low profile, but as no profile at all. This would be an unfortunate mistake,
as Russia or China would certainly move to fill any vacuum that was left. The
us and other Western nations should instead do some hard thinking about
what their wise role in the Third 'Vorld should be.
According to the assessment ofa French speaker, the bureaucratic systems of
most communist countries were already in a state ofcrisis and were not destined
to endure. Their place would not be taken, however, by a free enterprise system
on the capitalist model, an eventuality which the main Western powers did
not seem to recognize. This led the speaker to note the regrettable absence in
82
Western policy ofadequate contingency planning. Both ofthe great power blocs
sensed their inability to command events, and the need instead to adapt to
them, but the East made a greater effort to develop its planned responses. By
contrast, there was a curious discrepancy in the West, especially the us,
between national power and the lack of aims as regards the adversary.
Commenting on the previous speaker's reference to half-way economic
systems, somewhere between capitalism in its traditional sense and communism,
a Danish participant wondered what the American reaction would be to a
Europe of the future which might turn out to adhere to the structures and
ideological aspects of the Swedish model.
SUMMARY
In summing up, the author of the working paper agreed with an American
speaker who had pointed out that the discussion had uncovered differences of
"attitudinal affinity"-concerning, for example, the relative importance of
elements ofcontinuity and change-more than differences based on geographi-
cal viewpoints. It was generally recognized that the threat of a monolithic
communist camp had receded, but there was a wide divergence of views about
the degree of change within the Soviet Union and the nature and intentions of
the Russian leaders.
Some participants clearly believed that an attempt to achieve rapproche-
ment with the communist countries would in itself weaken the will to maintain
the solidarity of NATO and divert attention in Europe from the task of building
a closer union. Another group believed, on the contrary, that it was possible
to pursue both objectives simultaneously. Within that group were many,
particularly the younger participants, who felt in fact that continued public
support for NATO and the Common Market would depend on the leaders of the
countries allied in those organizations being visibly sincere in seeking to exploit
every opportunity for narrowing the gulf between East and West. In any case,
there was general agreement, with possibly one or two exceptions, about the
need to maintain and strengthen NATO-for which the health and stability
of American society was essential-and the desirability of enlarging the EEC.
There was a new style in us foreign policy, due largely to a realization that
the military commitment which had been so effective in post-war Europe had
not succeeded in bringing stability to the Third World, and showed no sign
of being able to do so. The Europeans, having achieved stability and prosperity
as a result of American help, were now sharing America's burdens-intellec-
tually, morally and materially. A question which might have been discussed
more, the speaker suggested, was whether Europe should not be sharing more
83
L '~
of these burdens in the Atlantic area, particularly in defense, and if so,
how this should be done. But the fact that this question could now be asked
was a measure of the success of the American policy in Europe.
There was a consensus that the ritual incantation ofworn-out slogans had all
too often been a substitute for thought in discussions leading to the formulation
of Western policy. A better hope for the future lay in the patient analysis of
situations on the basis of information available; the attempt to identify pos-
sible alternative courses of action; and the cautious exploration of them to find
out what progress was possible. Such an approach called inevitably for an
acceptance of the fact that the world had changed enormously over the past
quarter of a century.
*
* *
H.R.H. Princess Beatrix adjourned the meeting on behalf ofher father, who
had unfortunately been obliged to leave during the conference because of the
serious illness of his mother. Her Royal Highness gave thanks to the authors of
the working papers for laying the groundwork for the discussions, to the par-
ticipants for their enthusiastic contributions, and to the Secretariat as well as
the interpreters for their skillful assistance. The Princess also expressed every-
one's deep appreciation to all of their American hosts, and especially to the
members of the Rockefeller family who had arranged a reception the previous
evening.
An American speaker responded for all the participants in thanking H.R.H.
the Prince of the Netherlands and H.R.H. Princess Beatrix, as well as all
those responsible for insuring the success of this very interesting and enjoyable
meeting.
84
·;~
?,
i
l
i
I
!
I
I
i'I
fu
'~
"
.\
~.
r
J
ti'
i
j
. f
I 11
...,,,~, ;·~ j
