.....l.
or
~
OJ
I'\)
I
ol>
mr
.....l.
+::-.
mo
-;
m
~
z-t
z
:0
Ol
'<
.,,
0
G)
OJ
.....l.
(J)
m
CD
me..
:0
CX>
G)
CD
:Cl>
m
z
0
m
•
ii
r
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
LA TOJA
CONFERENCE
12-14 May 1989
NOT FOR QUOTATION
FOREWORD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
PARTICIPANTS 5
AGENDA .................................................... 11
OPENING . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
I. DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS IN EASTERN EUROPE:
POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WEST
Background Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Introductory Remarks, III. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
II. CAN THE ALLIANCE BE SUSTAINED BY MILITARY
AND ARMS CONTROL ISSUES ALONE?
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
III. THE LONG-TERM ECONOMIC DESIGN OF THE E.C.:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGNTY?
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3~
Introductory Remarks, Ill. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: U.S. - SOVIET RELATIONS
Introductory Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Discussion ....................................... : . . . . . . . 41
V. GREATER POLITICAL AND MONETARY UNION OF EUROPE:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGNTY?
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
1
'~
'
2
VI. GLOBAL RELATIONSHIPS:· SURPLUSES, DEFICITS, AND
PROTECTIONISM
Introductory Remarks, I. ................................... .
Introductory Remarks, II. . .................................. .
In_trodu~tory Remarks, III. . ................................. .
DtScuss1on . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... · . . · · . · · ·
VII. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
50
51
52
53
Background Paper .................................. ' . . . . . . 57
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
In.trodu~tory Remarks, III. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
CLOSING .................................................. 74
FOREWORD
This booklet is an account of the proceedings of the 1989 Bilderberg Meeting at the
Gran Hotel La Toja, Island of La Toja, Spain. Working papers and introductory remarks
appear essentially as they were presented, with some minor editing. Comments and
interventions made in the discussion sessions, as well as panelists' closing remarks, are
organized and reported according to subject matter, not necessarily in the order in which
they were made, nor always in their entirety.
Grant F. Winthrop
Rapporteur
3
CHAIRMAN
Lord Roll of Ipsden*
President, S.G. Warburg Group pie
CHAIRMAN DESIGNATE
Lord Carrington
Chairman of the Board, Christie's International pie;
Former Secretary General, NATO
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA
Victor Halberstadt*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE U.S.A.
Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.*
Senior Research Fellow, Hoover Institution on War,
Revolution and Peace, Stanford University
HONORARY TREASURER
ITA
DEN
USA
UK
USA
POR
Conrad J. Oort*
Member of the Board, Algemene Bank Nederland N.V.;
Professor of Money and Banking, University of Limburg
Giovanni Agnelli**
Tage Andersen*
Dwayne 0. Andreas
Paddy Ashdown
George W. Ball**
Francisco Pinto Balsemao*
Chairman, Fiat S.pA.
Managing Director and Chief Executive, Den
Danske Bank
Chairman, Archer-Daniels-Midland Company,
Inc.
Member of Parliament; Leader of the Social
and Liberal Democrats
Former Under-Secretary of State
Professor of Mass Communication, New
University, Lisbon; Chairman, SOJORNAL;
Former Prime Minister
NETH Relus ter Beek Member of Parliament; Labour Party
Spokesman on International Affairs
CAN Michel F. Belanger Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, National
Bank of Canada
USA Jack F. Bennett*
USA Lloyd M. Bentsen, Jr.
NETH Ernst H. van der Beugel**
Former Director and Senior Vice President,
Exxon Corporation; Former Under-Secretary of
the Treasury for Monetary Affairs
U.S. Senator (Democrat, Texas)
Emeritus Professor of International Relations,
Leyden University; Director of Companies
5
INT Fran~ois Heisbourg Director, The International Institute for
TUR Selahattin Beyazit* Director of Companies Strategic Studies
ICE Bjorn Bjarnason Assistant Editor-in-Chief, "Morgunbladid"
FIN Jaakko Uoniemi* Member of the Management Board, Union
CAN Conrad M. Black* Chaitman, Argus Corporation Ltd. Bank of Finland; Former Ambassador to the
SWE Hans Blix Director General, The International Atomic United States of America
Energy Agency
AUS Peter Jankowitsch* Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relat~o~s,
SPA Miguel Boyer Salvador Chairman, Cartera Central; Former Minister of Austrian National Assembly; Former M1mster
Economy and Finance for Foreign Affairs
TUR Ali Bazer Deputy Prime Minister
USA Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, H~uer & Fe.Id
ITA Enrico Braggiotti Chairman of the Board, Banca Commerciale (Attorneys-at-Law); Former President, National
Italiana Urban League .
USA Willard C. Butcher Chairman, The Chase Manhattan Bank, NA.
USA Thomas H. Kean Governor of the State of New Jersey
GRE Costa Carras* Director of Companies Foreign Editor "Neue Zurcher Zeitung"
SPA Jaime Carvajal Urquijo* Chairman and General Manager, lberfomento SWI Christian H. Kind
Former Secret~ of State; Chairman, Kissinger
SPA Juan Luis Cebrian Chief Executive Officer, PRISA (EI Pais) USA Henry A. Kissinger*
Associates, Inc.
TUR Ismail Cem Member of Parliament (Social Democratic
UK Andrew Knight* Chief Executive, The Daily Telegraph pie
Populist Party)
INT Max Kohnstamm** Secretary General, Action Committee for
USA Charles H. Dallara Assistant Secretary Designate of the Treasury Europe; Former President, European
for International Affairs University Institute
USA Kenneth W. Dam* Vice President, Law and External Relations,
AUS Josef Krainer Governor of Styria . .
IBM Corporation; Former Deputy Secretary of
SWI Alex Krauer
Chairman and Managing Director, Ciba-Geigy
State Limited
FRG Herta Diiubler-Gmelin Member of Parliament; Deputy Chairwoman, FRA Marc Ladreit de Lacharriere* Director and First Executive Vice President,
SPD L'Oreal
BEL Etienne Davignon* Director, Societe Generale de Belgique; C J A Lede President Federation of Netherlands Industry
Former Member of the Commission of
NETH ees . . van ,
VNO
European Communities F J L"t If* Former General Manager and Membe~ of the
SPA Guillermo de la Dehesa Chief Executive, Banco Pastor; Former SWI ranz · u 0
d · B k C t
Executive Boar , Swiss an orpora 10n
Secretary of State for Economy and Finance POR Rui Machete Chairman, Constituti~n~l Revisi~n
DEN Aage Deleuran Editor-in-Chief, "Berlingske Tidende" Parliamentary Comm1ss10n; President,
CAN Marie-Josee Drouin Executive Director, Hudson Institute of Canada Portuguese-American Foundat~o~; Former .
INT Arthur Dunkel Director General, General Agreement on Deputy Prime Minister and M1mster of Justice
Tariffs and Trade CAN Paul D. Manson Chi~f of the Defence S~~ff . .
FIN Casimir Ehrnrooth Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, SPA Carlos March Delgado Chairman, Banco UrqmJO Unyo~, Vice
Kymmene Corporation Chairman, Juan March Foundat10n
USA William T. Esrey President and Chief Executive Officer, United
BEL Wilfried Martens Prime Minister
Telecommunications, Inc. and U.S. Sprint Partner, Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue; Former
LUX Colette Flesch Chairman, Democratic Party; Former Minister USA Charles McC. Mathias, Jr.*
U.S. Senator (Republican, Maryland)_
for Foreign Affairs
FRA Thierry de Montbrial* Director French Institute of Internat1onal
INT John R. Galvin Supreme Allied Commander Europe, S.HAPE Relation~; Professor of Economics, Ecole
ITA Raoul Gardini Chairman, Perruzzi Group Polytechnique . . .
UK Timothy J. Garton Ash St. Antony's College, Oxford; Foreign Editor,
Mario Monti* Professor of Economics, Boccom Umver_s1ty,
"The Spectator" ITA Milan; Vice Chairman, Banca Commerc1ale
FRG Michaela Geiger Member of Parliament; CDU/CSU Foreign Italiana
Policy Spokesman NETH Her Majesty The Queen
SPA Felipe Gonzalez Prime Minister of the Netherlands
SPA Fernando I. Gonzalez Laxe Chairman, Government of Galicia NETH His Royal Highness Prince
CAN Allan E. Gotlieb William Lyon Mackenzie King Visiting Claus of the Netherlands
Professor of Canadian Studies, The Center for ITA Filippo M. Pandolfi . Vice President, Commission of the European
International Affairs, Harvard University Communities .
USA Maurice R. Greenberg President, American International Group, Inc.
GRE Theodore Papalexopoulos Former Chairman, Union of Greek Industries
USA William E. Griffith Professor of Political Science, Massachusetts
UK Cecil Parkinson Secretary of State for Energy "
Institute of Technology
USA Norman Pearlstine Managing Editor, "The Wall Street Journal
SWE Sten Gustafsson* Chairman of the Board, SAAB-SCANIA AB
7
6
UK
SPA
USA
USA
USA
USA
Rupert L. Pennant-Rea
Jest1s de Polanco
S. lchtiaque Rasool
William K. Reilly
Rozanne L. Ridgway
David Rockefeller, Sr.**
Editor, "The Economist"
Chairman, TIMON Group; Chairman, PRISA
(El Pais) .
Chief Scientist for Global Change, NASA
Administrator, Environmental Protection
Agency
Assistant Secretary of State for European and
Canadian Affairs
Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank International
Advisory Committee
USA David Rockefeller, Jr. Chairman, Rockefeller Brothers Fund
Minister of Finance; Chairman of the Interim
Committee of the IMF
NETH H. Onno Ruding
POR
CAN
FRA
GRE
USA
USA
ICE
UK
NOR
BEL
FRG
SPA
SPA
USA
USA
IRE
FRG
USA
AUS
NOR
USA
DEN
USA
USA
FRG
SPA
8
Jorge Sampaio
Jeanne Sauve
Louis Schweitzer
Michael J. Scoullos
John S. R. Shad
Jack Sheinkman
Hordur Sigurgestsson
John Smith
Secretary General, Partido Socialista
Governor General of Canada
Financial Director, Regie Nationale des Usines
Renault
President, European Environmental Bureau
Chairman, Drexel Burnham Lambert Group
President, Amalgamated Clothing and Textile
Workers Union, AFL-CIO, CLC
President and Chief Executive Officer, The
Iceland Steamship Co. Ltd.
Member of Parliament; Shadow Chancellor of
the Exchequer
Lucy C. Smith Professor of Law, University of Oslo
Jacques E. Solvay Chairman, Solvay & Cie SA.
Theo Sommer* Editor-in-Chief, "Die Zeit"
Her Majesty The Queen of Spain
His Majesty The King of Spain
Lesley R. Stahl National Affairs Correspondent, CBS News
Robert S. Strauss Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer & Feld
Peter D. Sutherland
Klaus Topfer
George J. Vojta
Franz Vranitzky
Niels Werring, Jr.*
John C. Whitehead
Nils Wilhjelm
Lynn R. Williams*
(Attorneys-at-Law)
Former Member, Commission of the European
Communities; Member, Action Committee for
Europe; Chairman Designate, Allied Irish
Banks
Federal Minister for the Environment
Executive Vice President, Bankers Trust
Company
Federal Chancellor
Chairman of the Board, Wilh. Wilhelmsen
Limited A/S
Former Deputy Secretary of State
Minister of Industry
International President, United Steel Workers
of America
James D. Wolfensohn* President, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.
Otto Wolff von Amerongen** Chairman of the Supervisory Board, Otto Wolff
A.G.
Juan A. Yanez-Barnuevo Director, Department of International Affairs
of the Office of the Prime Minister
-·--...----..--~---:-::--~.- •.- .. ~.·:•":'"·-,,--~--=;.= •..,,,·r·.,.,,,..~--.~··~·~.-.-
SPA Emilio de Ybarra y Churruca Vice Chairman and Managing Director, Banco
Bilbao Vizcaya
ITA Paolo Zannoni* President, Fiat Washington, Inc.
RAPPORTEUR
USA Grant F. Winthrop
IN ATTENDANCE
SPA Julio C. Abreu
\
NETH Saskia ten Asbroek
USA Charles W. Muller
Director, Milbank Wilson Winthrop
Director General, Central de Congresos;
Organizer 1989 Conference
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
President, Murden & Company; Adviser,
American Friends of Bilderberg, Inc.
* Member of the Steering Committee
** Member of the Advisory Group
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AUS
BEL
CAN
DEN
FIN
FRA
FRG
GRE
ICE
INT
IRE
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Federal Republic of Germany
Greece
Iceland
International
Ireland
ITA Italy
LUX Luxembourg
NETH Netherlands
NOR Norway
POR Portugal
SPA Spain
SWE Sweden
SWI Switzerland
TUR Turkey
UK United Kingdom
USA United States of America
9
I
I. DOMESTIC DEVELOPMENTS IN EASTERN EUROPE:
POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WEST
Moderator: Charles McC. Mathias, Jr.
Introductions: Michaela. Geiger
William E. Griffith
Background Paper: Timothy J. Garton Ash
II. CAN THE ALLIANCE BE SUSTAINED BY MILITARY
AND ARMS CONTROL ISSUES ALONE?
Moderator: Lord Carrington
Introductions: Theo Sommer
Henry A. Kissinger
III. THE LONG-TERM ECONOMIC DESIGN OF THE E.C.:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGN'IY?
Moderator: Kenneth W. Dam
Introductions: Giovanni Agnelli
Lloyd M. Bentsen, Jr.
Peter D. Sutherland
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: U.S. - SOVIET RELATIONS
Moderator: Etienne Davignon
Introduction: Rozanne L. Ridgway
V. GREATER POLITICAL AND MONETARY UNION OF EUROPE:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGN'IY?
Moderator: Lord Roll of Ipsden
Introductions: Miguel Boyer Salvador
Rupert L. Pennant-Rea
VI. GLOBAL RELATIONSHIPS: SURPLUSES, DEFICITS, AND
PROTECTIONISM
Moderator: James D. Wolfensohn
Introductions: Charles H. Dallara
Arthur Dunkel
H. Onno Ruding
VII. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Moderator: Costa Carras
Introductions: William K. Reilly
Klaus Topfer
Background Paper: S. Ichtiaque Rasool
11
OPENING
The thirty-seventh Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Gran Hotel La Toja, on the
Island of La Toja, Spain, on May 11-14, 1989. There were 112 participants from 19
European countries, the United States, and Canada. They represented government,
diplomacy, politics, business, law, labor, education, journalism, the military, and institutes
specializing in national and international studies. All participants spoke in a personal
capacity, not as representatives of their national governments or their organizations. As
is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit frank and open discussions, no
reporting of the conference proceedings took place.
Lord Roll of Ipsden, the Chairman of the Bilderberg Meetings, opened the
conference with an expression of good wishes and appreciation to their Majesties the
King and Queen of Spain. He then reviewed the procedural rules of the meeting, stressing
the need for punctuality and for adhering to the time limits prescribed for participating in
the discussions.
13
Background Paper
Fundamental Dilemmas
1. The countries of Eastern Europe today have greater opportunities but also greater
problems than at almost any time in the last forty years.
2. The opportunities lie in the greater room for maneuver which the Soviet Union
under Gorbachev is currently allowing these countries' political leaderships. They lie also
in the ever richer web of ties with the West, a web spun by the Ostpolitik of the Federal
Republic of Germany, the less intensive and consistent Eastern policies of other Western
powers, the 'Helsinki process', and, last but not least, by numerous non-governmental and
individual initiatives.
3. In discussing these opportunities it is vital always to keep in mind the differences
between the interests and aspirations of the political leaderships of these countries, on
the one hand, and those of their peoples on the other. Even in the most 'reformist'
states-Hungary and Poland-this difference remains deep and crucial. It is too often
blurred in Western discussions about policy towards Eastern Europe.
4. The most obvious common problems of the region are economic. Overall, Eastern
Europe is again in a position of growing relative backwardness vis-a-vis Western Europe.
This growing relative backwardness affects not just industrial production, but transport,
schools, leisure facilities, environmental protection (a subject ofgrowing popular concern),
housing and health care.
5. The region's more realistic political leaders see this. They look anxiously at the
revolution of high technology in the West and Far East and the economic integration of
Western Europe under the banner of '1992.' They realize that if their countries are not
to fall still further behind they need more radical economic reforms than have so far been
attempted, even in Hungary.
6. Apart from the immense theoretical, technical and external economic obstacles to
more radical 'marketising' reform there are profound political problems. To oversimplify, -
one might say that such reforms provoke resistance from both the ruling class and the
working class.
7. Such reforms require that numerous members of the ruling class-the nomenklatura
and political bureaucracy-sacrifice at least some of their powers and privileges. Besides
these individual losses there is a more general concern. The more the market replaces the
Plan, the less evident it is what the Party is there to do. Even the most 'reform-minded'
leaders are naturally ambivalent about this.
8. Such reforms also generally require that in the short term a large part of the
working class-and society at large-will get poorer. New kinds of inequality are added to
the old. The 'socialist' state ceases to furnish what it itself has described as the most
basic 'social right': full employment. Instead people are promised jam tomorrow. But
they have been promised this for forty years. To overcome the credibility gap the
authorities therefore have to offer payment in political coin: more popular participation
in, or at least oversight of, government. This in turn increases the resistance of the ruling
class. Thus, while the society has different interests and aspirations from the political
bureaucracy, their resistance can be mutually reinforcing.
9. Io addition, there is the problem of raised expectations. Younger people, better
educated, remembering neither the fear nor the rural poverty of the forties and fifties,
increasingly travelled in the West and measuring their own states by the rising standards
of Western Europe, make growing demands on their rulers.
15
The Role ofthe Soviet Union
10. These expectations are raised still further by Gorbachev. Gorbachev has given the
local elites greater latitude to work out their own domestic solutions. But the 'Gorbachev
effect' is far from comfortable even for more reform-minded rulers and profoundly
unsettling for the Brezhnevite leaderships of Czechoslovakia and the GDR.
11. The modest conventional troop withdrawals announced by Gorbachev will be
welcomed by both states and societies. But these withdrawals may also raise popular
expectations still further, while in practice leaving in place a more than reasonable
sufficiency for purposes of repression. There is a danger as well as an opportunity in the
present Soviet leadership's wholly comprehensible reluctance to spell out (ifit knows itself)
where the ultimate limits of its tolerance might lie.
12. The countries of Eastern Europe have always been very different, but they are now
more different than ever: both from the Soviet Union and from each other. I have
written in this context of the 'Ottomanisation' of the Soviet empire, meaning the slow,
piecemeal, discontinuous emancipation both of individual states from the imperial center
and of societies from states, but in conditions of overall decay rather than systematic
reform and competitive modernization.
Opportunities and Risks for the West
13. The less the Soviet Union has to offer, and the less it constrains, the more these
states look-as their peoples have never ceased looking-to the West. This growing interest
in the West is accompanied by a growing dependency on the West: particularly in those
states with a large hard currency debt, Poland, Hungary and the GDR. More than ever
before, the politics of Poland, Hungary and (in a special way) the GDR are determined
by calculations about the West.
14. For the West, this offers a great opportunity-and a great risk. The great
opportunity is that we could assist at ending the Cold War and peacefully overcoming the
division of Europe ('Yalta') by helping to remove its political as well as its military root
causes.
15. The great risk is that of explosion. Prediction is notoriously difficult, and in Eastern
Europe more than anywhere. But on a sober assessment one can see a serious possibility
of some kind of an explosion of popular discontent in four out of the six East European
states over the next few years: Romania, Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia. (Some
analysts would add the GDR).
16. No one can predict what course such an explosion would take, nor hmv the Soviet
Union would react to it. A direct military intervention could spell the end of 'perestroika'
not just in the country concerned but in the Soviet Union itself. A disguised intervention
could split the West far more seriously.than did that in Poland in December 1981.
17. One must, however, clearly grasp whence this risk mainly comes. It does not at
present come from the process of economic and political reform going too far, too fast.
That is not the case anywhere. It comes from the process going too slowly, and not far
enough; The longer reform is delayed, the more painful and costly it will be, and the
less popular trust the political leadership will have to bank on. Pressure builds up under
the sealed lid, not the open one. This is the danger in both Czechoslovakia and the GDR.
Individual Countries
18. The most important countries for Western policy at this moment (spring 1989) are
Poland and Hungary, for three related reasons. First, their present leaders have gone
furthest in the pursuit of economic and political reform. These countries' politics almost
16
begin to resemble those of 1945-48, rather than of 'post-Stalinist reform'. In economics,
they are speaking almost the same language as the contemporary West, although deeds
lag far behind words. Secondly, their highly active civil societies, their intelligentsia and
opposition movements, are pushing them in the direction of further and more radical
change. As a result, the process of political change in both countries is actually a mixture
of reform and revolution. Thirdly, the West's influence .here is greatest.
19. These two countries deserve to be discussed in more detail. But one general point
might be made in writing. A degree of 'instability' (e.g. unofficial groups, demonstrations,
strikes) is an inevitable accompaniment of such fundamental change, and, indeed, a
necessary catalyst for it. We should treat it as normal and healthy not as dangerous and
sick. Unless the pot is simmering, nothing will get cooked.
20. A change of leadership and a more fundamental change in policy may reasonably
be expected in both Czechoslovakia and the GDR over the next one to three years, if
only because of the old age of current leaderships (although Erich Honecker has firmly
indicated that he will still be there in 1990). The exact timing of the leadership change
is, however, important, for at least two reasons. First, it would make a considerable
difference to Poland and Hungary to have neighbors moving in the same direction.
Secondly, the nature of the reforms then introduced will depend to a significant degree
on the progress of perestroika in the Soviet Union. If perestroika in the Soviet Union
has in the meantime become entangled and stalled, the new Czechoslovak and GDR
leaderships will have one less motive for introducing their own. If it has gone further,
they will have one motive more.
21. So close is the engagement of the Federal Republic of Germany in the GDR that
the role there of the other Western powers can only be supportive and supplementary.
(A special case is, of course, Berlin, whose status is increasingly questioned in and by West
German and specifically West Berlin politics. But no better alternative to the status quo
of the Quadripartite Agreement will exist, short of radical change in both Soviet policy and
GDR politics). There is however, a strong case f.or all the West to pay very close attention
to Czechoslovakia at this moment.
22. Romania, with the miserable, repressive and irrational dictatorship of the
Ceausescus, cries out for the kind of protest and symbolic politics at which Western official
visitors (e.g. to Poland) have sometimes been quite effective in recent years. But until a
leadership change-with the accompanying risk of explosion and violence-the possibilities
for constructive, peaceful engagement there are very limited. Bulgaria offers modest risks,
but equally modest opportunities.
Onepolicy or many?
23. It is customary and comfortable to maintain, as did a recent Foreign and
Commonwealth Office memorandum to the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, that
'most Western countries conduct their policies towards Eastern Europe along broadly
similar lines.' An independent analyst is not bound to such diplomatic piety. There have,
in fact, been profound differences of approach between the Ostpolitik of the Federal
Republic of Germany, on the one hand, and the East European policy(-ies) of the United
States of America on the other. The second-rank actors, France, the UK, Italy and
Austria, have tended to lie somewhere in between, with the UK closest to the American
and Austria closest to the West German approach.
24. Whereas the ideal from the point of view of encouraging desirable change in
Eastern Europe would be a coordinated Western approach tailored to each individual
(increasingly different) East European country, the reality has tended to be each individual
Western country pursuing its own policy towards the whole of Eastern Europe. Some
progress in coordination between the major West European powers has been mad;, in
recent years, but much more is needed. Seen from Eastern Europe, the differences
17
between the approaches of Western powers are still very marked.
25. Thanks to its economic might and its new Ostpolitik, Germany (West) is once
again a major power in Central Europe. Its trade is three to five times that of other
Western states. Its special relationship with the GDR has acquired an extraordinary
quality. Whereas security issues were deliberately excluded from the 'first phase' of the
new Ostpolitik, in the nineteen seventies, they are now near its heart: a change very much
encouraged by Soviet policy over many years. In these circumstances, an active all-
Western policy towards Eastern Europe is also part of what one might call the sustainment
of West Germany.
26. One should note that leading West German politicians of the right and center say
they would positively welcome more active engagement in this field from their West
European partners. Their notion of the 'Europeanization of Ostpolitik' merits a serious
response. But one response may be to say that it must rather be a Westernization of
Ostpolitik: that is, unambiguously and explicitly based on Western values, in its theory,
and fully involving the United States and Canada in its practice. For 'Europeanization' can
also mean de-Americanization.
27. Good policy towards Eastern Europe is a matter of doing many small things
consistently rather than a few big things sporadically. It is therefore, by its nature,
impossible to summarize. Some useful indications for a positive agenda are to be found
in the April 1989 report to the Trilateral Commission by Kissinger, Giscard and Nakasone;
in the (British) Commons' Foreign Affairs Committee report on Eastern Europe and the
Soviet Union; and, most concretely, in an outstanding short paper by the US Ambassador
to Hungary, Mark Palmer. Palmer's paper offers suggestions in three sections: 'economic
action,' 'sociopolitical action,' 'security action.' In each section, it has the vital merit of
combining elements of previous American and German approaches. [Mark Palmer, 'US
and Western policy-new opportunities for action,' in William E. Griffith ed., Central and
Eastern Europe: The Opening Curtain? (Westview Press).J
28. Rather than review the whole agenda, I offer concluding comments on just two
aspects that have recently been controversial.
Not a new Yalta, but . •.
29. Henry Kissinger is said to have (had?) in mind a 'new Yalta': the West negotiating
with Moscow over Eastern Europe, Western guarantees of Soviet security in return for
Soviet guarantees of East European liberty. No doubt what Henry Kissinger has really
had in mind is somewhat more subtle. But the caricature notion of a 'new Yalta' does
serve to sharpen the argument.
30. The objections are, firstly, that we should not recognize or legitimate Soviet
hegemony over Eastern Europe, and, secondly, that Moscow is already tolerating the
unprecedented developments in Poland and Hungary, so why not just let them get on
with it? It seems plausible to suggest that the Soviet leadership might tolerate more in
its present mode of pragmatic muddling-through or 'benign neglect,' than it would in any
systematic, conscious redefinition of its 'security interests,' especially if that was a
redefinition urged upon it directly by the United States.
31. To say that Moscow 'holds the key' to developments in Eastern Europe is both
true and false. It is true negatively but false positively. What the Soviet Union can offer
to Hungary and Poland today are essentially negative goods: non-intervention, benign
tolerance of heterodoxy, the removal of past falsifications (e.g. about Katyn), some
lightening of economic constraints (terms of trade, energy prices, existing joint projects).
Positively, however, it can offer very little: it needs all the technology, know-how and,
indeed, hard currency it can get for its own economic reconstruction. It can offer no
models for economic an-4 political transformation to these already more advanced
countries. These positive goods have to come from within the countries themselves-and
18
~·~~.,,_,,,.,..,.,..7""~~,,.,..~~~~
' " " ' ' ' ' <§., >'"' '-<~<----------
from the West.
32. In any case, what guarantees could we offer in direct conversation with the Soviet
Union? Can we really say that we do not want these countries to become liberal
democracies with market economies? Can we say that we do not want them to move
into ever closer association with the West European Community? Egon Bahr may be
prepared to say that, but I am not. Not merely the peoples but even (parts of) the
governments of Hungary and Poland would be dismayed if we were to do so. This would
indeed be 'Yalta', in the sense that most East Europeans use the term.
33. What we can say is that we do not want these countries to join an anti-Soviet
military alliance. For the foreseeable future we see no alternative to these countries
staying in the Warsaw Pact, albeit at lower levels of armament all round. But this is
hardly news to Moscow. If anyone needs to be told this, to have the arguments explained,
patiently and privately, it is some of the new political forces in Poland and Hungary. What
the West can and might properly do is to say to them directly: 'yes, we will help you so
far as we can along the road to a market economy, to the rule of law, de jure pluralism,
and to an ever closer association with Western Europe; but no, we will not support you
in any attempt to start by changing the fundamental framework of military security in
Europe. That is the last step not the first.' But this is a conversation to be had in Warsaw
and Budapest, not in Moscow.
34. There is one other private conversation to be had. This is an intra-Western
conversation. It concerns the (probable) eventuality of a major crisis on 'explosion'
(referred to in Par. 15-17 above) bringing with it the risk of Soviet intervention or Soviet-
sponsored domestic repression. The West plainly should have a closely coordinated,
indeed united position in presenting to Moscow both the costs of intervening and the
benefits of not intervening. Neither the costs nor the benefits should be understated. The
time to start preparing such a position is now.
Not a new Marshall Plan, but ...
35. Others have proposed a new Marshall Plan for Eastern Europe. This is unrealistic.
Even if the West were ready to offer a new Marshall Plan, the East is not ready to receive
one. The Soviet Union is unready both objectively and subjectively. Poland and Hungary
may to some extent be ready subjectively, but their economies are far from ready
objectively. In Western Europe forty years ago there was a pump waiting to be primed.
In Eastern Europe the pump has first to be built.
36. Yet of the three Western policy areas identified by Palmer, 'economic action' is
by far the most urgent for Poland and Hungary in 1989. Economic crisis has driven these
countries to radical reform, indeed to an attempted transformation of their whole system.
But economic crisis could also defeat that transformation. In the short to medium term,
the reforms themselves will worsen things still further: causing dramatic inflation,
unemployment, and dramatic new inequalities. It is not at all clear that people will stand
for this, whatever the new liberties offered in compensation.
37. As an aspect of policy (rather than business) Western 'economic action' therefore
has two goals:
(a) the short-term goal of preventing that explosion of popular desperation which
could set back or quite destroy the peaceful transformation, not just in one particular East
European country, but possibly in the Soviet Union and in East-West relations as well
(b) the long-term goal of helping the transformation of these economies into ones
that can both supply their own consumers and develop a more 'normal' market interaction
with the developed economies of the West.
38. Ideally, the instruments used to achieve goal (a) should also contribute to goal (b).
The Rockefeller scheme for private agriculture in Poland is a small case in point. But in
the present extremity this will not always be possible. Large, untied, government-
19
guaranteed credits have not in the past been a positive contribution to goal (b). Quite the
reverse. They have been used as a substitute for reform, not a means.to achieve it. But
given the scale of the debt burden, and the depth of the crisis, some government-
guaranteed new money may be essential-so long as this emergency panacea is not
confused with a proper cure. The package of measures announced by the Bush
administration in response to the relegalization of Solidarity is a good beginning. West
Germany's response will again be crucial.
40. For Poland, the situation may soon arise when the West will be called upon, and
by Lech Walesa as well as Wojciech Jaruzelski; to give straight aid: literally to put some
food on the Poles' kitchen tables. One can imagine worse uses for the European
Community's butter mountains. And the psychological effect of such immediate gestures
should not be underestimated. This would, of course, be little more than 'buying time.'
But in the time thus dearly bought, more sophisticated and rigorous proposals could be
elaborated.
41. Such proposals might include: debt relief, reschedulirig and conversion (whether
into local currency for agreed projects or, preferably, into equity); direct incentives for
Western investment, in majority-owned joint ventures or special zones; measures designed
specifically to encourage the development of the private and co-operative sectors, including
perhaps a Western-financed European Development Fund offering small-scale haz:d
currency loans, Western contacts, know-how; management, technical, fiscal and
promotional training; a sustained effort to ensure that EC and North American markets
are really open to all Polish and Hungarian producers, private and co-operative as well as
state, with consideration given to preferential treatment, even if not so much as presently
accorded to the GDR. The Trilateral Commission's proposal of treaties of association
with the EC, under article 238 of the Treaty of Rome, is currently an appropriate overall
goal for policy towards Poland and Hungary-and for them only-but direct economic
measures must be the immediate priority. Interesting suggestions have been made in this
area under the auspices of the Soros, Rockefeller and Bronfman foundations.
42. The West cannot make the difference between success or failure for perestroika
in the Soviet Union, and least of all in the economic field. But it can perhaps make the
difference between the success and failure of the still more fundamental attempted
transformation in Poland and Hungary, and most of all in the economic field. But the
case is urgent. It is a matter of months, not years.
Introductory Remarks
L
The changes that are happening in Poland and Hungary are potentially the most
important and momentous in at least 40 years. The central theme of politics in those
two countries is nothing less than the dismantling of the Communist system. It is nothing
less than the transition to a Western European liberal democracy-to a free market
economy, freely elected parliament, and independent judiciary. Poland is already in the
throws of its first half-free election in living memory. Hungary already has many political
parties, including two or three inside the Communist party.
However, even in Poland and Hungary, the chances of success are small. The
internal obstacles, the chances of a backlash are great. These two countries are alone in
Eastern Europe in this experiment, surrounded by neighboring states that are hidebound,
fearful, and oppressive. Poland's neighbors are the Soviet Union and the German
Democratic Republic. Most observers in Poland and Hungary share the prevailing British
and American assessment that there is a more than even chance of a check or reversal in
the Soviet Union.
Nonetheless, this is an historic moment of opportunity, and we in the West need
20
..,, ?·:,,_~"~.i-'.,,,:.:.:.•fa.wC, .'.°";i.'?."':"~°'7t:"'"~~:"~:'"r."'7'~"' ·"""""""''*·"'"' ~
to consider the possibilities to facilitate and promote this historic change. Of the various
kinds of actions available to us, economic action is much the most important in relation
to Poland and Hungary today. This is made more challenging by the political turmoil and
transition in these countries, which do not make for clear and consistent economic policy.
New thinking is called for.
The Federal Republic of Germany is the crucial player in this respect. It has by
far· the greatest economic presence of any power in the region. The question is not
whether Germany will again be a great power in Central Europe, but what kind of great
power it will be, what role it will play.
The Soviet Union is, of course, the other great power in East Central Europe, and
we must ask where the limit of Soviet tolerance of these extraordinary changes may lie.
It is probable that Gorbachev himself does not know the answer. He is indulging in new
thinking and in improvisation-playing it by ear.
A year ago, it could have been said that one essential fact remained-the leading
role of the Communist Party in Eastern Europe. That leading role is now being defined
away. But there remains one basic minimum condition for the Soviet Union-membership
in the Warsaw Pact. However, there is an inner logic in the political developments in
Poland and Hungary, in the politics of national emancipation, which will lead these
countries, or at least their opposition groups, to challenge membership in the Warsaw Pact
fairly soon and fairly directly. This is a development that is at once inevitable and
dangerous. Eastern Europe hopes in this direction are inadvertently raised by Soviet
unilateral disarmament initiatives aimed at the West.
While it would be absurd for NATO to stand as the last defender of the Warsaw
Pact, we could and should say privately to all political forces in Hungary and Poland that
to change the basic foundations of military security in Europe is the last step, not the first.
Political and economic changes must be put in place first. To be credible in saying that,
we must simultaneously be able to say that we are going to take steps to encourage and
promote the changes underway.
The window of opportunity opening in Poland and Hungary is a narrow one, and
it might soon be blown shut. It would be unforgivable for us in the West to miss this
opportunity by squabbling amongst ourselves, to pluck defeat from what is, in the
perspective of forty years, an extraordinary victory for Western resolve and values.
Introductory Remarks
IL
Besides those noted in the working paper, the crisis in Eastern Europe is serious
for two additional reasons, both of an economic nature. One is the increasing competition
with Eastern Europe's ability to export, even to the third world, from Far Eastern powers.
The other is because the Soviet Union, since Gorbachev came to power, has been
demanding more and better quality goods from Eastern Europe. This means Eastern
Europe can export fewer high-quality goods to the West and earn less hard currency to
buy Western technology, so they will remain uncompetitive.
It is also true that the chances of success in Eastern Europe are low because the
Communist Party nomenklatura and most of the working class will suffer, politically and
economically, from these reforms. If this obstacle is to be overcome, some charismatic
leader is required, and there does not appear to be one on the horizon in Hungary or in
Poland.
Moreover, the authority, in the largest sense, of the Soviet Union and its ideology,
culture, economy, and military high technology, have collapsed in Eastern Europe. The
Eastern Europe countries are again turning toward the West.
One should distinguish among these countries-between those that are at the core
21
ofSoviet security interests and those which may be becoming peripheral to these interests.
The core is Poland and the German Democratic Republic. Russia would cease to be not
only a superpower, but a great power, if it were to lose East Germany and Poland, and
thereafter almost surely the Ukraine and the Baltic States. This is an internal problem for
the Soviet Union.
The Ottomanization of the Soviet Union is a possibility, with the Eastern European
countries going the way of the provinces of the Ottoman Empire, which gradually relaxed
its grip upon them.
Every day, the non-socialist developed world, above all the United States and Japan,
because they compete with each other so much, are rushing ahead of the socialist world
in high technology. Thus the situation is, as they used to say in Vienna in 1910, "not only
hopeless, but indeed serious."
The Russians might be prepared over the years to grant Hungary and
Czechoslovakia the kind of autonomy they had right after World War II. But this is
unlikely for Poland and the German Democratic Republic. The Russian fear of a united,
powerful Germany is still quite strong.
It is not possible, even if it were desirable, for these problems to be settled either
by the United States and the Soviet Union, or by Western Europe and the Soviet Union.
If they are to be settled or contained, it will largely be by the forces within these countries.
Russian intervention is still a possibility.
These countries badly need short- and long-term economic aid. There should be
no disagreement about this in the West. Long-term economic aid should not be given
without strings, however. We need cooperation between the United States and Europe
on this, and not the kind of squabbling among the countries of the West which sends the
message to Eastern European countries that the West will not only not help them, but may
indeed not be capable of helping itself.
Yet, while there is some cause for gloom analytically, we must be optimistic in
policy. We are seeing the greatest single change in the map of Europe since 1945. Policy
should be conducted with prudence, and not with a presumption of ultimate failure.
Introductory Remarks
m.
In the eyes of many people in Eastern Europe, the Communist system is bankrupt.
Marxist ideology has lost much of its attraction, and to most Eastern Europeans, has no
credibility. The machinery of a centrally-controlled socialist economy has failed because
it is an obstacle to innovation and creativity. In the words of Helmut Schmidt, the Soviet
Union's development has reversed to make it "an Upper Volta with missiles."
The crisis besetting the socialist system has grown worse since the mid-seventies
as a result of slower economic growth and a declining standard of living. The old Soviet
instruments of crisis management-propaganda and repression-have lost their effectiveness
because the population is generally better educated and because a great deal more
information is now coming from the West. The brittle social and political structures
forced the Communist rulers to look for methods of reforming or overhauling the system.
Gorbachev's arrival on the scene was, therefore, only logical.
In the West, especially in the Federal Republic, the press and the public have
"Gorbymania." The West must therefore make clear that the new policies in Eastern
Europe are, in fact, a victory for the West, because our democratic, political, and economic
system is providing extremely attractive to the Communist bloc countries, whose people
want more freedom and a higher standard of living. The Russians, Hungarians, and Poles
are trying to make their reforms more realistic than in the past. Reformers, especially in
Hungary and Poland, have recognized that this process cannot any longer be confined to
22
-~·--:-;·~·,~~;:~~---;;~r-G;-r;~:~;"'.\';"'.~;-;i>."tr:-'7'-•~
..~=---------
a few improvements in the economic field but has to embrace society as a whole. Most
people do not identify themselves with the Communist P·arty apparatus. This has
prompted the Polish Communist Party to conduct a dialogue .with old enemies like
Solidarity and the Catholic Church.
The credibility gap between the ruled and the rulers in Eastern Europe can only
be bridged if the party can make major ideological concessions and relinquish much of
its controls. The reformers, most ofwhom are part of the party apparatus, find themselves
in a dilemma. Either the reform process will become bogged down on ideological
grounds, or it will increasingly challenge the party monopoly and thus its own power base.
This dilemma is driving a wedge between reformers and counter-reformers throughout
Eastern Europe.
Party leaders in Romania, Czechoslovakia, and the GDR still adhere to the Stalinist
instruments of repression. Each has a different motive. In Romania, it is the primitive
urge of a despotic family clique to stay in power. In Czechoslovakia, it is an almost
psychopathic fear of another P~ague Spring. For the GDR, it is because it is part of a
divided Germany; if the citizens of that part were allowed more freedom of movement,
they would inevitably move closer to the Federal Republic-something the Communist
leaders fear greatly.
Gorbachev's first priority is to keep the balance of power in Eastern Europe stable,
but he is not likely to exert much pressure on the anti-reformists among his allies. On the
other hand, it has become clear that there will be no peaceful order in Europe as long as
Germany remains divided. It is not possible to build a Europe whose nations cooperate
with one another and respect the rule of law, where the powers of the state are separated
and human rights protected, without the Germans. Similarly, a reunited, neutral Germany
isolated from her European neighbors is just as inconceivable. It is not possible to end
the division of Europe without ending the division of Germany.
The political stability of Eastern Europe will continue into the nineties. The Soviet
Union will devote increasing attention to domestic problems and leave its satellites to
themselves as long as they maintain a certain amount of bloc discipline. They would
certainly be going beyond the threshold of tolerance if they were to question membership
in the Warsaw Pact and Comecon. For the time being, the Soviet Union appears to be
tolerating the tendency in some countries to recognize opposition forces.
The outcome of the various experiments with reform in Hungary, Poland, and the
Soviet Union remains uncertain. But the process of change will gather momentum.
Those Western politicians who are saying the change has become irreversible are being
too hasty, and this could be dangerous. The continuing instability in Eastern Europe also
holds the risk of sudden turbulence. The pent-up bitterness of the people and their
tendency to expect too much from the reform process, especially as regards the economy,
could lead to unrest and revolt in some countries. From the Western point of view, that
is the worst thing that could happen. An uprising put down by force could mean the end
. of the reform process and could ruin for decades the chance of creating a peaceful order
in Europe. It could also freeze disarmament negotiations. Only if the Soviet Union were
prepared in the Vienna negotiations to forego its attack capability would that be a sign
that Moscow had abandoned the Brezhnev Doctrine. At the moment such a sign does not
exist.
The unstable situation in Eastern Europe and the smoldering crisis in the
Communist system still do not permit the West to abandon its dual principles of security
and cooperation. It remains essential for the West to maintain its defense capability, even
in the face of disarmament negotiations. It is the responsibility of NATO and the
European Community to secure the process of change in Europe by creating stable general
conditions and offering reliable partnership. The reform process in Eastern Europe means
both opportunities and risks for the West. The risks can be limited by Western cohesion.
The question "can we help Gorbachev?" is not the right one. But it would be a
23
mistake just to wait and see. The arguments that Gorbachev only wants reforms to make
the Soviet Union a more efficient, stronger, and more successful superpower, and that thus
the West should show restraint, are not conclusive. A Soviet Union and an Eastern
Europe that open up both domestically and externally, that modernize their outdated
systems, and that offer their people more freedom and prosperity would be far less
threatening to us. The Warsaw Pact nations will only master the huge task of becoming
internationally competitive if they grant more individual freedom, permit the exercise of
human rights, and introduce the rule of law. Such a transformed body politic would no
longer constitute a threat to the West. Radical change in Eastern Europe is therefore in
the Western interest.
We should take opportunities for cooperation where they present themselves, and
especially where, after careful consideration, they promise success. The mistakes of the
past, such as indiscriminately granting loans in order to promote detente, must not be
repeated. Rather than compete with one another, the Western nations should carefully
coordinate their policies. Economic and technological cooperation must go hand in hand
with an offensive Western cultural policy designed to bring the people of Eastern Europe
out of their long, involuntary cultural isolation. There should be more seminars,
scholarships, advanced training courses, exhibitions, cultural forums, and exchange
programs. The CSCE process must be used to obtain more basic rights and freedoms for
the people of Eastern Europe and to encourage development of a pluralistic society.
Discussion
The political and economic developments in Eastern Europe were, in the opinion
of an American speaker, the most important events going on anywhere in the world.
Amounting to nothing less than a fragmentation of the Soviet empire, they represented a
victory for the West. Poland and Hungary were on the way to becoming Western-style
democracies with free market economies. In Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria less evident
change was gradually occurring. And while little progress had yet been made in East
Germany and Romania, change would ultimately occur there as well.
How should the Western nations react to this process of change in Eastern Europe?
One thing they should not do, emphasized the speaker, was to view these changes with
caution and fear about their effects on the Soviet Union. The West should not discuss the
process of change in Eastern Europe with the Soviets, for such consultations would convey
to the Eastern European countries the image of the superpowers getting together to decide
their fate.
An Austrian agreed that Western leaders had to be careful about whom they talked
with in the East. We had to avoid "legitimizing structures that had been rejected by large
sectors of the population in these countries." A Briton added that he was dismayed that
some Western leaders visiting Poland and Hungary had had meetings and discussions with
groups and individuals that were not part of the reform movement.
Other participants in the discussion urged caution about events going on in Eastern
Europe. They expressed concern that the "limits of Soviet tolerance," as an American put
it, might be exceeded. This speaker argued that rapid change was not desirable for this
reason. There first had to be a "general acceptance of the process of change by the people
concerned," or the process might degenerate into violence. A German observed in this
regard that many in Hungary, while wanting to adopt a more neutral stance, were fearful
of a recurrence of 1956.
A British speaker agreed that gradual, evolutionary change would be desirable, but
doubted that it was possible. What was going on in Poland and Hungary was a "dangerous
leap" from one form of government to another, and it was inherently impossible to "leap
slowly."
24
',
. There was general agreement that the nations of the West should assist ~he process
of change in Eastern Europe by providing various forms of economic assistance. An
American called for development of more East-West trade, greater private sector
involvement in Eastern Europe, responsivenessto the goal of full membership of Eastern
European countries in GATf, encquragement of IMF agreements and World Bank
financings, and rescheduling of the heavy debt burdens of these countries. Others
advocated such things as vocational training and technical exchanges.
In the view of a British participant, the most important thing the West could do
to assist Eastern Europe economically would be to keep our markets open, including our
labor markets, even though this might well cause us economic hardship. The importance
of this was illustrated by the fact that, in 1988 hard currency transfers from Poles working
abroad exceeded the total hard currency surplus of the state sector in Poland.
Some speakers were cautious about the appropriate extent and manner of Western
economic assistance. An Austrian speaker pointed out that Eastern European countries
had serious economic problems. Hungary, for example, had a huge external debt, and
faced great difficulty in restructuring it. The abolition of price controls there was resulting
in the loss of purchasing power of the population, and this could be the basis of future
social tensions. It would be a mistake to invest a great deal of money in Eastern Europe
without regard to the possible structural effects. A Greek warned that we should not
repeat the same mistakes we had made in providing assistance to Third World countries.
In a British speaker's opinion, The West, especially Western Europe, had to "think
more constructively about new instruments for economic action." In particular, there was
a need for a new instrument to aid directly in the growth of the private sectors of Eastern
European economies. An Austrian said Western Europe ought to "think in an institutional
framework" about how to use existing European institutions as agents of change. A
Spaniard wondered if Western European institutions, such as the Council ofEurope, could
be opened to Eastern European countries. In the case of other organizations, such as the
EC, perhaps they could be offered some kind of associate or observer status.
There was a consensus that, whatever the West did, it had to act together and act
carefully. Particularly in Europe, there had to be cooperative effort in which the burdens
of economic assistance were shared.
The suggestion in the ~orking paper that the Federal Republic of Germany should
play a dominant role in shaping future relations between Western and Eastern Europe
prompted a discussion of what that role ought to be. A West German speaker said he
"recognized and accepted" that his country had an important role to play, but said that it
should not be overestimated. For historical reasons, neither Poland nor the Soviet Union
would be likely to tolerate a dominant German role, nor would the German Democratic
Republic, whose interest in good relations with West Germany was mainly for hard-
currency income. The Federal Republic should play an important role, but only as part
of a larger, European effort.
An American agreed that West Germany should not, "consciously try to dominate
events in Eastern Europe." Relations with Eastern Europe should be carried on in the
context of a united Europe. Europe had to become more united than it currently was.
Only in the reunification of the European continent did the possibility of real stability exist,
and only in the context of a unified Europe was it possible to envisage a reunified
Germany. German reunification was not against U.S. interests, but was intolerable to the
Soviet Union, unless reunited Germany was in a weakened state.
Regarding German reunification, a British speaker said he could imagine Poland,
Hungary, or Czechoslovakia "muddling through" to something close to democracy and a
fr.ee market economy while remaining sovereign independent states. But this would be
difficult for the GDR. If the GDR ceased to be Communist, it would cease to be the
25
GDR; there would no longer be an argument against reunification. This was a major
reason for developing a very active Western European policy of ever closer association
with East Central Europe. Only in such an association could one imagine a peaceful,
evolutionary convergence of the GDR back into a larger, democratic Germany.
Several speakers stressed the importance of political contacts between Western
and Eastern Europe. An Austrian felt that a "political Marshall Plan" was called for. A
countryman called for exchanges of political information about the organization of parties,
the running and financing of political campaigns, etc. A Belgian speaker noted that this
was particularly appropriate for Poland and Hungary, which now spoke the "same political
language" as the West.
A Spanish speaker commented that his country was carrying on extensive political
exchanges with Hungary and Poland, trying to explain to these countries Spain's experience
in developing democracy. Indeed, as a British speaker noted, leaders in the democratic
reform movements in Hungary and Poland looked particularly to Spain as an example.
26
II. CAN THE ALLIANCE BE SUSTAINED BY MILITARY
AND ARMS CONTROL ISSUES ALONE?
Inlroductory Remarks
L
The answer to the question under consideration is obvious: the Alliance can't be
sustained by military and arms control issues alone. Arms control is one avenue toward
a more acceptable order in Europe and the world; but it is not the only one. There must
be political approaches as well, and there must, above all, be a political concept of where
we want to go, what kind of order we would like to see emerge, and how to get there.
Arms control is not everything, but without arms control, everything else is nothing.
It is inconceivable for us to hold fruitful talks with the Russians on fundamental political
issues dividing us while eschewihg negotiations with them about every category of nuclear
and conventional weapons. It is almost unimaginably crude to place the two Eastern
countries that have gone farthest in their political and economic reform-Poland and
Hungary-under a new military threat at the same time we are thinking of ways and means
of supporting them.
There is a conflict here between military means and political goals, quite apart
from the fact that the whole modernization issue is overtaxing the psyche of one important
Alliance member-West Germany. The combination of pressure for modernization and
the refusal to negotiate with the Russians on SNF lie at the heart of NATO's present
crisis. While one may argue that NATO has weathered similar crises before, this one is
more dangerous and potentially more disruptive than all the previous ones.
The one element is no longer there that used to cement the alliance in those earlier
crises-the sense of clear and present danger, imminent threat, and an undisputable enemy
image. Gorbachev has changed the givens. He may falter, fail or fal~ and we must insure
against those contingencies by prudence. But prudence becomes counter-productive if it
leads to do-nothing policies, if it fails to explore the opportunities at hand for fear of the
risks connected with them, and if an arms build-up is the only reaction to the new range
of possibilities. This is what the quarrel in NATO is all about: do we muster the courage
to grasp the new opportunities, or do we hang on to our old risk assessment as though
Stalin and Brezhnev still resided in the Kremlin? Do we acknowledge that the threat is
diminishing and therefore tailor our defense efforts and military strategies to the
diminished threat? Or do we cling to our familiar concepts, making our defense efforts
and our strategy independent of the threat? Do we restrict our actions to arms measures,
· or do we become active diplomatically?
Here is the German position on short-range nuclear forces, given in the knowledge
that some believe the Germans are being weak and vacillating on this issue. First,
modernization is a misnomer. Replacing a four-cylinder engine with an eight-cylinder
engine is modernization. But NATO is replacing a beetle with a tank by extending the
range of the Lance from 120 to 480 kilometers-just under the intermediate-range nuclear
force limit, and by doubling the number of launchers to around 200. This is an arms
build-up in a field which had been lying fallow heretofore. Indeed, the old Lance has
already been modernized with new engines and electronic parts.
NATO is considering this arms build-up in the face of no increased threat in that
range band on the other side. The numbers game is somewhat suspect. Some say there
is a ten- or a sixteenfold superiority in the East in this area, whereas the number is closer
to fourfold. Whatever it is, it should be negotiated down. Some say the Russians have
modernized the Frog, but what they did was to increase its range to 120
kilometers-roughly the same as that of the Lance. This time we do not need to arm to
bring the Russians to the negotiating table. They are offering to negotiate.
27
Denuclearization is also a misnomer. It is a distortion to say that Western Europe
would be denuclearized if all the land-based short-range weapons were eliminated. (The
Bonn government is not seeking the third zero, anyway. Even the Social Democrats are
prepared to settle for the time being for parity at a m.uch lower number.) There would
still be about 4,000 American nuclear warheads in Europe. There would be several
hundred on American submarines at the disposal of SACEUR. And there would still be
the British and French nuclear forces.
It is wrong to imagine that the German government sprung on its allies the demand
to negotiate about weapons in this range band. "The Germans did not change their minds.
Ever since the INF negotiations and the imposition of the second zero, the Germans have
been asking that Russian superiority in SNF be negotiated away. There is ample evidence
of this on the public record.
Another factor influencing German opinion on this matter is the impact of the
recent Wintex exercise which politicians observed first hand. That this exercise
hypothecated a scenario in which the use of nuclear weapons occurred after just a few
days was disturbing to the politicians observing it. The analysis of it dropped like a
bombshell right in the middle of the coalition talks about the compromise. It raised all
the old fears, and the question "how flexible is flexible response?"
It is not disloyal to ask for negotiations on SNF. The argument that parallel
negotiations on SNF will hamper or undercut the conventional talks is not valid. It ought
to be possible to link the implementation of reductions in SNF to meaningful conventional
arms reductions.
Underlying the whole issue is the suspicion that perhaps the Germans are drifting
away from NATO and the West, perhaps even trying to get out of the European
Community as soon as there is a chance for reunification. This is unfair. Germany has
made its choice. It will be loyal to NATO as long as NATO exists. Germany has become
part and parcel of the European Community. Even if Eastern Europe opens up, West
Germany will not be pushing for reunification in the foreseeable future. What matters is
to end the separation of the people, not necessarily the division of the country. Once
reunification becomes possible in a freer Europe with freer communication, it will become
superfluous. The argument about SNF modernization should be viewed on the basis of
that assumption.
Introductory Remarks
IL
While it is certainly true that arms control has become a central component of
East-West relations, it is doubtful that there is a clear-cut objective to arms control.
When the process started in the Nixon Administration, there were certain imperatives,
including a peace movement that had to be placated, and a Congress that would not
increase defense spending, so that putting in a ceiling met certain needs. Every arms
control agreement became the subjc;:ct of vicious debate on issues like verification and
selling out to the Soviets and justified in terms of arms control being desirable in itself.
We lost a sense of direction, and arms control agreements have become an end in
themselves. It Jias become difficult to explain what they are supposed to do.
It was predictable that the INF agreement would produce exactly the situation we
see today in the political structure of Europe without producing a corresponding military
benefit. It became its own end. The attraction of being able to say that a class of
weapons had been reduced to zero was so overwhelming that the political implications of
putting a German government that had been dedicated to the Alliance through the agony
of deploying these weapons and then pulling them out were ignored. This has contributed
to the extraordinary German unanimity we are now seeing. It is essential to bring arms
28
control into some relation to the political objectives we are trying to serve.
The timing of the proposal to modernize short-range weapons was a mistake. It
was extraordinarily insensitive to propose, in the year that we withdrew strategic weapons,
the moderniiation of weapons that would kill primarily the victims of aggression. It was
also wrong that, once the issue had been raised, to resist so fiercely the modernization of
weapons that were already there.
The SNF debate raises all the issues of nuclear deterrence that we have avoided
studiously for twenty years-ever since it became apparent that some parity in strategic
forces was on the horizon. The West German Foreign Minister's statement that he has
a responsibility to spare the East German population from the horrors of war has practical
consequences not just for short-range weapons, but for the use of any nuclear weapons.
It will lead logically to a position of no-first-use of nuclear weapons. If such a position
means NATO is saying it would rather be defeated by conventional weapons than resort
to nuclear weapons, it may change all the premises of the security policy on which NATO
has been based.
It is a mistake to compare the short-range weapons on both sides. We made that
mistake with the INF. The INF was not an answer to the SS-20, but rather an attempt to
couple the defense of Europe to the strategic defense of the United States. It was
irrelevant how many SS-20's there were; and it is irrelevant how many short-range weapons
the Soviets have. The utility of the short-range weapons in Europe, as with any nuclear
weapons in Europe, is to threaten the Soviets with getting into a realm of warfare that is
essentially inpredictable and perhaps uncontrollable. Giving this up would amount to a
huge change in all the perceptions.
There is nothing in European history to suggest that conventional equivalence
produces deterrence. We are talking about conventional arms control and equal numbers
in conventional weapons when all of European history shows that victories have almost
always been achieved by equal forces and have frequently been achieved by inferior forces.
Fundamentally, we have four sets of relationships that we need to think through:
the relationship of unified Western Europe to the United States; the relationship of
Germany to Europe and to the United States; the relationship of Western Europe to
Eastern Europe; and the relationship of both sides of the Atlantic community to the
Soviet Union. We need a concept of what we are trying to do. We have escaped into
psychoanalysis of Gorbachev, and we cannot gear our policy to one man, whose life is
bound to be transitory. It is a fact that every Soviet leader has disavowed his predecessor.
It has been said the Communist systems, and especially the Soviet system, are the only
systems in the world that have an unpredictable past.
On the relationship of Western Europe to the United States, it would be highly
desirable for Western Europe to organize its own defense arrangements within NATO.
Such an act would not divide the Alliance. If we can stand a European Economic
Community where there is no penalty for competitiveness, we ought to be able to stand
a European defense community in a situation in which any threat to European survival
would find any sensible European better off with American assistance than without it.
It is undoubtedly true that tremendous changes are taking place in Eastern Europe.
But it would be a fatal mistake to assume that a great empire will disintegrate by itself,
while the United States and Western Europe simply sit there and observe this
disintegration and harvest its fruits without any action on their parts. There is nothing
in Russian history or Soviet perceptions that would make this likely.
What we have to do is separate the economic and political liberalization of Eastern
Europe from the Soviet military security problem. We need to see that the first part
moves faster than the second part. The issue of membership in the Warsaw Pact should
arise later than the issue of whether these countries can join the European Community as
associate members on an individual basis. We cannot tell them they must stay in the
Warsaw Pact, but a direct challenge to the Soviet system in that respect should not be
29
encouraged.
This is not a second Yalta. It is a means of eliminating the consequences of Yalta
without creating an excessive danger of conflict. There are now two forums in which
issues of this kind are being discussed. One is the European Community and its relations
to Eastern Europe. The E.C. can determine conditions of association in the economic
field. Second, arms control negotiations are going on in the conventional field in Vienna.
Rather than turn them into the usual numbers game, they ought to be related to our
desire to reduce the Soviet capacity for repression in Eastern Europe while at the same
time continuing to try to achieve a degree of balance. If these countries challenge their
membership in the Warsaw Pact, it would be much better if they did it after Soviet forces
had been substantially reduced as the result of arms control negotiations.
With respect to the position of West Germany, it must be admitted that there is
a growing concern among its allies. This has little to do with the tactics that produced
the current SNF situation. When one looks at German history, one can say that the
tragedy of Germany is its central location and its late unification. Throughout its history,
Germany has been either too weak or too strong for the peace of Europe. When it was
too weak, it invited constant foreign intervention. When it was too strong and sought to
defend itself against all its neighbors, it threatened each neighbor individually. Pre-World
War I German foreign policy was an extraordinary achievement in bringing about every
nightmare that it sought to avoid.
The problem is that German national energies have been so absorbed in achieving
unification that there has never been developed a clear statement of the national interest
which would explain its foreign policy. With the best interests in the world, Germany,
assaulted by all its conflicting temptations, will tend to follow them all, and will thereby
create an uncertainty that one of its leaders intend. The danger is not that Germany will
stampede out of the Alliance, but that, under the pressure of public opinion, policies will
be pursued whose objective result will be to undermine European unity and the NATO
Alliance.
It was a tremendous achievement of Germany policy to integrate itself into the
West. Germany has every right to seek reunification, but it should be sought in a
European framework. But the European Community and the United States owe it to
the Germans to come up with a concept that is rational and sustainable. Germany owes
it to itself and to its allies to be willing to pursue its goals in such a framework. For this
reason, arms control is not enough.
Discussion
An International speaker opened the discussion by responding to some of the points
made in the panelists' introductory remarks. Regarding the need to modernize the Lance
missile, the speaker said that the service life of the Lance would end in 1995, after which
it might not function reliably if it was not modernized. As to Soviet superiority over the
West in the SNF category, a factor of 16 was accurate if applied to launchers; the Russians
had approximately 1400 against our 88. And the Russians had modernized their SNF
arsenal by doubling the range of the SCUD and bringing in new missile systems such as
the SS-21, SS-N21, and AS-15. As to the question of whether Western submarine-based
weapons could replace ground-based weapon systems, the speaker said they could not
because they were not based on European soil.
With regard to the unsettling effect that the Wintex exercise had had on German
politicians, this was unfortunate, but understandable. But such a procedural exercise, in
which both military and political leaders participated in a simulated crisis, escalating to
the use of nuclear weapons, was still valuable.
To deal with the larger arms control issues facing the West, the International
30
speaker proscribed a five-point course of action to be taken at the summit level.
First, we should indicate that we planned to move ahead with conventional arms
negotiations. We needed to indicate our determination to make progress by adopting a
"better spirit of give and take."
Second, we should "stay generalized" on the question of a follow-on system to
Lance. Such a system should not be discussed in detail before being created. The proper
question to address should be that of budgeting for research and development of a follow-
on system. We ought not to "overload the German circuits" by pressuring Germany about
the issue of deployment.
Third, we should negotiate on SNF only after progress had been made on the
conventional side. This was important because of the seriousness of the conventional
threat and because it would provide the Russians with an incentive to agree to cuts.
Fourth, we should recognize the importance of unilateral moves in arms control
negotiations; they were as important as negotiated reductions. The West had in fact
made, and should take credit for, significant unilateral reductions over the past ten years,
both in terms of reducing the number of nuclear weapons and in defense-budget
reductions.
Fifth, we needed to reaffirm our adherence to the Alliance and to our defensive
strategy, and we had to commit budgetary resources sufficient for our defense.
It was a French participant's view that the current controversy over SNF was largely
the result of the INF agreement-a mistake we should try to avoid repeating. We needed
to avoid the "slippery slope toward denuclearization." We should continue the arms
control process, but do it in sequence, and not start too rapidly with SNF. It was
important that we think about how to "relegitimize" nuclear deterrence and how to avoid
irreversible moves.
An International speaker doubted that a "go slow'' approach on SNF would be
possible. In his view, a negotiation on SNF was "irresistible," and any link with
conventional talks would probably be loose. It would be hard to avoid a third zero on
ground-based nuclear weapons, given the "broad rejection" in West Germany of artillery
nuclear weapons and the follow-on to Lance.
A Canadian argued that the idea that NATO could rely on a conventional defense
alone had to be discarded because no NATO country was prepared to pay the costs of its
share of such a strategy. The INF agreement had indeed caused a gap in the strategy of
flexible response, and, if we adopted the third zero, flexible response would not longer be
valid. What strategy could replace it? Clearly a strategy of massive retaliation would not
be acceptable. We had, therefore, to find a variation of flexible response which.relied on
whatever nuclear weapons remained. To some extent the independent French nuclear
arsenal could be seen as a deterrent because of the uncertainty of its use. Submarine-
launched nuclear weapons could not be relied on as tactical weapons because they were
destabilizing. And aircraft-delivered nuclear weapons posed the problem of being
increasingly unreliable and also not survivable. If all ground-based weapons were
removed, NATO security would be left to the "good will of the Soviets," and this went
against the fundamental concept of the Alliance.
Another Canadian warned that, though it was up to the West Germans to decide
whether or not to allow nuclear weapons on their soil, Britain, the U.S., and Canada had
the right to choose to not maintain their ground forces in Germany without the protection
of the nuclear umbrella. Thus, burden-sharing had to be considered part of the SNF issue.
Several speakers questioned whether flexible response was still a valid strategy.
An American doubted that there could be such a thing as gradual escalation, or that a
controlled war was possible. A Briton agreed, saying that, in Europe, there was a growing
concern about the doctrine of flexible response. For many Europeans, the concept of a
limited war made little sense. In this respect, there was a growing divergence between the
two pillars of the Alliance. A West German raised the question of the viability of flexible
31
•
response, given the changes in Eastern Europe. Would flexible response allow the
· destruction of Prague or Warsaw? ·
Other participants strongly defended the Alliance's reliance on nuclear deterrence.
A Briton argued that nuclear weapons were essential for deterring war. They had done
so successfully for more than 40 years, while conventional weapons had never done so.
An American found it "odd" that all arms control agreements so far had focused on the
nuclear side, while it was the conventional side that had produced the threat in Europe.
If we gave up nuclear weapons, he warned, we would be in a new world that "we had
better analyze prayerfully."
There was an extensive discussion of the importance of public opinion in sustaining
the Alliance and its policies. In the view of a British speaker, the Alliance could be
sustained by military and arms control issues as long as people were frightened. What
now confronted us was the perception by our publics of a diminished threat.
Such perception, said a Canadian, combined with Gorbachev's great public relations
successes, made it vital for Western leaders t_o maintain a long~term, consistent approach
to Western security. For that, we needed the support of our publics. This was especially
important in relation to the problem of the psychological decoupling of Europe from
North America. At a time when our values were triumphant, when we were winning the
cold war, we found ourselves divided and thus in a weakened position. Arms control went.
to the heart of public opinion, and our failure to address arms control in a united way
would undercut public support for the Alliance. This could lead, in turn, to a decoupling
and weakening of the Alliance. One way to counter Gorbachev's public relations success
was to be united and to develop arms control proposals that captured public opinion.
An American agreed, saying that the revival of West-West tensions had to be
avoided. Keeping NATO together had to be the foremost objective. An Alliance
weakened by internal squabbles would have a "dismal" effect on Eastern Europe and on
the Soviet Union.
It was, in a Belgian participant's view, a paradox that, "at the moment of our
greatest success" we were "in real trouble." The responsibility of Western leaders was to
quiet the dissension in our ranks, and to restore unity. "NATO must be a choice, not a
habit," he said.
It was a widely held view among participants in the discussion that the Alliance
had to formulate a new comprehensive concept. The best way to accomplish that, in the
opinion of many speakers, was to conduct a Harmel-type exercise. We had, in the view
of an International participant, locked ourselves into an agenda out of which we urgently
had to move. We had to stop allocating blame. And we had to move away from the focus
on nuclear issues in the Alliance. If we could not resolve the problem of ground-based
nuclear weapons, then we should attempt to address the problem of defining "first
principles." The best way to do that would be a new Harmel exercise.
Another International speaker agreed, saying that the West had to address some
basic questions. Could we "live with success" and maintain unity and cohesion at the
same time? Was the Atlantic link still important? Was nuclear deterrence still valid?
We had to confront the question of how to reduce East-West confrontation and move
toward a more peaceful Europe while maintaining our security.
It was a German's view that the strategic, theoretical problems we faced. were
insoluble. There was no strategy that would satisfy both sides of the Atlantic. The most
promising course was to work to create "a more benign security environment." At that
point, it.would be time to talk about nuclear strategy, flexible response, the Atlantic link,
etc. If there was going to be a fundamental change in the political environment, then
these issues would have to be addressed anew. We could not "railroad a definition of our
national interest past our public opinions." Our governments had to have a concept of
what they wanted, and it was up to the leaders to mold public opinion.
32
An American felt the underlying question was what leaders should tell their publics.
The average person could not understand the complex technical issues involved in arms
control, nor the rationale of negotiating levels and ceilings of various weapons and forces.
There had to be a discussion of what it was we wished to achieve in terms of an ultimate
result.
. In terms of the Soviet threat, the speaker continued, we had to ask whether the
Russians wanted to remove the cause of our fear or the perception of it. It could be
argued that the Russians knew that the perception of a threat was wha:t held the Western
Alliance together; remove that perception, and the West would fall apart. If the Soviet
goal was simply to remove the perception of the threat, then the West was indeed in
trouble. We had to have a definition of what we considered to be the nature of Soviet
threat. We had to stop putting all our focus on the character of the current Soviet leader
and start looking at the reality of 400 years of Russian expansionism. Could the "Russian
Empire" live in equilibrium with its neighbors? And how did the West define equilibrium?
We also had to have a c;lear concept of what we meant by Europe. The Soviet
idea of a Europe from the Urals to the Atlantic was absurd. If the Soviet Union was
part of Europe, it was from Vladivostok to the Atlantic. There were three possible
concepts of Europe: today's concept, which included both the Soviet Union and the U.S.;
a Europe that included the Soviet Union but not the U.S.-a prescription for Soviet
hegemony; a Europe from the Soviet-Polish frontier to the Atlantic. If the West were to
base its arms control and economic concepts upon this last idea of a Europe, then that
would constitute the vision of the future that we so sorely needed.
33
III. THE LONG-TERM ECONOMIC DESIGN OF THE E.C.:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGNIY?
Introductory Remarks
L
One finds, in discussions such as those that have taken place on developments in
Eastern Europe and on military and arms control issues, frequent references to the
European Community as an entity, as opposed to a more general reference to Europe
as a place, and to its role in the world. Such references would probably not have been
so common in similar discussions four years ago.
The metamorphosis which has taken place in the significance of the European
Community has been stimulated by the event symbolized by 1992. That 1992 has become
a symbol of something has obscured some of the essential issues that underpin it. 1992
is not an isolated event, but one which will take place in the context of a process that has
been developing over several decades. Only in that context can 1992 be examined.
The issue of national sovereignty in relation to 1992 cannot be avoided. If national
sovereignty means the untrammelled right to order one's own economic destiny, then the
European Community has gradually reduced in one sense, but increased in another, the
power of the member states of the Community to develop economic strategies.
In the context of discussions about Europe and where it is going, one sometimes
hears the expression of European union as being a goal. That certainly reflects the
evolutionary process that began in the fifties and moved gradually through the sixties with
the development of independent and autonomous institutions, to a point where we had
formed an entirely new structure which cannot be compared with any other regional
grouping in any part of the world that has existed before or has come into existence since.
The difference between what the Community is and what it aspires to be is related to the
fact that it is, in its essence, supranational, rather than intergovernmental. It is not merely
a matter of ongoing agreements between sovereign independent states, but it also
necessarily involves the institutions of the Community playing an independent, autonomous
role in developing a new type of economic space with important political implications. All
the member states have agreed to this, and the essence of it is now secure, defined by
basic concepts, such as the supremacy of Community law. Time-honored formulae about
the sovereignty of national parliaments has now to be taken in this context.
During the 1970's, the Community went through a period of economic stagnation,
which was the result of the post-Bretton Woods world, the economic upheavals of the
seventies and early eighties, and the internal protectionism that it gave rise to. We are
now faced with a startling change. Back in late 1984, Europe was considered io be the
sick man in economic terms in the world economy. Terms like Eurosclerosis and
Europessimism were in vogue. There was a certain palpable negativism about the
Community. 1992 has regenerated something that was already there in substance and
structure, but has now begun to develop.
What are the implications of 1992 in terms of economic sovereignty? First, by the
adoption of the Single European Act in 1986 and the agreement of all of the governments
of the Community that we should have, in a defined list of economic measures, majority
voting, as opposed to unanimity, everyone agreed to reduce their own sovereignty. They
did this by accepting that they could not stop something simply by voting against it.
Second, the Community was founded, and still rests, upon the principle that a free market
economy and competition stimulate and create efficiency, growth, and prosperity. 1992 has
always been viewed, in Community terms, as being a liberalization of trade, both internal
and external. Therefore, the debate about fortress Europe is somewhat incongruous and
essentially denies the real purpose of 1992, which is merely the fulfillment of objectives
34
that were in the original Treaty of Rome and should have been fulfilled long before.
Thus, when one talks of the economic implications of 1992, one talks of a common
external trade policy. It will no longer be possible for national governments to maintain
separate rules in regard to the importation of certain types of goods. National quotas are
inconsistent and will be totally outlawed in terms of the creation and maintenance of one
economic space. There must be common dumping procedures, rules on local content, a
similar position on liberalization of services-in short, one Community policy and one
Community voice in the development of that policy. The national power to grant-aid
industry through state subsidies must be subservient to overall rules. This is a real
infringement of national sovereignty, but is inherent in and necessary for the development
of one economic space.
Such areas as merger policies and regulation of sectors like air transport or
telecommunications will also be affected.
The gradual development of the strategy of 1992 has involved not merely passing
legislation necessary to remove naticinal borders and facilitate movement between different
parts of Europe, but has also involved the assertion of a certain European Community
power in itself. The point is not to seek to intervene anywhere and everywhere on a
Community basis, but rather to enforce the principle of subsidiarity. Policy making should
-and must-only take place at a Community level when it is necessary to do so to maintain
a common market. Otherwise, the matter should be left to national governments. The
effectiveness of certain economic functions at the national level is reduced by market
integration. This means enormous changes in the balance of administrative and political
power within the European Community.
The option of an inward-looking Community does not exist. The integration of
the world economy through technology and communication, supplemented by the
integration of industrial society through investment across oceans, is such that the idea
of a fortress Europe simply does not hold water. Apart from the fact that 20.9 percent
of world trade is generated within the Community and therefore that the Community has
an enormous vested interest in free trade rather than protectionism, it is entirely
inconsistent with the situation which involves the degree of cross investment, for example,
that arises between North America and the European Community.
Prime Minister Thatcher's statement that the European Community should not
seek to regulate or divest national governments of their powers or to impose excessive
regulation is correct. But the paradox of 1992 is that Community regulation is intended
to deregulate by removing the national barriers which inhibit trade. The European
Community is, and will be, an open trading bloc which will stimulate an open world
trading area.
Introductory Remarks
n.
The automobile industry is an example of what can happen in European industry
after 1992. It is much more important in Europe than it is anywhere else. Europe
produces 12 million cars, while the U.S. and Japan each produce eight million. There
are 1.8 million workers employed in the European auto industry, and another 1.8 in the
automotive component industry. The value added in industrial turnover is over 12 percent,
which is half again what it is in the U.S. Research and development in the motor car
industry in Europe represent 20 percent of all research and development in Europe, and
is very important in terms of its fallout to other industries.
European motor cars are sold in Europe, the U.S., Japan, and the Third World.
The industry has a negative balance with Japan and a positive balance with the U.S. and
the rest of the world. But the positive balance with the U.S. and the rest of the world is
35
shrinking in favor of the Japanese. There is a ten percent import of Japanese cars into
Europe, which is more or less stable, with varying quotas.
What about the future? The Japanese will not import more cars into the U.S.,
but will produce more cars there. They are likely to go up to two million cars by the end
of the decade. At that point, they will import into Europe from the United States. The
Japanese will also increase production of cars in Europe. So Europe is looking at
diminishing exports to the U.S. and to the Third World and resulting negative balances.
Europe cannot afford to accept this state of affairs. It must therefore negotiate
with the Japanese an interim, transition period that could last for up to seven years. In
the meantime, Europe will have to negotiate voluntary quotas. The Japanese industry is
only 35 years old, and when it started, it asked for quotas on cars from Europe. So the
motor car industry, like the other industries in Europe, must have the objective of being
able to be competitive and not protected. In the meantime, it must have some kind of
transition period.
Introductory Remarks
Ill.
American opinions about 1992 run the gamut from Europhoria to Europhobia.
There are those in the U.S. who believe that 1992 represents a great opportunity to
develop markets and expand trade. And there are those who say that 1992 will bring
about the destruction of GATT. But there is an American consensus developing about
1992 as we become better informed about it and better understand the changing
institutions of Europe.
There has been a rich record of trade between the U.S. and Europe since the end
of World War II. Since then, Europe has had widespread support from the U.S. for the
fulfillment of its dream of a Europe without frontiers. We have seen the fulfillment of
that dream as a Europe united by peace and by prosperity. We have also seen that vision
as an antidote to military conflict among Europeans and as a bulwark against Russian
expansion.
On the other hand, the U.S. is concerned about some of the specifics of E.C. policy.
For example, it is important to understand what is meant by domestic content. At what
level does this become industrial policy? At what level does it become emulated by less-
developed countries trying to protect their industries?
Then there is the question of Europe's Common Agricultural Policy. It is
destructive to free trade, and the U.S. has replied in kind. This is costing both Europe
and the U.S. We need to stop the oversubsidization of agriculture, which is a great waste.
It has damaging effects on other parts of the world, like Central America. It is a subject
thatis important to the relationship between Europe and the U.S. and must be addressed.
We are concerned about protectionism toward Japan and what effects it may have
on the U.S. At what point might Japanese cars built in the U.S. be precluded from being
exported to Europe?
We worry about some of the details, such as standards. It is fine to have E.C.-
wide minimum standards. But small- and medium-sized American companies that can't
afford to build a plant within Europe are excluded from the standard-making bodies. The
detail standards are at least partially designed to be protectionist.
As Europe brings down 12 different barriers, it is the concern of the U.S. that it
does not erect one big barrier. This is not the intent or objective of Europe 1992, but
there are competing interests within the U.S. that want protectionism. The Europeans
and the Japanese lobbied hard in Congress during the writing of the trade bill, and we
tried to be responsive to their concerns, particularly on protectionist measures. We would
like to have that kind of communication to advise Europeans about our concerns.
36
Collectively, Europe will be the u:s.'s largest trading partner, and vice versa. If we
continue to build on that relationship and encourage a free exchange of our products and
goods, then we will all benefit. It is essential that Europe and the U.S. come to terms at
the Uruguay Round and bring it to a successful conclusion by the end of next year.
Discussion
There was a general consensus among participants in the discussion that the
political dimension of the economic unification of Europe presented the most significant
challenge to its successful completion.
A speaker from Luxembourg felt that the business community had gone ahead of
the politicians in the E.C. member states in adapting to 1992. What was lacking was a
long-term political concept of the Community, and this created a problem in terms of
political cohesion. The European Parliament did not have the full powers of national
parliaments, yet the national parliaments felt they were being divested of traditional
powers. This could lead to a disaffection in public opinion about the Community.
A Briton agreed that "supranational consciousness" was not yet very fully developed
within the E.C. countries, and thus it was important to avoid the supranational ambitions
of the E.C. institutions going too far too fast. A major difference between the E.C.
Commissioners and members of national governments was that the latter had to respond
more directly to public opinion. We had to decide whether to strengthen the Community's
institutions or to seek more effective liaison between them and national parliaments. In
order to build a supranational consciousness and gain the support of public opinion for the
E.C., we had to create not just a "businessman's Europe," but a "people's Europe," with
higher social standards in terms of such things as welfare and wage levels.
A Belgian participant observed that the authority of last resort, except in legal
matters, in the Community was the Council of Ministers, and it was not directly
responsible to anyone. This did create a political problem, and was a void that had to
be filled. A Canadian wondered how European political institutions might evolve, and
whether a new form of political organization might develop that could be described as
"United States of Europe."
Another major challenge that the Community faced, in the opinion of a Spaniard,
was the question of how the efficiency, growth, and prosperity of an economically unified
Europe would be distributed among different countries and regions. Countries such as
Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Ireland had not converged with the other countries of the
Community in terms of per capita income levels. Indeed, the divergence in income levels
in these four countries was greater in 1988 than in 1975. This could lead to a major
conflict in 1992 in terms of approaches to economic growth. The richer countries in the
E.C. were more prepared to sacrifice growth in order to maintain economic equilibrium;
but the poorer countries needed to grow faster in order to catch up with the average of
the Community. In addition, there were problems with the EMS arising from the fact that
the monetary policies of the stronger countries were imposed on the weaker ones.
Another problem was that the current high level of E.C. budgetary expenses on agriculture
made difficult the transfer of structural funds to poorer countries. Thus, in order to
achieve the upward convergence of incomes that would be necessary to successfully achieve
economic integration, there would have to be budgetary adjustments and changes in the
EMS.
The Common Agricultural Policy was a subject of concern to several speakers. In
the opinion of a British participant, it could no longer be defended, and the Community
had moved too slowly in dealing with it. It was wrong to preach free trade in the
industrial sphere and not apply it to agriculture. An American observed that agriculture
was a "sore point" from his country's point of view. While in many European nations,
37
agriculture was a "social policy," in the U.S. it was a business. A Belgian agreed that a ·
change in agricultural policy in the Community would require a change in the social
structure, and would take a long time. But it was a "complete misconception" to believe
that the European Commission did not want to reform agricultural policy while national
governments did.
Other trade-related concerns expressed by speakers included such things as
standard-setting, anti-dumping measures, labor standards, and subsidies or other forms
of protection for companies not able to compete in the post-1992 environment. An Italian
felt it was a paradox of 1992 that it might stimulate an over-reaction in the form of a more
aggressive attitude on the part of the E.C.'s trading partners.
It was an International speaker's view that what was happening in the E.C. was
not just a matter for transatlantic discussion, but concerned the rest of the world, too.
The best place to address trade policy was at the Uruguay Round, where the Community
was the only trading bloc to speak with one voice. It was here that the fears of a fortress
Europe should be dealt with.
A Greek speaker expressed the hope that, with respect to environmental standards,
the Community would not adopt weaker measures than its trading partners in order to
achieve growth.
Members of the panel concluded the discussion by addressing themselves to some
of the questions and comments raised therein. The following points were made.
It was not envisaged that a European entity comparable to the U.S. be created.
This would create more problems than it solved. The goal, rather, was gradually
increasing integration as necessary to achieve the agreed upon goal of the single market.
There was indeed a requirement for political cooperation and cohesion, particularly in
formulating a response to such developments as those in Eastern Europe.
Policy making in the Community had to take place at the lowest level consistent
with its proper functioning. It was not correct to say that unelected bureaucrats were
making decisions. The European Commission could only propose laws, while the Council
of Ministers had the power to make them. They, in turn, had to be answerable to their
parliaments.
As to public opinion, while there was some negativism toward the European
Parliament, there was an increasing positivism toward the goal of economic integration.
In answer to a question raised about the supremacy of Community law over national
law, it was unambiguously true that Community law overrode national constitutional law.
As to labor standards, there would be decisions as to joint standards in subjects
like safety and welfare, but not minimum wages. Minimum wage standards would inhibit
growth prospects of poorer E.C. countries.
It was recognized that further widening of the gap between the richer and poorer
countries in the Community would be a problem for the Community, and policies had
been developed to deal with it.
Reforming the Common Agricultural Policy did present a major social problem.
There were 13 million farmers in the Community, many of them at the subsistence level.
They could not simply be wiped away. But progress was being made.
Finally, the subject of trade should be dealt with multilaterally, not bilaterally.
38
IV. CURRENT EVENTS: U.S. - SOVIET RELATIONS
Introductory Remarks
In the view of the American government, the overriding goal of Soviet leaders in
the next decade is to arrest internal decline and modernize Soviet political and economic
systems. They seek to lay the basis for the Soviet Union becoming a stronger, more
competitive superpower politically, economically, and militarily in the next century.
Gorbachev himself has admitted that this is his objective.
In pursuing this objective, the Soviets face formidable problems: slow economic
growth, an increasingly dissatisfied public, lagging technological development, resistance
to change, and looming nationality strife. The restructuring process that is now in motion
will take years, if not decades, to take root. But there does exist a widespread consensus
that a return to the policies of the 'past is out of the question.
The U.S. sees Soviet foreign policy objectives flowing from these internal
imperatives. Gorbachev is clearly impatient for progress and sees international stability
as a sine qua non for domestic reform. It is not possible to say with certainty the extent
to which the new Soviet attitude is either genuine or lasting. But, since the impetus for
reform is likely to last into the next decade, if what we are looking at is tactical now, it is
possible that if it is pursued for a period of time, it could become fundamental change.
The basic conclusion of what all this means for the West is not surprising. There
are many new opportunities that could not be imagined a decade ago for achieving long-
standing Western objectives in the security, political, and economic fields. It is in our
interests to try to encourage the kind of systemic changes that will help to ensure the
durability of reform. Given the length of the road that is still to be travelled by the
Soviets, we must also be prudent. The Soviet Union is opening, but is not open. Some
good things are happening, but we don't know what the final result will be.
Meanwhile, Soviet military forces remain formidable and continue to modernize.
They will be a threat to Western security for years to come. As a result, as we navigate
this period of possible transition to a more cooperative relationship, one of the most
difficult tasks is going to be to balance realism with forward-looking policies that seek to
exploit real opportunities for change.
The U.S. has three broad sets of objectives vis a vis the Soviet Union over the next
ten years. They reflect the new opportunity that is apparent to reintegrate the Soviet
Union into the world system. The basic thrust of the objectives is to encourage the
institutionalization of favorable military, political, and economic change so as to build a
more lasting and predictable relationship in the future.
The first set of objectives come under the category of strategic/military. The
objective there is to maintain strong, modern defenses, strengthen deterrence, and enhance
the security of the U.S., and its allies and friends. In this category is the search for ways
to encourage the transformation into reality of all of this Soviet rhetoric we hear about
restructuring the Soviet military toward lower force levels and a truly defensive posture.
Arms control is one of the ways to accomplish that.
The second category is political/diplomatic. There, the objective is to encourage
further Soviet retrenchment in the Third World and greater autonomy in Eastern Europe.
We would challenge Moscow to subordinate its c.lient relationships to the goal of finding
peaceful resolution to regional conflicts and, over the longer term, to removing the
competitive East-West dynamic. We would like to take advantage of opportunities that
arise as the Soviet Union becomes more interested in being a player globally, and to
expand cooperation in dealing with global issues such as terrorism and the environment.
Finally, perhaps the greatest challenge is in the area of democratization-genuine
reform within the Soviet Union. The starting point has to be an understanding that our
39
ability to influence Soviet internal developments rests largely in the difficult area of ideas
and in mechanisms like the CSCE process. Over the long term it is in the West's interest
to encourage the Soviets to reach their own conclusions and to build a society that
increasingly talks of its values and priorities in terms of the quality of life of its people
rather than in terms of expansion abroad, or the power of the Soviet leadership and
Communist Party. Over the longer term, many of the things that are in this
category-economic, social, cultural contacts-are private, and not governmental. But
governments can encourage this.
Looking at these sets ofgoals, the Administration has confirmed a five-part agenda:
human rights, arms control, regional issues, bilateral issues, and global issues. The
purpose of Secretary Baker's recent trip to Moscow was to share with the Soviets this
broad set of conclusions from the American policy review, to re-engage with the Soviets
in all of these five parts of the agenda in various forums, and to begin work again in the
various negotiations in which there had been a pause for several months.
Dates for the resumption of all the arms control negotiations and related talks
have been set, and dates will be set for bilateral consultations on the edges of the Geneva
conference on disarmament dealing with chemical weapons. Substantive negotiations on
conventional arms have begun again in Vienna. We are looking to find forums for
consultation with respect to missile and chemical weapon proliferation in the world beyond
our own bilateral relationship. In the regional area, we have agreed to reinstitute all of
the experts' meetings, and much time was spent discussing central America and the Middle
East.
The human rights part of the agenda is being followed and progress is being made.
We are fmding that the Soviet Union is searching for Western experience in the area of
developing democratic institutions.
The bilateral category includes active cultural exchange and such lesser but real
topics as making television available to the staffs of the embassies in the two capitals.
This is the kind of thing that can cause problems.
On global issues, it will take time to decide where the appropriate areas of
cooperation lie, but a start has been made.
During his meeting with Secretary Baker's delegation, Gorbachev made the
following remarks about perestroika. Perestroika is no longer a policy, but a reality. In
a large and complex country like the Soviet Union, the results are not immediate,
particularly in a period of revolutionary change. But perestroika will succeed. In terms
of the economy, of political developments, in the intellectual sphere, in the nationalities
question, and even in the party, it has turned out that the process has been more difficult
than was first thought. But a process is underway that will change the Soviet Union in a
very profound fashion. The Soviet Union has set out to radically reform its economy by
changing the role of the individual in economic affairs. This main purpose of perestroika
affects both the role of the individual and the forms of socialist ownership. The problem
is not just the bureaucrats, it is the impact of 70 years of egalitarianism in the economy
and its effect on people. It is not easy to change how people approach work. One has to
break up the old managerial attitudes and defeat the old administrative system. To do
this, it has been necessary to move to political reform. In this area, there have been some
startling changes. The recent elections were a lesson for everyone. It is now necessary
to form the kind of Supreme Soviet and the kind of government that can shoulder new
responsibilities.
Gorbachev said mistakes had been made in past years, but no one could be
expected to carry out this kind of profound change without making mistakes. He seemed
concerned that people were always comparing progress in the Soviet Union with progress
in China. He said that China may have had some success in the beginning of its reform
but was currently stumbling because there had not been enough technological progress.
40
The Soviet Union is trying to learn from this and move.forward with not only new forms
of management and ownership, but, efforts to keep up with technologies.
Gorbachev spoke of the switch from the military sector to the consumer sector,
and seemed amazed to learn that the Soviet space program is producing technologies,
ideas, and materials which are suitable for the consumer sector. He said the Soviet Union
was trying to break down the barriers between the military and consumer sides of its
economy in order to apply some of these technologies to the consumer side.
He said there was much debate about the tactics of perestroika. Many people
wanted an overnight fix. He said of the great Soviet breakthroughs of the 1930s and the
Chinese "Great Leap Forward" of the 1960s that these were really leaps backwards. He
said that extremes had to be avoided. He sees the need to stay the course. His major
challenge is dealing with the contradictions between the great expectations of perestroika
and the real results.
In the area of pricing and, convertibility of the ruble as indications of a real
commitment to economic reform, Gorbachev said he believed the people would not have
let perestroika continue if the leadership had moved into the area of price reform
immediately because one could not pursue for very long policies that take money out of
peoples' pockets.
With respect to arms control, Gorbachev has said the Soviet Union has decided
to unilaterally withdraw 500 warheads from tactical nuclear systems from the territory of
its allies in Eastern Europe. Of these, 284 will be from tactical missiles, 166 from aircraft
bombs, and 50 from artillery weapons. This program resembles more NATO's periodic
restructuring of its warhead supply than the removal of missiles.
The next proposal that is likely to emerge will be for the removal, between 1989
and 1991, of all tactical nuclear weapons, including dual-capable systems, back to national
territory. Thus, a zero on all short-range weapons will be proposed.
On the conventional side, the Warsaw Pact will table a new proposal in Vienna
very soon. It calls for the Warsaw Pact and NATO to reduce the numbers of their armed
forces and armaments in Europe by 1996-1997 to the following equal, residual levels: 1.35
million men, 1,700 combat helicopters, 20,000 tanks, 24,000 artillery weapons, 28,000
infantry fighting vehicles, and 1,500 "frontal" aircraft. The Soviets will likely propose that
each military alliance reduce its armed forces by more than one million men; that NATO
reduce its combat aircraft and helicopters by 2500 each while the Warsaw Pact reduces
such systems by smaller amounts; that the Warsaw Pact reduce tanks by 40,000, artillery
by 46,000, and infantry fighting vehicles by 42,000, while NATO reduces such systems by
lesser amounts. All of these things are under study.
The U.S. has noticed that the Warsaw Pact figures on tanks, artillery, and infantry
fighting vehicles are very similar to the numbers tabled by the West in March in Vienna.
It appears we are about to have a very serious negotiation in this area.
Discussion
An Austrian speaker began the discussion with the observation that the
developments in the Soviet Union signified a "totally new East-West relationship." It was
up to the West to promote change in the Soviet Union by economic, political, and cultural
means. We had to determine what mechanisms, frameworks, and institutions we could use
to reintegrate the Soviet Union into the global system. And we had to decide whether to
base our hopes on one man-Gorbachev-or to identify other agents of change in Soviet
society.
But, warned an American, we should be careful not to overestimate our potential
influence upon events in the Soviet Union. Western influence could only be marginal. It
41
was beyond our capability to be the deciding factor in the transformation of the Soviet
Union. We could render technical assistance in some fundamental areas, such as helping
the Soviets create a national income accounting system, which they lacked. But we should
be careful about jumping in and saying we had all the answers. The danger was that we
might find ourselves associated with policies of reform and austerity that could lead to
domestic turmoil.
This warning was endorsed by a Frenchman, who felt that there could well be
serious upheavals and disorders in the Soviet Union in the next few years. The economy
was in total disarray, far worse than Gorbachev admitted. Soviet leaders were discovering
the problem of inflation and were frightened by the social consequences of price
liberalization. They seemed not to know where they were going.
Another American agreed that the Soviet economy was in serious trouble. We
should be cautious about believing Gorbachev could succeed; it was doubtful that his
country would ever catch up with the West. A more realistic prospect was the
"Ottomanization" of the Soviet Union-a slow, regulated, fairly peaceful decline. The best
course for the West to follow was to do nothing that would cause Gorbachev any more
difficulties than necessary.
As for the goal of reintegrating the Soviet Union into the global system, a Briton
wondered when it had ever been integrated in the first place, except perhaps in the period
1941-1945. An American responded that U.S. policy makers had purposely chosen to use
the concept of reintegration in deference to the wartime relationship between the two
nations.
The Soviet Union, said an International speaker, was showing very clear signs of
wanting to become part of the multilateral economic system. It had indicated its desire
to join GAIT, and it appeared to be laying the groundwork for membership in the IMF
and World Bank. An American speaker advised that any such steps toward including the
Soviets in the multilateral system be careful and tentative.
A Briton suggested that we should ask ourselves which Soviet Union we wanted
to reintegrate into the global system. We had to address the question of the nationalities.
The problems of the Soviet internal and external empires could not be separated from
each other. An American disagreed with this, saying that the internal empire involved
more than the forces of sovereignty and nationalism. There were issues of language,
religion, and borders at work also.
The limits of perestroika might lie in the issue of the internal and external empire,
said a Spaniard. The Soviet Union could not tolerate any change in its security scheme.
An American agreed, saying that the Soviet Union would be "more relaxed" if it was not
worried about its security interests. For the West to challenge these interests would be
"the height of folly."
A British participant cautioned that, when speaking of the irreversibility of change
in the Soviet Union, we should be clear about the distinction between irreversibility in
domestic political and economic change versus change in foreign policy. Foreign policy
was much more easily reversed-an important point to get across to our publics.
In this context, an American said that we had to keep in mind that the drastic
nature of Soviet economic reforms did not have to be paralleled by equally drastic change
in its long-term strategy. Gorbachev might well be using foreign policy as a counterweight
to balance progress in the international area against the domestic difficulties of economic
restructuring.
A French participant suggested that the degree to which there was "new thinking"
in Soviet foreign policy could be tested in terms of Soviet behavior toward out-of-area
conflicts such as those in the Middle East. This notion was rejected by an American on
the grounds that it implied we in the West necessarily had the answers.
Several speakers supported the concept of linkage in the West's dealings with the
Soviet Union. Economic assistance, for example, could be linked to progress in the
42
military area. There was a difference of opinion between two American speakers over
whether this was appropriate. One argued that linkage never worked because the U.S.
was not prepared to sustain it, particularly on the economic side of the equation. While
the elements of the Soviet-American relationship were interrelated, the basic issues had
to be addressed separately.
The other American felt that it was dangerous to segment all negotiations into
"sets of technical negotiations conducted by experts." He worried that there would be a
return to the "traditional agenda" of separate negotiations on such issues as conventional
arms, chemical weapons, testing, and regional conflicts. Each negotiation would become
an end in itself. It would be a pity if the opportunity we now had was "swamped by
endless technical discussion." We needed some unifying sense of what kind ofworld order
we were trying to achieve.
A number of speakers wpndered what effect Gorbachev's recent conventional arms
control proposals might have on the issue of SNF modernization. It seemed to a British
participant that, if the rationale for modernization was the conventional imbalance, and
that imbalance disappeared, then the rationale for modernization was undermined. An
American responded that, if a mixture of conventional and nuclear forces was deemed to
be necessary for the defense of the Alliance for the foreseeable future, then these systems,
no matter their number, had to be up-to-date. Thus the new Soviet proposals did not alter
the need to modernize SNF.
An International speaker added that, apart from Soviet conventional superiority,
nuclear weapons were based in Europe to deter war. This was NATO's strategy. This
prompted an American to question the effectiveness of deterrence based upon weapons
that the West "constantly proclaimed it could not use." There was a danger that any
agreement we reached with the Soviets, even if perfectly balanced, could produce a form
of unilateral Western disarmament.
One aspect of what was happening in the Soviet Union that particularly worried a
British speaker was that the West "was losing the propaganda battle." The Alliance was
in danger of losing the support of its publics. The perception of most people was that the
West made general proposals while the Soviets made specific ones. It was imperative for
the NATO heads of government to address the need to coordinate information policies.
43
V. GREATER POLITICAL AND MONETARY UNION OF EUROPE:
EUROPEAN SOVEREIGN1Y?
Introductory Remarks
L
The Delors Committee took on the responsibility of studying and proposing
concrete steps toward the objective of a progressive realization of monetary union of the
member states of the E.C. Such a union is desirable because it will enable us to take
advantage of all the potential of the single market, to deal with uncertainties of rates of
exchange, and to reduce costs. The Delors Committee did not set out to do an academic
study but to respond to the very precise terms of reference of the Council of Ministers.
The definition ofmonetary union chosen by the committee was the definition of the
Werner Report of 1970, which said that monetary union was characterized by the total
convertibility of the currencies, by free movement of capital, and by certain exchange rates
that are irreversibly fixed.
At the time the Delors Committee was created, the British government seemed to
think that, in order to liberalize the movement of capital, it was better to have flexible
exchange rates. But Great Britain seems now to accept that semi-fixed exchange rates Will
be convenient in due course.
Monetary union implies that the inflation levels in the various countries must be
practically the same, or the fixed rate of exchange cannot be maintained. With similar
levels of inflation and free movement of capital, interest rates will also be the same. The
public deficit must have some limits, and taxation on capital income must probably be the
same in all countries.
Regarding the economic union, which is more difficult to define, the Delors Report
synthesizes this in the total freedom of movement of goods, services, workers, and capital.
There must also be a certain level of transfer from rich countries to poor countries in
order to make up for the fact that exchange rates cannot be used to adjust the economies
of the poorer countries. And there must be a coordination of economic policies, most of
all budgetary policies.
The report does not go into the reasons that all the constraints of this union are
accepted, but, the evolution of the thinking in the last few years is such that we reject
inflationary growth models. We have seen it is possible to grow with relatively low
inflation rates. Therefore, monetary policy must be aimed at combatting inflation, and
not, as we believed in the 50s and 60s, at stimulating growth through very low interest
rates.
Variations in exchange rates have proved to be less useful than was thought a
decade ago, and they have very obvious inconveniences. Exchange rate variations are
inefficient and they serve only to reduce speculation against a given currency. But this
can be achieved as well with a disciplined system of rates of exchange without having to
resort to other procedures. Devaluation can help buy time while other adjustments are
made, but the effect of devaluation lasts only a short time. Many think the single market
cannot be achieved without eliminating the possibility of competitive devaluations. This
would destroy the rules of the single market.
The Delors Committee delineated three stages of development. The first is a
better coordination and a convergence of the economic policies within the existing
institutions. During this stage, all the countries are to observe the discipline of the
exchange mechanism of the European Monetary System. This means all countries would
submit to the predominance of the Bundesbank for a period of time until a broader
institution may collectivize the decisions in monetary policy. In this first stage, the
committee advises that a new treaty be prepared and negotiated to enable all the member
44
governments to give up their sovereignty in the field of monetary policy, which the existing
legislation does not do. The report also talks about the eventual creation of a European
monetary fund.
The second stage starts when the new treaty enters into force and a European
system of central banks is created according to the model of the U.S. system. This would
dictate the limits of budgetary deficits and their financing. But the responsibility would
lie with the national authorities.
The third stage would start when the exchange rates are irreversibly fixed and the
ECU is adopted as the single currency in place of the national currencies. While there
are national currencies there will always be doubts about the irreversibility and the fixation
of parities. In this stage, there is no autonomy in monetary policies. The objectives will
be set by the European system of central banks, which will also set the maximum deficits
and how they can be financed. The national central banks will only be branches of a
supranational system which will have a pool of foreign reserves.
The report only set one' date-that the first stage should start before July 1990,
when the complete liberalization in capital movement is due to start in France, Italy, and
several other E.C. countries. The report says it is necessary to go from one to the other,
but it does not specify when or define the conditions to go from one to the other. The
report does not give any role to the ECU until the final stage. But the report says that
to embark on the first stage must be a commitment to go through all three stages.
The findings of the report have been accepted by all of the governments, except
the British. Even the countries of southern Europe, which have a harder time observing
the disciplines prescribed, have been enthusiastic. On the other hand, the northern
countries fear that their monetary orthodoxy will be destroyed.
The transfer of sovereignty is an important issue and has been met with some
resistance by the United Kingdom. But the fears of loss of sovereignty are greatly
exaggerated. This is in part due to the report, which overemphasized the creation of
limitations for national budgets. It is not necessary to insist on this, because it will come
about anyway. If the ideas put forward are accepted, monetary sovereignty is not very
important any more, and the function of monetary policy is to avoid inflation and not to
stimulate growth. It is less serious to submit monetary policy to a collective decision than
to give up other types of sovereignty. Monetary sovereignty is already very much reduced
and will be even more in 1990 with the free movement of capital. The Bundesbank is the
only bank with monetary sovereignty in Europe, and it is better to share it with others in
a more collective system of decision making.
Finally, it is not likely that the socialism the British government worries about is
going to occur through the Brussels commission. The Commission applies the principle
of subsidiarity to reduce to a minimum the regulations. This should liberalize our
economies, not create more interventionism. If the British rejection cripples the progress
toward monetary union it will be very serious. Great Britain's remaining on the margin
will deprive Europe of many benefits, not the least London as a financial center.
Introductory Remarks
IL
When governments talk about the loss of sovereignty implied by European monetary
arrangements, they are talking about three sorts of freedom: to set monetary policy, to
set their exchange rate, and to set their own fiscal policies.
Regarding monetary policy, if you look at the eight countries that are full members
of the EMS and at their latest 12-month inflation figures, you see that they range from
about one percent in the Netherlands to the average of just over three percent up to the
high of just over six percent in the Italian case. In those countries that are not full
45
participants in the EMS, the lowest (Spain) starts at about six percent, with the U.K. at
eight percent, Portugal at 12 percent, and Greece at 15 percent. This seems to indicate
a conclusion that a country that has access to the printing press cannot be trusted with it.
What about the freedom of setting interest rates? What is this freedom intended
to be for? Historically, it has been to bring a country's domestic costs into line with those
of its trading partners. The essence of a devaluation is that it should cut domestic costs,
and, if it doesn't, it will have only created higher inflation. The delusion that somehow the
exchange rate can be used as a painless way to cut costs, and particularly to cut wages, can
surely not be in doubt today. The most extreme case of countries trying to use exchange
rate devaluation in order to bring costs into line with other countries is that of the Latin
American countries, with their hyperinflation.
In the case of fiscal policy, the Delors Report argues that monetary integration
has to go hand-in-hand with fiscal integration. This is analytically wrong and ignores
important historical evidence. Take the example of the gold standard when exchange
rates really were fixed against each other, between 1870 and 1913. The inflation rates in
. all the countries participating in the gold standard were almost identical. There was no
talk then that they were losing their rights to set their own fiscal policy. There was no
worry that they could not set their own tax rates, the scale of government borrowing, or
repayment of national debt. Above all, none of them complained that this was going to
force them into some sort of political union where some centralized body was going to be
setting things they regarded as most dear to their national sovereignty. On the contrary,
during most of this period, there was a great deal of national political independence.
A more recent, European example, is the entirely fixed exchange rate that existed
between Ireland and Britain for more than 50 years after Irish independence. One might
think the Irish would have been very conscious of any loss of fiscal sovereignty as the
result of that direct link with the British pound; but they never complained.
The British government is wrong in refusing to put sterling into the EMS now and
in portraying the prospect of a fully fixed exchange rate of a monetary union as somehow
being a dagger at the heart of political and national sovereignty. But the Delors approach,
too, is wrong in some ways, including the tactics. It was wrong, knowing the position of
the British government, to insist that any government that signed on for the first stage of
the three stages of the report, had to accept the final stage at the outset. It was also an
error to argue that fiscal integration is a necessary accompaniment to monetary
integration. And it was an analytical mistake to assume that the ECU could only emerge
as an important component at the end of the process. It would have been better to say
the ECU could start to develop if and when ordinary people want it to. Gradually, a
parallel currency in Europe could be developed that would prove itself on its convenience
and its relative stability compared to national currencies. It would seem the most natural
thing in the world to say that a European currency had evolved by choice. If we
proceeded from that starting point, we would have a far better choice of getting to the end
without any of the political friction that is now going to be involved in this process.
Discussion
The discussion of this topic began with a British speaker's explanation of his
country's position on economic and monetary union and on the recommendations of the
Delors Report.
The United Kingdom had, for some time, been acting as a surrogate member of
the EMS, tracking the Deutsche mark, staying in an "imaginary band." Many in Britain
believed that it was this that gave rise to the current burst in inflation, and that full
membership in the EMS would not have prevented it.
By proposing to create a central economic policy-making body with the power to
46
impose its will, the Delors proposals embodied a "huge transfer of sovereignty" that the
U.K. found unacceptable. Taking control of a nation's monetary and fiscal policy and
putting a central bank in charge of its currency did imply a substantial loss of sovereignty
and amounted to a "quantum leap," bigger than anything suggested in the E.C. so far.
Britain was not opposed to change, and had in fact been leading the way in Europe
in removing barriers and restrictions and opening all markets. Britain totally supported
the single market concept. But the British government objected to monetary union in that
it went against the way Europe ought to be moving in the sense that it involved more
centralization of power. Furthermore, there was no democratic machinery to which those
in control would be responsible, and nothing to suggest that the Community had the
machinery to undertake such a large task. The logic behind the Delors proposals was an
unacceptable move toward the kind of interventionism that Britain had been trying to get
rid of. The focus in working to achieve the single market should instead be concentrated
on the major task of removing barriers.
Several participants felt that the recommendations of the Delors Report were too
ambitious. An American opined that fiscal policy was "very much a domestic area of
responsibility." He questioned the necessity of accepting all the stages of the Delors plan
before taking the first step. That step, he said, ought to be the creation of a central bank
of European central banks, modeled after the Federal Reserve System in the U.S. The
Federal Reserve had managed to do a good job in the U.S. without the requirement of
fiscal coordination.
Another American agreed with this approach, calling for the creation of a bank of
issue of the ECU. This would get the process going and would lead to semi-fixed, if not
fixed, exchange rates. It would be a force for the convergence of fiscal and tax policies
within the Community. The preordaining of subsequent steps was wrong, and could delay
the realization of this first step. A speaker from the Netherlands agreed, and warned that,
although it made sense, the requirement that all three stages of the process be pre-
accepted was "politically dangerous."
A number of speakers expressed concern about the powers of the Brussels ·
bureaucracy that would oversee economic and monetary union. Said a Dutchman, it must
not be an over-regulated, interventionist type of system.
This speaker voiced another problem with the report-the "overemphasis" on the
southern countries and Ireland, which was, he felt, a "kind of bribe." Why should the
other countries provide to these countries, for the second time, a transfer of resources?
They had already "paid" by doubling structural funds. There was no case why an additional
transfer of monies to the "so-called weaker countries" was an essential element of
European monetary union.
An American raised two concerns about the report, one about the role of the
Bundesbank and the other about labor mobility. He wondered what convinced the other
countries of the E.C. that the Bundesbank would have the capacity to take into account
their interests. Given the record of the Bundesbank, might not its interests and those of
the rest of Europe diverge? As for the question of labor mobility, the speaker felt that
the problem of unemployment had become increasingly difficult for Europe. Increases in
subsidies would increase the labor problem, and economic prospects were not going to be
enhanced without a major effort on labor mobility.
A speaker from Switzerland worried about the assumption that monetary union
would be achieved in stages "by doing what has been done in past years." He observed
that what had been done so far had not been terribly difficult because it had occurred
during a period of "unexpectedly high economic activity." If there was a recession, things
would be much more difficult, and a very clear decision to give up monetary sovereignty
would be necessary.
To many speakers, the issue of loss of sovereignty in monetary and fiscal affairs
47
was greatly overblown. A Dutchman said that the fiscal policy aspect of the Delors report
did imply a loss of sovereignty, but, in practice, there was not really much sovereignty left.
A countryman agreed that it was better to lose sovereignty to international cooperation
than to the "straightjacket" of locked exchange rates, which would "do irreparable damage
to monetary union." A Spanish participant felt that we should be talking about shared
sovereignty. Historically, sovereignty was defined by a nation's capacity for self-defense.
Today, no European nation worried about shared sovereignty in this regard, and the same
should be true with respect to economic sovereignty.
A Belgian pointed out that the Single Eilropean Act listed economic and monetary
union as a basic policy to be followed to achieve European union. There was, therefore,
a legal basis for it. Moreover, a commitment had been made not only to bring about
economic and monetary union but to charge a committee with making recommendations
on how to achieve it. The resulting Delors Report provided an excellent guide for action,
with clear objectives. Member states had to undertake an act of political will to achieve
economic and monetary union. Already, many important decisions were being made at
the Community level, and autonomous decision-making was being eroded. This should
not be lamented, but rather should be considered a recovery, or strengthening, of
sovereignty at a different level.
On the specific subject of fiscal policy, a Dutch speaker argued that fiscal
harmonization was a crucial component of monetary union, which would be impossible
without it. An Italian agreed, and pointed out that giving up fiscal autonomy applied also
to hidden taxation through financial regulation. This sort of "non-explicit taxation" which
did not require parliamentary approval and was used by some E.C. countries as a way of
making transfers to the government, would be harder under economic and monetary
union. In addition, with the removal of capital controls, governments would no longer be
able to finance themselves at interest rates kept artificially low in domestic markets. And
with the liberalization of financial services, it would become impossible for certain
countries to require banks to have much higher reserve requirements.
It was very positive to force governments to give up these highly distortionary forms
of "taxation without representation," even though, as a result, there might be higher budget
deficits, particularly in the countries of southern Europe, which would face a demanding
exercise in fiscal discipline.
The subject of the British government's position on economic and monetary union
was of particular concern to many participants in the discussion. A speaker from the U.K.,
while agreeing with his countryman's earlier remarks about the Thatcher government's
steps toward opening markets and lowering barriers, worried nonetheless about Britain's
"low reputation as a European." Mrs. Thatcher, he continued, still had the potential to be
the great leader in Europe, but she was "throwing away that chance on the language, not
the practice, of parochialism." She was "boxing the U.K. inside a wall of noncooperation
from her partners on E.C. issues." Rather than dispersing the socialist tendency she
complained of in Europe, she was in danger of entrenching it. And she was interpreting
the E.C. to the U.S. as a "misguided socialist club." She was also allowing other countries
that were skeptical about the Delors Report to "hide behind her skirts." Finally, she was
destroying her own ability to influence West Germany in terms of the future of the E.C.
A Dutch speaker warned that a "showdown" over the problem of sovereignty must
be avoided at any price. If, for example, the French were to put the British to a test on
the subject of Sterling in the ECU basket, this could lead to British withdrawal.. What
Denmark's position might be was also problematical. This raised the question of "Europe
at two speeds," something that should be avoided, but not at all costs. We had to be
prepared to move ahead with the faster group. A Spaniard, who felt that the U.K. was
vital "for the construction of Europe," rejected this idea of two speeds.
48
A British and a Spanish speaker responded to some of the points and questions
that had been raised in the course of the discussion. The British speaker defended the
role of the Bundesbank in the process of economic and monetary union, saying that it
was able to deliver low inflation and low interest rates. As to subsidies, it was not correct
to suggest they were being increased in Europe; rather, one of the purposes of 1992 was
to reduce them. And while it was true that international cooperation was preferable to
a gold standard, political control of monetary policy built an inflationary bias into the
whole system.
The Spanish speaker remarked that, in his opinion, the emphasis of the Delors
R<;Jport on constraints on fiscal policy was a mistake. It was in the report because the
governors of the central banks wanted to impose limits on deficits, but their concern was
exaggerated. Regarding the requirement that countries sign on to all three stages before
undertaking the first stage, this arose as a way of dealing with the risk that countries might
remain at the frrst stage perma,nently. As to the subject of fixed exchange rates, this must
indeed be done very carefully, and it was envisaged that the second stage, in which
exchange rates were not irreversibly fixed, would last quite a long time. Responding to
the concern expressed about the transfer of resources to the weaker countries, the speaker
said that this was not intended to be a subsidy, but rather was aimed at infrastructure
improvements and other state-administered functions.
Finally, the Spanish speaker emphasized that the criticism that had been made in
some quarters that the report bore the stamp of the personal opinion of Delors was not
valid. The conclusions of the report had unanimous support of all the committee
members, and, indeed, Delors took great pains to steer a neutral course and not to
influence the results. A Briton added here that the tendency of some to depict Delors
as "a fanatical idealogue" were quite unjustified.
49
VI. GWBAL RELATIONSHIPS: SURPLUSES, DEFICITS.
AND PROTECTIONISM
In/rodJJclory Remarks
L
In spite of its persistence, the U.S. fiscal deficit is half the size it was just a few
years ago as a percent of the total economy. It is still a problem, but it is about in the
middle with respect to the deficits of other major industrial countries. Unfortunately,
the U.S. savings performance is at the lower end of the spectrum, and that is one reason
why this deficit is such a problem for the U.S. economy and the world donomy.
The American body politic is struggling to come to grips with this deficit. The
recent bipartisan budget agreement, while not a final solution to the problem, is an
important step forward as a sign of the new administration's ability to work with Congress
and agree on a framework that should provide for significant further reduction of the
deficit during the next fiscal year. But another round of budget negotiations will have to
occur before long, and these may well be more difficult. It is true that there is a good
deal more that can be cut from the spending side of the U.S. budget.
The other U.S. deficit, the trade deficit, is, in part, a function of the fiscal deficit.
It is somewhat more frightening because it seems that the country, having now understood
the gravity of the fiscal deficit, is more complacent about the potential threat posed by the
trade deficit. The inexorable accumulation of liabilities to the rest of the world-living off
the rest of the world's savings, in effect-could have a major affect on the global balance
of power in the next decade.
The global imbalances we face today, which consist significantly of a U.S. trade
and current-account deficit and major German and Japanese surpluses along with growing
surpluses in some of the Asian economies, represent a complex set of factors that
underscore the interdependence of the global community. The factors which led to the
U.S. trade deficit include the strong U.S. growth in the early 1980s, the attractiveness of
investment in the U.S. which contributed to a rise in the dollar, the structural rigidities in
Europe which reduced demand for European currencies, and the international debt
problem, which had a major negative affect on the exports of the U.S. and other major
industrial countries.
Such a complex set of factors could only be usefully addressed within a broad
framework, and, in 1985, such an effort was initiated, calling for both the surplus and
deficit countries to tackle their domestic problems. This signalled a recognition that the
interdependence of our global economic relationships required us all to formulate national
policies within a more closely constructed set of international relationships. The blessing
of this process at the economic summit in Tokyo in early 1986 was an important element
of political support that has carried the process forward. Substantial progress has been
made, but there are signs today that it is losing some steam. Reports of continuing growth
in German surpluses and some stagnation in the American trade position are matters of
concern and should cause a reinforcement of efforts by the leading countries.
The Brady Initiative is also an important part of the effort to reduce global
imbalances. The debt problem is an economic problem for all of us. Secretary Brady's
initial statement was one of concepts and not of details because of the international
dimension of the problem. It is not up to the United States to lay out the details and to
specify every part of a solution to the problem in which American banks only hold 30
percent of the claims. In spite of the dominant political interest the U.S. has in the
solution of this problem, it is not within its capacity to solve it alone. Intense international
collaboration is needed. The IMF and the World Bank are moving quickly to put into
place the necessary measures, and individual negotiations are underway between the
50
banking community and the debtor countries. These will not be easy negotiations,
because, when the U.S. Treasury speaks of debt reduction, the commercial banks see a
loss of capital. When the Treasury speaks of debt service reductibn, the banks see a loss
of quarterly earnings. A great deal of skill and considerable luck will be needed for a
successful effort. But the problem is urgent and must be tackled quickly, particularly with
respect to Latin America.
In/rodJJclory Remarks
n.
Deficits or surpluses in the current account, or in the overall account of balance
of payments, are no reason for concern as such. But they become dangerous if they are
unsustainable. Looking at the balance of payments patterns in the world, there is reason
for concern. There are prolonged imbalances, especially among the U.S., Japan, and West
Germany, that require action.
There are basically three causes of external imbalances. First, there are the
imbalances in the overall national relationship between savings and investment.
Excessively large public sector deficits frequently play a role in external imbalances. But,
in some countries, a large budget deficit may be offset by substantial private savings. This
is the case in the Netherlands.
Another cause is lack of competitiveness, to which wage increases are a major
contributor.
Thirdly, rigidities in economic structures-improper functioning of markets-are a
cause.
These unsustainable current account deficits should be reduced because they lead
to exchange rate instability, inflationary pressures, and, ultimately, unsustainable external
debt positions. They also feed protectionist measures, especially where there is
unemployment at the same time.
International imbalances should be reduced by eliminating their causes. In most
cases, this requires correction of domestic policy deficiencies rather than using
protectionist measures. In the case of the U.S., there is a budget deficit which implies
too large domestic demand and insufficient private savings. In the U.K., the causes are
too large money growth, lack of clarity in monetary policy with confusing impacts on
exchange rates and interest rates, leading ultimately to rising inflation. Italy is a classic
case of excessive budget deficits. The Federal Republic of Germany, according to the
IMF, is a case of structural policies, of rigidities and disincentives affecting many areas
of the economy.
Beyond correcting domestic policy deficiencies, it is necessary to improve
consistency and predictability of policies and international policy coordination. This must
be done on the basis of preparedness to adjust national policies within the framework of
the existingmultilateral international financial organizations. For example, the surveillance
task of the IMF is important. It uses a number of macroeconomic indicators to promote
international convergence of policies.
There is a danger that the existing multilateral institutions are weakening as the
result of the growing importance of small groups of large industrial countries, such as the
Group of Five, or the Group of Seven. The multilateral organizations play virtually no
role in these groups, and this is a matter of concern. Ultimately, it is in the self-interest
of the U.S. to continue to support these multilateral financial institutions. The G-5 and
the G-7 are not bad as such. They function successfully by coordinating exchange rate and
interest rate policies among their member countries. But they should not try to become
the main forums worldwide for negotiations about the world monetary system. The
policies of the G-5 and G-7 have a major impact upon other countries, industrial and
51
developing alike, which have no influence in these groups.
International inter-relationships in the areas ofexchange rates, balance ofpayments,
interest rates, and macroeconomic policies are nowadays not based on a global system.
There is cooperation, but no longer a system, since the collapse of Bretton Woods. Most
of the international inter-relationships are rather loose, and not binding. The IMF no
longer controls the international monetary system, nor does it control exchange rates. It
has largely become a credit institution for LDCs only. It would be good if some industrial
countries with persistent balance of payments disequilibria would apply, as was the case
in the past, for IMF standby credit arrangements.
On the European regional scale, the situation is not so bad. The Common Market
and European Monetary System have been largely successful and provide for a higher
degree of exchange rate stability than exist worldwide.
But the prospects for exchange rate stability globally are not so bright. This is
because, first, there is a tension between a growing volume of international transactions
and consequent growing interdependence among countries on one hand, and, on the
other, insufficient willingness to give priority to international external economic policy
objectives as opposed to domestic economic policy objectives. This leads unavoidably to
insufficient coordination and convergence of national economic policies.
The second under.lying reason is that the U.S.-and hence the dollar-is no longer
able to play the central role in the international monetary world. This is due to three
factors: (1) the growing role of others-Japan, Europe, the newly industrialized countries;
(2) the weakened position of the U.S. because of its twin deficits; and (3) the fact that
American economic policies are still mainly determined by domestic considerations rather
than by external considerations.
Regarding the international debt issue, it is important to recognize that a number
of highly indebted middle-income countries have very large interest burdens. The U.S.
would contribute more to the third-world debt problem by correcting its budget deficits
and thereby allowing the dollar interest rates to fall. This would be more productive than
the Brady Initiative.
Introductory Remarks
llI.
No trade or finance minister has ever said he, or she, is either in favor of
protectionism, or practices it. However, all of them have complained about the
protectionism of their colleagues. One must conclude that there is no agreed upon
definition of what protectionism is.
The Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, now back on track, is leading
governments and economic operators to reconsider their traditional and classical approach
to trade policy and to consider a number of substantial changes.
Developed countries in GATT have been successful in bringing down the level of
their tariffs. They have fallen, on average, from 15 percent in 1%2 to five percent in 1987
for manufactured products. The target of the present round is to reduce present levels by
a further 30 percent. These reductions have been accompanied by significant simplification
or elimination of all sorts of formalities at the border. As a result of such policies, as well
as through the harmonization of standards and norms, trade in goods has grown to the
point that it now contributes an average of 20 percent to the GNP of GATT members,
compared to 14 percent as recently as 1970. This percentage would be substantially higher
if trade in services, which is one of the main areas of negotiation in the present round,
were included.
Some significant conclusions must be drawn from these developments. First,
external trade in goods and services is no longer a relatively marginal part of the economic
52
activity of national economies. This is true for all countries across the board. In other
words, the notions of interdependence and globalization of the world economy are now
part of the real world. Trade policies now must focus increasingly on the conditions of
competition. A series of practices and policies which have always existed require very
serious attention if the full benefits of the market-opening process of the last few decades
are to be realized.
A review of some ofthe things being considered at the Uruguay Round will indicate
what some of these practices are. The Uruguay Round is looking at production subsidies,
not just export subsidies; at price supports, not just for export goods, but for domestic
goods competing with imported goods; at state trading; at local content; at trade-related
investment; at norms and standards; at different forms of safeguard clauses. In other
words, it is looking into all the elements that relate to public policies and have an impact
on competition. This means that trade policy is no more just an activity of customs
administration. It has turned into one of the major elements of any national economic
policy.
Trade in services is also a very important area. Protectionism in the field of
services-banking, insurance, etc.-is n'ot implemented through tariffs or quotas, but through
the national legislations in these areas which often have a very protectionist element. Here
again, trade policy will go into areas that were considered areas of national sovereignty.
Negotiations in the Uruguay Round are of course influenced by the serious
imbalances among the major trading nations. The negotiators are also very aware of the
negative impact of the debt situation on trade policy. This is because the countries that
are trying to service their debt are not importing, and thus, those who could export are not
exporting. The negotiators are also very much aware that the process leading to 1992 has
an agenda that interfaces with the Uruguay Round.
Finally, there is a very clear contradiction between the position of the industrialized
world and the developing world in the negotiations. The industrialized world is seeking
open markets for services, protection of intellectual property and to bring the world
trading system into all the new areas where the industrialized world has a competitive
edge. But in areas where the developing areas have a competitive edge-agriculture,
textiles, etc.-they are very reluctant. This is a challenging aspect of this round.
Discussion
A considerable portion of the discussion of this agenda item was devoted to the
twin deficits of the United States. An American began the discussion by giving his views
on the current prospects of effective U.S. government action on the budget deficit. The
recent bipartisan agreement on the budget did not signify much in the way of progress,
based as it was, in the speaker's view, upon "a number of rosy economic assumptions and
some bookkeeping legerdemain." But it was significant insofar as there was a bipartisan
effort and it did lead to an agreement.
Doing something about the budget deficit was a political problem in the U.S. With
power divided between a Republican White House and a Democratic Congress, it was
difficult for an administration to govern effectively without creating and maintaining an
overall political consensus. This was particularly true on a specific, controversial issue like
the deficit. Reagan had had this kind of political consensus for cutting taxes and
increasing military expenditures. But Bush's campaign for the Presidency created no such
consensus on the budget. Bush ran on a promise of no new taxes, and, politically, he had
to keep that promise at least for the first year.
But, the speaker said, the Bush Administration knew that the budget deficit had
to be reduced over a reasonable period of time, and it was likely that, by late summer or
early fall, there would be a successful effort by the Administration and Congress to
53
develop a political consensus in support of doing something about the deficit.
Another American agreed with this analysis. But he regretted that the
Administration had missed its first opportunity to really accomplish something. The
bipartisan agreement was based upon contradictory assumptions about GNP and interest
rates; it represented little more than a "muddling through" approach.
As for the trade deficit, the speaker continued, it was more serious than the budget
deficit. In part, it was the fault of the U.S. for not sufficiently increasing productivity. But
trade barriers comprised a major factor in the U.S. trade deficit. In addition, it was worth
noting that, if the U.S. were to decrease its military expenditures to the level of Japan's,
it would have a surplus. So the matter of burden-sharing had also to be addressed.
A third American speaker commented that in the steel industry, for example, the
U.S. had incre.ased productivity and could compete effectively given "a level.playing field,"
which there was not.
The degree to which many in Europe held U.S. fiscal policy accountable for much
of the world's economic imbalance was illustrated by the comments ofa Dutch participant,
who said it was "an absurd economic world in which the richest country sucks in the
world's savings and whose policy mix is such that it imposes much of the burden on poorer
countries." The U.S. trade deficit could not be corrected by exchange rate adjustments,
less protectionism, or increased spending by its trading partners. The solution had to be
found in its internal policies.
The point was made by two Americans that, while the twin deficits were indeed a
problem that had to be dealt with, there was a growing sensitivity in the U.S. to criticisms
from other countries that had done little to correct their internal problems. Cases in point
were Europeans countries with structural rigidities that inhibited growth, and the Japanese
failure to address their agricultural problems. All countries and regions were subject to
political constraints, and constant criticism of the ability of the U.S. to bear its
responsibilities in the international area were not helpful.
Responding to the point raised in the Dutch intervention, one of the Americans
said it was incorrect to suggest that the U.S. was forcing the world's savings to invest
there. Investment in the U.S. was voluntary, based upon the high rates of return there
as compared to other countries.
A Canadian, speaking in defense of the U.S., opined that those elements that were
the most critical of the American trade imbalance were also the "most addicted" to the
three to five million jobs in Europe, Canada, and Japan that were dependent on the large
portion of the world's exports that went to the U.S. market. It was worth noting that a
correction in the U.S. trade imbalance would be painful for these countries.
Another aspect of the global relationship focused upon in the discussion was third-
world debt. This problem was, in the view of a Swiss speaker, more urgently in need of
a solution than ever before. Recent events in Venezuela were an example of how
dangerous the situation could become. Pressure was building in the indebted countries
on the political and social level.
The Brady Initiative was "highly inadequate," and raised unrealistic hopes among
both bankers and debtor countries: the former that they could be bailed out of a bad
situation by the taxpayers, and the latter that there was a relatively painless way to solve
the problem. The Brady Initiative seemed destined to be a disappointment, as the Baker
Plan was before it.
Defending the Brady Initiative's approach of linking debt relief with economic
reforms in the debtor countries, an American argued that no amount of debt relief would
sustain the kind of economic growth needed in debtor countries in the absence of
comprehensive economic reforms. Some debt reduction might be useful to foster the will
to undertake reforms, but it was not really a matter of quantity. What was needed was
a three-part strategy of debt reduction, reforms, and new lending. It was important not
54
to undermine the long-term creditworthiness of the debtor countries and the banks'
interest in long-term relationships.
Another American agreed that, without performance, no initiative on debt
restructuring would be successful. He cited the experience of his bank, which had been
involved in restructuring Third World debt since 1974. The countries that had successfully
worked out their problems had, for the most part, adopted sound economic and financial
policies. Many of today's most heavily indebted nations had yet to show an ability to
pursue such policies.
A third American speaker worried that we might find ourselves in a situation where
the short-term benefits of debt forgiveness had been exchanged for the long-term
availability of credit to the third world. To encourage permanent debt forgiveness, as
opposed to temporary debt relief, risked legitimizing debt repudiation, especially in
countries with large trade surpluses. This was a danger that went beyond Latin America.
A Dutch speaker stressed that debt repudiation or forgiveness was not under
consideration for middle-income countries, which had to do more for themselves in the
way of adjustments, particularly in such areas as capital flight, which the speaker called
"morally unacceptable." It was also his view that official creditors should not substitute
for private lenders, which would have the effect of transferring the burden to the taxpayers.
A Finnish participant noted that Poland and Hungary had serious debt problems,
and wondered if the Brady Initiative or other actions should apply to them. A German
added that indebtedness in Eastern European, as well as the Soviet Union, was a
particular problem for his country. A Dutchman said that Poland, in particular, while a
member of the IMF, was unwilling or unable to honor the standard conditions of the IMF
program. It was simply unable to perform, and new credits would not solve the problem.
Addressing himself to the need for a strong multilateral trading system, a Canadian
expressed concern about conflict in international trade relations. He observed that trade
disputes had come to occupy "center stage around the world." Feelings of unfairness were
becoming politicized. It seemed also that the world was being organized into large trading
blocs, and negotiations were occurring bloc to bloc. The only way out of this situation was
to strengthen the multilateral trading system. It was necessary to define international rules
to be accepted by all participating nations. It would help governments deal with their
publics and with pressure groups if it could be shown that these rules applied universally.
Also needed was a better system of dispute settlement. The problem of conflict in the
international trading system was not just caused by imbalances, but by "profound, rapid
economic and social change."
An International participant agreed that it was necessary to address these issues
on the basis of multilateralism and to define universal rules of the game. The negotiations
in the Uruguay Round were moving in this direction. It was encouraging that governments
were increasingly bringing smaller disputes to GAIT; but it was important that they bring
the large ones as well.
Several speakers voiced the opinion that the Uruguay Round should take up the
issue of labor standards and trade union rights. It was an American's view that, instead
of being in a "race to lower standards," the participants in the world trading system should
be attempting to raise living standards around the world. An International speaker said
that there had been some resistance to dealing with this issue in trade negotiations because
it might be used as an argument for protectionism. But there was now going on in Geneva
a process which was bringing into GAIT an objective analysis of labor standards. On this
subject, a Dutch speaker pointed out that trade unions in his country had given priority
to increasing employment over wage increases, and this had led to a substantial recovery
of competitiveness.
Finally, an American stressed the importance of completing the Uruguay Round
by 1990. An International speaker agreed that this was important for political and
55
...
psychological reasons. There had to be a deadline. But the round could not come to a
successful conclusion until the concerns of all the participating nations had been dealt
with. The speaker noted that, in a number of areas, there had already been results that
were being implemented. There had also been adopted a new trade-policy review in
which the major trading nations' trade policies would be reviewed every two years. This
would force governments to define what their trade policy was on a continuing basis.
56
VII. ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Backgrotuui Paper
"You could not step twice
in the same river, for
other and yet other waters
are ever flowing on."
- Heraclitus, 6th Century B.C.
The state of the planet Earth is not static; it is ever changing on time scales ranging
from seconds and hours to thousands and millions of years. The daily cycle of the solar
heating, the seasonal changes in vegetation, the eddies in the ocean currents, the slow
meanderings of the gulf stream and the waxing and waning of the polar ice caps all testify
to the dynamic nature of the ehvironments. This concept of an ever changing earth has
been pondered since the beginning of human thought.
What is new today is that changes brought about by human activities in the
character of land surface, the chemistry of rivers and oceans and the composition of the
atmosphere may have reached a proportion such that they might not only change the
equilibrium of the global ecosystem but alter its course. It is also becoming clear that
subtle and relatively small changes in the characteristics of Earth's surface or atmosphere
in one region of the world can produce substantial social and economic impact on people
far away in another part of the globe.
Evidence of these changes varies from discovery of the ozone hole and the potential
greenhouse warming effect to the accelerating rate of land use and rapidly changing ocean
productivity. The important question these planetary scale changes have raised in Earth
sciences is why despite rapid advances in space and computer technologies in the last 20
years are we still unable to forecast these events or predict their consequences with any
confidence?
The greenhouse warming is an interesting example. There is a tendency to think
about the problem in the most simple way (Figure 1). The radiation comes in. The
greenhouse gases increase the atmospheric opacity to the infrared radiation emitted by
the Earth and thus heat is trapped and the climate warms. However, the problem is
much more complex than that (Figure 2) and in fact depends entirely on our ability to
probe simultaneously into three completely different areas of research in the Earth
sciences: how are vegetation cover and soils around the globe changing with time, and
how exactly do those changes influence the build-up of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere? How does the deep ocean circulation regulate the exchange of gases at the
ocean/atmosphere interface? And what are the processes of chemical exchanges in the
atmosphere and how are they being perturbed by human interventions.
Advances in space based systems and improved computational techniques are of
course assisting in resolving these questions. With these new tools scientists have begun
to find compelling observational evidence that the chemical composition ofthe atmosphere
is changing at a rapid rate on a global scale. Scientists have also begun to compile a list
of potential problems for the global environment which may result from this change
(Figure 3). This list grows larger with each new investigation.
Although the changes are being brought about through both natural and manmade
causes it is clear that we as humans are responsible for many of the problems. While the
automation and increased productivity of the post-industrial age has reached full strideiit
has barely kept pace with the growth in world population which continues to increase. n
the process the by-products of civilization continue to be spewed into our atmosphere and
oceans at a rate unprecedented in the history of mankind.
57
The reality ofthese circumstances is that there ~l be changes in our global climate.
Whether these changes will be large or small and whether or not they will be irreversible
is the question which is being hotly debated by the scientific community around the world.
The Facts
An examination of the facts finds that the atmospheric concentrations of key
greenhouse gases; C021 CH4, Np and man made CFC's is higher today than during any
period in the last 160,000 years (Figures 4, 5, 6).
These gases alter the Earth's radiative balance through the greenhouse effect as
previously shown in Figures 1 and 2.
There is evidence that the global mean temperature has increased by about 0.5
degrees centigrade since the late 1800s (Figure 7). This overall increase in global mean
temperature is consistent with that expected from the increase in greenhouse gases.
These are the only facts of any consequence to the global warming issue which
today are unambiguously accepted by the scientific community. Beyond them all
projections related to the impact of the greenhouse effect on the planet Earth are fraught
with uncertainties.
The Uncertainties
The observed increase in global mean temperature has been neither monotonic
with time nor uniform over the globe as has been the increase of greenhouse gases. This
situation calls into question the validity of isolating the greenhouse effect as the only cause
of the recent temperature increase.
A second uncertainty stems from the knowledge that the Earth has gone through
major perturbations in temperature and climate in the past and continues to go through
seasonal and cyclical changes (Figures 8, 9). How much if any of the recent changes then
are just part of a long term trend is not known.
In addition what if the temperature does rise, what will be the role of increased
humidity and the associated enhancement of cloud cover in modulating the climate? Low
clouds reflect sunlight and thus reduce the tendency to warm the climate. High clouds let
sunlight through but trap radiations increasing the tendency for the Earth to warm.
Then, what about the role of vegetation on the land and nutrients in the oceans
which regulate the carbon cycle.
Finally, regional and temporal effects must be better understood. The ability to
differentiate between natural and human induced changes in temperatures in specific
regions, especially those regions which are important to the world's food production is
critically important.
To answer these questions, however, requires significant improvement in our data
base and in our understanding of the global Earth system.
Adding to the list of uncertainties is the fact that no model that exists today is
capable of predicting with any accuracy the exact magnitude of the greenhouse warming
effect, the time scale over which it will occur or its specific regional and temporal effects.
While all general circulation models (GCMs) predict an increase in the global mean
temperature of between approximately two and five degrees centigrade for an effective
doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide there are wide differences in the magnitudes of
the predicted regional and seasonal temperature changes and in the patterns and intensity
of global rainfall (Figures 10, 11). Most of these differences attest to the complexity of
the problem and reflect our poor understanding of the physical, chemica~ and dynamical
processes involved.
Even with this background of uncertainty it is important to recognize that human
activities are changing the global environment and there is a finite possibility that these
58
I
I
I
%'
1
l
i
FIG.1
THE BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES. Movements of key elements (carbon, nitrogen, sulfur,
phosphorus, and others) through the Earth system are critical to the maintenance of life.
FIG.2
GLOBAL CHANGE
Key Global Change Issues:
• Ozone Depletion
• [ Greenhouse Warming I
• Deforestation
• Desertification
• Soil Erosion
• Ocean Productivity
• Atmospheric Dust
• Fresh Water Supply
FIG.3
FIG. 4
lon.g-Term Trends in Concentrations of Greenhouse
and Ozone-Depleting Gases
· Nitrous Oxide IN201
Parts per Billion
:::i
280
260
. . . J
. . ..; ... .. " .
.. .... . . \ . ' ,,;;.:.. ...
• •• a.'• •• ''• ••,..,.~.
. .
. .
~..--~~..,-~~-.~~---,~~~r-~~.-~~-.~~---,
0 300 600 900 1,200 1.500 1,800 2,100
Year
Source: M.A.K. Khalil and AA. Rasmussen, "Nitrous Oxide: Trends and Global Mass Balance Over the Last 3,000 Years;' Annals of
Glac10/ogy, Vol. 10, 1988.
Parts per Billion
1.800
1,600
1.400
Methane ICH4 1
Annual
Change
;"
Concentration
Year' (ppbl
10,000 yaai*s ago-A.D. 1700 0.0
l
1700-1900 +1.5
1900-1925 +2.2
1,200
J
. : ,~.
.···J)·-
. ..
1927-1956 +6.4
1962-1973 +11.0
1974-1984 + 17.0
1,000
800
600
400
r I I I
10,000 8,000 6,000 4,000 2,000 0
Years Before Present
Source: M.A.K. Khalil and A.A. Rasmussen, "Atmospheric Methane: Trends Over the Last 10,000 Years," Atmospheric Environment,
FIG. 5
Long-Term Trends in Concentrations of Greenhouse
and Ozone-Depleting Gases
Parts per Million
350
300
280
260
240
220
200
180
Carbon Dioxide iC021
1987 Concentration = 349 ppm~
160,000 120,000 80,000 40,000 0
Years Before Present
Source: J.M. Barnola, et al., "Vostok Ice Core Provides 160,000-year Record of Atmospheric C02," Nature, Vol. 329, p. 410.
FIG.6 61
w
a:
~
0.4 r---r---r--r--r--.~r---r-...--i--.--r---ir--...-...--i--r-r--i~..--....--....~
Annual Mean
5 Year Running Mean
o.2 1--+---+---1~+--1----!--+--lr--+--+---+--1~+--+--tt--+__,1--+--+--_..,.""'4...._....
O!-+-+--+--+--+--+---t--+-+....-..Mf-4--l~~bl-~+....;~f-!+--+-+-~
!:;:
ffi -0.2f--+--ff-~~"tt--t--l-f''i'----l----+~1---l--+-+~+--+"-+->f-+---l1__;1--+--l
Cl.
~
w
1-
-0.4 ::
~ l l Error Estimates (95% Confidence)
-0.6,__.+--+-+~i--4---!--+--l~+--+--+--+~i--4--1--+--l~+--+--1---l--I
-o.81 I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I 1 1 1 1
1880 1890 1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990
DATE
FIGURE 10-1 Departure of mean global temperatures from their 1951 to 1980
period mean value for individual years (dots connected with dashed lines) and
for 5-year running mean values (solid curve). Error estimates for both individual
and running mean values are shown for selected years. Period of record is 1880
through 1987. (Reprinted from Hansen and Lebedeff, 1988. Copyright © 1988
by the American Geophysical Union.)
FIG. 7
(.)
0
LO
l
Global Mean Temperature
Paleo Doto----...,.
- 2025
I (Dote)
• .-2000
~
Model
( Scenario Al
150 125 100 75 50 25 0
Thousands of Years Ago
FIG.9
FORECASTING THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT:
SEASONAL PREDICTIONS
6
~
Ul 4
~
:>
~
Ul
~
ill 2
;-.
0
TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCES
~ GISS
M
~
OA
~ ~
i 02
m~1
~ 0
!41
~
d~
2~
44
-Oj
-0~
PRECIPITATION DIFFERENCES
rl!'B GFDL 0 osu
LARGE DIFFERENCES, PARTICULARLY FOR PRECIPITATION
FIG.10
h~
SOIL WATER DIFFERENCES FOR JJA
sos
3
l;--.- , ~~...:...._..-- I
0 0 lOE 60£ 90£ •20£ !SO£ 180 1sbw 120W 90W ,ow JOW
O JOt 60E 90£ ll0£ ISOE 180 !SOW 120W 90W 60W JOW O JOE
OSU, 2•C01 -11C02
gosL-,.-, ' ,.t~~-~. I 90sl ' ' ' ~' -,~' [
-·----------~·- -·-----------·-
70Sc:---__.......____.--?'...._~..--J2_~_....---
90S --r--r·--r-·1
--· · ,---·r--r----,--,---,--· r·-1----r--
JOW 0 lOE 60£ 90£ IWf ISOE 1&0 JSOW 120W ~w 60w JOW 0 30£
FIG.11
64 FIG.12
SATELLITE MONITORING OF
DEFORESTATION
RONDONIA, BRAZIL
1982
1987
FIG.13 65
changes may be irreversible.
The issues are not only global in nature but their solutions are linked directly to
the world economy and the standard of living of all the world's peoples. A course of
action is required which will improve our understanding of the global Earth system,
provide the basis for predicting changes and form a solid basis for the policy decisions
that will secure our future.
The Solutions
The first steps can begin immediately. There are currently available data records
from the last 10 to 20 years that can be analyzed to determine whether there is a clear and
unambiguous greenhouse warming "signal" that will stand out above the current "noise" of
climate change. It is possible with today's technology to define an integrated approach to
this problem that could yield the complete "fingerprint" that increasing concentrations of
radiatively active gases are leaving on the global climate.
Also within the reach of today's technology is our ability to improve our predictive
models. This can be done by incorporating the role of clouds, the recycling of
"greenhouse" gases through the biosphere, the changes in. oceanic current and the effect
of changing vegetation cover on regional and global climates.
These efforts to search existing data for a clear greenhouse warming signature and
to improve our predictive models are important to do but we also need to recognize that
understanding the global environment requires new and innovative approaches to studying
the Earth and its climate system.
It is necessary to initiate a long-term program of integrated comprehensive
monitoring of the Earth on a global scale. Such a global perspective can only come from
space observations but they must be made in conjunction with measurements from surface
networks. Together they will provide direct measurements of a changing world and will
also serve to test models and verify predictions.
A full scale mission to planet Earth (Figure 12) must be launched to start a long
term study of the atmosphere, ocean and land that will tell us how they evolve and interact
on a time scale of 2 to 3 decades.
The United States must take the lead in this effort not by doing it alone but by
making the issue of global change a permanent and prominent part of our scientific,
political and foreign policy agendas. We can lead by our example. It is not necessary to
wait 10 or 20 years to begin to make adjustments in the way we live that will have
immediate positive effects on our environment.
We know, for example, that global warming and acid deposition are linked to heavy
reliance on fossil fuels. We should therefore enhance both energy efficiency and
conservation of these limited resources while continuing our search for alternative non-
fossil fuel energy sources.
It is also known that stratospheric ozone depletion is linked to ozone destroying
chemicals such as chlorofluorocarbon products. While the Montreal Protocol was an
important step, we can take steps to totally stop emissions of these chemicals on a
reasonable time scale.
And finally, we can take action to preserve and protect our agricultural, forestry
and water resource systems by considering strategies that consider the economic and
social forces which are currently driving their destruction. It should be made clear for
example that deforestation in Indonesia or in the Brazilian Amazon basin (Figure 13)
could have devastating local and regional impacts as well as potential global effects.
Unequivocal evidence of this type could provide incentives for conservation efforts that
would benefit the local economy and the entire world community.
t56
The Summary
The problems are complex but the· solutions although elusive appear attainable.
Each country must seek their brightest individuals from science, academia, industry and
government and have them turn their attention to the solution of these problems. They
must have the depth of knowledge, breath of experience and global perspective necessary
to provide the leadership to unite the nations of the world in a common effort to secure
the future of planet Earth.
Gloom and doom should not despair us; scientific research and sound policy design
should proceed hand in hand. The areas where immediate advances are required are:
• Rapid progress in the capability to accurately forecast the regional effects (i.e.
temperature and precipitation) of global warming for the next decade. This
will provide the basis for conservation movements in critical areas of the world
that can have both, regional and global benefits.
Environmental issues must become an integral part of national policies,
economic developments and international affairs.
The harnessing of our most precious resource, man himself must be improved.
The right people must be identified, motivated and placed in various strategic
positions in industry, government and academia.
The educational system must be adjusted to focus on strong interdisciplinary
topics that will produce a new generation of scientists and engineers that will
be the infrastructure upon which future advances will be made.
Introductory Remarks
L
We know that the planet Earth is changing, at a more rapid pace than ever in
recorded history, not only in terms of speed but also of magnitude of change.
Deforestation is occurring at a rate of 11 million hectares a year in the tropical forests;
there are indications that the ozone hold is not only in the Antarctic but is in the northern
hemisphere as well; moisture on the surface of the earth appears to be decreasing at a
rapid rate. At the same time, the population of the Earth is increasing by 84 million
people a year. In order to keep pace with this increasing population and to maintain a
level of prosperity, industry keeps producing material which stays in the atmosphere.
These are the observable facts. The scientific community is dealing with the
complex question of the future impact of this changing atmospheric composition and
changing chemistry of the land and water. There is no consensus on this. Scientists do
not all agree, for example, that the greeiihouse effect is upon us today, but they do agree
that the changes are so imminent that in one to three decades we are bound to see some
major perturbations in the global climate. Whether they are just perturbations or a long-
term trend toward disequilibrium is not clear. We don't know whether the greenhouse
warming will come in five or fifty years, or how much the oceans will rise in the next
decade. But, if it does happen, we have to begin to think about how to deal with it. We
don't know if the ozone hole will go towards the equator or stay at the poles and disappear
in a few years, but we need to start thinking about how to slow the process. .
The deforestation in the tropics is a very critical problem. It will not only change
the global carbon cycle, which will impact the global climate, but it may also desertify the
tropics themselves, and change the biodiversity that is unique to earth. We must find a
way to explain to those who depend on the forests to slow down on the use ofwhat we call
the lungs of the planet Earth. There are some indications that the deforestation of the
Brazilian forests is affecting the climate of North America.
These are some of the problems the scientific community is trying to deal with by
67
talcing measurements from ground and space. We need to begin to think how to deal with
these global changes to the betterment, rather than the detriment, of mankind.
Introductory Ronarks
n.
The emissions into the air and the water from the economic activities of a
dramatically increasing population are neither bound to national or continental boundaries
nor to ideological differences. We must learn to see the Earth as one single ecosystem.
We must therefore increasingly steer our policies away from mere national interests. A
global environmental partnership must be our answer to the environmental community.
We need integrated, international action.
There is no longer any doubt that the greenhouse effect and its consequences for
the warming of the Earth's atmosphere, together with the depletion of the ozone layer,
constitute one of the main threats to the preservation of our environment and the
conditions of life on our planet. Scientists will never give us 100 percent security. But
the evidence in this case is so dramatically clear-cut that we are forced to act now, and
not wait for scientific proof, lest the patient die in the meantime.
We need more and better coordinated research, but not as an excuse of inaction.
It is up to us to restore the balance of our common creation. We have an obligation to
future generations. We must take precautionary measures instead of react to damages
already done. What is needed is a full cost accounting of our economic activities in the
prices we pay now; we must not burden coming generations or other regions of the world
with these costs.
Scientists now consider CFC emissions to be the main culprit behind the threat to
the ozone layer. These substances are responsible for some 20 percent of the greenhouse
effect as well. It is important that the production and consumption of these substances
throughout the world be ended as quickly as possible. Substitutes and alternative
production techniques are already available or will become so in the near future if science
and industry is forced to develop them.
The United Nations environmental program is aware of the seriousness of the
present situation, and it deserves the credit for the Montreal Protocol. This protocol
should be amended as soon as possible. The main targets of negotiation must be a
reduction in the period specified in the protocol with regard to protection measures. A
50 percent reduction in consumption and production by the end of the century is not
enough; these substances should be completely phased out by the end of the century.
The industrialized countries should phase them out by 1995. Also the protocol should
be amended to include additional substances, such as carbon tetrachloride.
Uniform action will only be safeguarded if the developing nations cooperate as our
partners. We should help them to avoid using ozone-depleting substances and
technologies. Nothing can be achieved without assistance to these developing countries.
This was emphasized in the declaration adopted in March of this year in The Hague. It
called for the development of a mechanism to assist the developing countries, and the
establishment of new institutions.
Further action is needed with regard. to the greenhouse effect as well. The
greenhouse effect is much more complicated and the task greater because there are
several substances involved. Parallel to the Vienna convention on protection of the ozone
layer, it is important that a convention on combatting the greenhouse effect be established
soon.. This convention would have to be supplemented by individual protocols on the
individual contributory factors, like C02• And it must incorporate an action plan to
preserve the tropical rain forests as well. Such means as debt-for-nature swaps should be
used.
68
There also needs to be better strategies to decrease C02 emissions in industrialized
countries. Technical progress on energy consumption must be speeded up in order to
achieve a more efficient use of fossil fuels. Energy prices are an important factor in saving
energy. There is too much use of fossil fuels today. We need to look to new energies and
new fuels. Research and development of solar energy, as well as other sources, should be
intensified.
It is also important to deal with the future role of nuclear energy. We need an
internationalization of security standards on the highest possible level and a solution to
the problem ofnuclear waste. Without it, we cannot convince our populations that nuclear
energy is one answer, at least during a transition period while other sources are
researched.
Introductory Remarks
DI.
As the Twentieth Century comes to a close, we are witnessing two great social
phenomena. The first is the collapse of Communism as an ideology. With this collapse
comes the recognition that economic growth requires free markets and that economic
freedom implies some political freedom as well. We are moving quickly toward a global,
consumer-based society. The other trend, interrelated with the first, is the increasing
global awareness that mankind faces terrible environmental problems. These problems
are receiving unprecedented attention within developed countries.
It used to be that concern about environmental problems was a leading indicator
that a society had a healthy economy. Even today, many political leaders believe that,
were a serious recession or economic dislocation to arise, this environmentaj concern
might evaporate. But even countries with stagnating economies are showing increasing
concern about the environment. It is clear that people who are starving do not have time
to worry about ozone depletion in the upper atmosphere, but it is also clear that more and
more people around the world understand the connection between the use of resources
and impacts on the environment. The perspectives may differ from nation to nation
depending on economic circumstances, but, as the planet shrinks, public concern over basic
and woeful environmental issues is going to continue to grow. But issues like the stability
of the planet and the continued productivity of natural systems like agriculture and forestry
are, thus far, primarily the concerns of people in developed nations.
The question is how can we harmonize the growth of free-market consumer
societies and the growing awareness that our economic activities are wrecking great cities
and risk crippling the planet. How can we recognize these trends without polarizing them
between north and south, east and west, or in more subtle ways, between high-waste
societies, like the U.S. and Canada, and more efficient energy users like Japan? And how
can we do it fast?
The greenhouse effect is the paradigm, and there is a growing consensus that
significant global warming due to greenhouse gas emissions is probable over the next
century and that rapid climatic change is possible. The magnitude is subject to debate,
but a conservative baseline model indicates that the doubling of carbon dioxide
concentrations from pre-industrial levels would create an increase in global temperature
in the range of two to four degrees centigrade. We have already seen a 25 percent
increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere in the last 100 years. Two to four degrees
might not seem like much, but small temperature changes have very dramatic
consequences. When you consider that the total global warming since the peak of the
last ice age, 18,000 years ago, was only about five degrees centigrade, it is clear that the
climate shift is dramatically rapid. What can be done? Two months ago, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency published the first study looking at what policy options
69
might be available for stabilizing global climate. It was found that a model based on
vigorous global economic development, without any serious attempt to limit greenhouse
gas emissions, would result in realized warming of two to three degrees centigrade by
2050, and four to six degrees by the year 2100. The most optimistic scenario in terms of
addressing greenhouse gas emissions could lower global warming by the year 2025 by only
one-fourth, and the rate of climatic change in the next century could be reduced by only
60 percent.
The optimistic scenario did not take into account any limitations of cost or political
feasibility. Political leaders have to ask what is reasonable, what is politically plausible,
what is a realistic time frame for action. These questions illustrate the unreality of even
the most optimistic scenarios.
It will have taken us 26 years if we are successful in phasing out CFC's by the end
of this century-26 years since the science began to emerge about the effects of these
chemicals on the upper atmosphere.
In order to slow down the global heating process in any significant way, the scale
of economic and societal intervention will have to be enormous. The EPA scenarios
show that the most effective forms of intervention involve such things as massive
reforestation, large-scale conversion to biomass energy sources, radical shifts in the cost
structure of fossil fuels to reflect their true environmental impacts, and the emergence
of solar and nuclear power as far more significant sources.
Any serious attempt to implement even a few of these proposals would generate
enormous political controversy within the United States and elsewhere. The world is not
yet ready. Yet unilateral action by any nation would have only a minimal impact. Today
the U.S. and the OECD countries account for 40 percent of all greenhouse emissions, and
these proportions will decrease as the emerging economies continue to grow.
The controversy from a geopolitical perspective is going to be even more heated.
How can the Atlantic Alliance credibly suggest to China that increased exploitation of its
reserves of coal is counter-productive? China plans to double its production of coal by the
end of the century, and India to triple its coal production. How can those of us in the
West tell the emerging countries that the creation of a consumer economy based heavily
on fossil fuels and on the personal use of automobiles has become unacceptable?
Even among ourselves, how can we develop a framework for discussion that has
even a remote chance of success? The Japanese have said that any across-the-globe
attempts to penalize C02 emissions would penalize energy-efficient nations like Japan.
The U.S. has plenty of waste to cut, but Japan would be very quickly cutting down to the
bone. Japan has serious anxieties about moving to a convention on global climate. By the
same token, some U.S. officials are concerned that efforts to address global warming will
lead to demands that the U.S. cut back its own output of C02
severely and
disproportionately, given that we generate so much of it per capita. There is also anxiety
in the U.S. that a movement to negotiate a framework convention on global climate could
lead .to a repeat of a Law of the Sea negotiations, which the U.S. found it necessary to
repudiate.
Trying to develop a sense of what's fair, let alone workable, is a daunting task.
Yet the fact is that, not only do we have to address these issues, we have to do it very
quickly. The cost of inaction is heavy. The greenhouse effect is cumulative in nature.
The EPA study concluded that if industrialized countries delay implementation of any
response to global warming until 2010, and developing countries delay until 2025, the
equilibrium warming commitment in 2050 could increase by 30 to 40 percent. President
Bush recently called for a process laying the foundations for a global climate convention.
He did so with a careful regard for the growing anxieties found among the developing
countries about where this process might lead. These countries are very concerned about
where the developed world might try to take them in this sense.
There is good reason for prudence and for taking seriously these anxieties. If our
70
understanding of the greenhouse phenomenon is limited, as it is, our understanding of the
social and economic consequences of trying to deal with the problem is really primitive.
There is much more at stake here than just lifestyles. The very values of economic and
political freedom that are emerging in the Communist world and elsewhere may very well
collide with the imperatives of planetary restabilization. The severity of the problem we
face suggests that, when we do begin a process of negotiation, we have laid a groundwork
for success. And that groundwork requires a considerable degree of consultation, among
those of us in the Alliance and with the developing world. We must fmd a way to address
this problem inclusively and thoughtfully.
We are at a point of significant correction in the field of environmental policy, as
in East-West relations. The environment is moving from the margins of governmental
policy-making toward the mainstream. Public-opinion polls in the United States show
that concern for the environment has never before been higher.
Discussion
There was general agreement among participants in the discussion that one of the
great challenges in effectively dealing with the environment was generating a public
consensus about the seriousness of the problem and public support for remedial efforts.
An American said that it was a troubling fact that, in his country, citizens groups,
often led by individuals with suspect scientific credentials, tended to oppose measures
designed to deal with environmental problems, such as the building of resource recovery
plants. It was the "not in my back yard" syndrome. What was needed was new leadership
from the scientific community in helping to establish the basic credibility of the politicians'
efforts to deal with the environment. Leadership was needed to inject a sense of urgency
and clarity. A countryman agreed that the scientific community, through its research,
testing, and search for solutions, should endeavor to narrow the uncertainties and give
public officials a range of choices.
Several speakers worried that the public was not yet persuaded of the seriousness
of the environmental problem. A Canadian observed that concern about the environment
seemed to go in and out of fashion, and somehow it was necessary to sustain public
interest in the problem. An American believed that a public perception of the seriousness
of the problem could be sustained as long as the public was directly impacted in
unavoidable ways, as it had been by the drought and heat wave in the United States last
summer.
Of greater concern, continued the speaker, was the question of the public's
willingness to make sacrifices for the sake of the environment. In the U.S., people were
willing to make inconsequential sacrifices over such relatively minor risks as trace elements
of pesticides in fruits. But their perception of the risks of global warming was not yet at
a point that they were prepared to make major lifestyle adjustments to deal with it.
Without the support of public opinion, it would be difficult to overcome the
immense political obstacles in the way of effectively, dealing with the environment.
National budgets had little money to pay for the kinds of efforts that had to be
undertaken. A Dutch speaker reported that public-opinion polls in his country indicated
that people were willing to pay a bit more to protect the environment, but not very much.
The recent attempt by the Dutch government to adopt an ambitious environmental
program was a case in point. While there was widespread support for the specific
measures, a disagreement on how to pay for them ultimately brought the government
down.
To effectively deal with the greenhouse effect, caused in part by .the emission of
C02 into the atmosphere, a number of speakers stressed the importance of redueing the
71
world's reliance on fossil fuels. This meant, in the opinion of some participants, an
increased reliance on nuclear power. A Briton said there was no other alternative for the
production of baseline power. But nuclear power was extremely controversial, and its
increased use faced considerable public opposition. This point was underlined by an
American, who reported that, in the northeastern part of the U.S., which suffered from
serious undercapacity, there were two fully-loaded, on-line nuclear plants that were not
being used. And, nationwide, not a single nuclear plant was under construction.
To overcome public opposition to nuclear power, a German called for "concerted
worldwide action" to increase security standards and to deal with the problem of nuclear
waste.
Other speakers cautioned against an overemphasis on nuclear power. A Greek
pointed out that, under the most optimistic scenario, nuclear energy could only replace
fossil fuel-generated electricity accounting for a third of the world's C02 emissions. A
Briton suggested that pursuing energy efficiency was more cost-effective than spending
money on nuclear development. A number of participants stressed the need for
developing other energy sources, such as solar.
The developed world faced a significant problem in impressing upon the developing
world the ser.iousness of the global environmental problems. A British speaker observed
that, while the developed world was talking about ways to cut down on C02 emissions,
developing countries were planning to augment their power-generating capacity. China,
for example, planned to greatly increase its use of coal, of which it had an abundance.
The developed world had to find a way to help developing countries attain their economic
goals without nullifying any efforts to correct environmental problems.
In the view of an American, the nature of our problem with the developing world
was this: having exploited the environment for economic gain, we now presumed to
"lecture" the developing world on the dangers ofenvironmental degradation. Perhaps what
was needed to help foster an understanding in the developing world of the seriousness of
the environmental problem was an admission of guilt and a demonstrable sacrifice on the
part of the developed countries.
A Canadian observed that there seemed to be an underlying assumption that the
current path of development was unsustainable and perhaps unacceptable. Could there
be a shift to a different path of development that was sustainable? This could only be
determined by addressing the criteria by which sustainability was to be judged. In this
context, an American wondered what the international multilateral economic organizations
should do. Should environmental analysis and assessment be included in their operations?
Perhaps the real issue was not environmental analysis of individual projects, but whether
the development strategies being pursued by these organizations properly took into
account the externalities.
A response to this question by another American was that the multilateral
institutions had to foster a different model of development with new priorities. Foreign
assistance should be reconfigured to place a higher priority on the environment. Practical
theories ofsustainable development were needed. The approach ofthe Montreal Protocol,
which applied a less stringent standard to the developing world with respect to the
elimination of CFCs, was a practical approach to encouraging action on the part of the
developing countries. It could equally well be used for C02 and greenhouse gases.
Another opportunity to stimulate action lay in the linking of debt repatriation to
environmental action. It was also necessary to involve the developing world in the science
of the environment. Brazilians, for example, had to be shown that deforestation of the
Amazon rain forest would affect the level of rainfall and, therefore, Brazil's agriculture.
A matter of concern to several speakers was the adequacy of existing political
institutions to the task of dealing with the environment. It was an American's conviction
that there was a need to define the fora to prepare a global convention on environmental
problems. An Austrian felt that, to address this "massive problem of social engineering,"
72
.. ----··----- _..._
might require "imaginative new institutions"· to address the current inadequacy of
leadership. A stronger international authority was needed.
But a German speaker felt that existing institutions, particularly the United Nations
and its environmental agency, was up to the job and should be relied upon. It should be
strengthened with a higher level of funding. The search for new institutions would be
time-consuming, and could be used as an excuse for inaction.
The problem we now faced in the environment was due to uncontrolled growth
and pace of economic development which took place with little regard for the
consequences for the planet as a whole. This proposition was generally agreed to, and
thus, in the opinion of many participants, industry had to play a role in the solution. A
Swiss speaker regretted that industry had been defensive on this issue in the past, but it
was encouraging that more and more business leaders were becoming aware that the way
they dealt with environmental issues would impact the success or failure of their
companies. It was important that business leaders recognize that their social
responsibilities went beyond' creating jobs and income. But it was also important that
there not be a governmental response that would "bind industry into a straightjacket of
rules and regulations." There should instead be a legal framework that allowed industry
the freedom of action to be innovative and come up with new, environmentally sound
technologies, processes, and products. There should be an approach that made
environmental innovation economically attractive.
A Greek speaker stressed that business must be allowed to remain competitive.
No business could afford to sustain substantial cost increases unless these were shouldered
by competitors the world over. A global commitment to action was therefore necessary.
A Belgian participant agreed that there had to be an in-depth dialogue among the
developed countries to deal with this question of competition. But, a German warned,
concern about competition should not hinder .action.
Several participants expressed optimism that the necessary technological
developments would take place, probably faster than we imagined. A German pointed
out that industry had come up relatively quickly with substitutes for CFC's. In the area
of energy, it was worth noting that Germany had achieved great economic growth since
1973 without any increase in energy consumption. An American agreed that technology
could be pushed harder than most people thought possible.
In some cases, observed another American, certain technologies already existed
that could make a significant contribution to the environment. There were a billion
gallons of ethanol in the U.S. which could be used as an alternative fuel source. There
was enough cornstarch and the technology needed to make all plastics used in the U.S.
biodegradable. And there were boilers, made in Finland, that could burn the dirtiest coal
without causing acid rain. What was needed was the incentive to use these technologies.
A Greek speaker ended the discussion on a note of encouragement, saying that at
last the environment was being taken seriously on a global level.
73
CLOSING
In closing the conference, Lord Roll first recognized the contributions to Bilderberg
of Tage Andersen and Franz Liitolf, who were retiring from the Steering Committee.
Speaking on behalf of all the participants, he thanked all those whose efforts had
made the conference a success: the Spanish hosts, led by Jaime Carvajal; the session
chairmen, working paper authors, and panelists; the conference organizer, Julio Abreu;
the Bilderberg Secretariat; the interpreters; the management and staff of the Gran Hotel
La Toja; and the security staff.
74
