~
-_,,.,_ _, __.,
;
,
,
I
I
ll
CONFIDF.l'. ru L
!\~OT FOR PUBl.JCATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN Pl\.RT
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
WILLIA1.1SBURG
CONFERENCE
20-22 .March 1964
····-~ .....,..,d-.i.~- ·~~.'jj'~;i:t~~,,;~~~
..~~'l.'ilfl(~~~,;;.~i4,,..i'l--~-
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
WILLIAMSBURG
CONFERENCE
20-22 March 1964
I
.
'
r:
"
~':cl~:..;.-'~-~--..;;~~~.-.:~
r
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R,H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
jOSEPH E. jOHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
PAUL RYKENS
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ARNOLD T. LAMPING
ACHESON, DEAN
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
BALL, GEORGE w.
BAUMEL, JACQUES
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BEER, HENRIK
BENNETT, FREDERIC M.
BERG, FRITZ
Bmm, l'vL NuRI
BTRRENBACH, KURT
BRAUER, MA X
BUCHAN, ALASTAIR
BuNDY, 11cGEoRGE
CABOT, Louis Vv.
CrsLER, WALKER L.
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
DEAN, AR'rHUR H.
*
* *
UNITED STATES
ITALY
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
FRANCE
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
TURKEY
GERMANY
GERMANY
UNITED KINCDOM
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
u N!TED STATES
3
~I
I
{
f'
t
!'
I.
t
t
/'
f'
'
'
f
I
I
I
r
i
I
[
,
~
i
f
l
~
il
i
, ;,
'I
4
DEFFERRE, GASTON
DUNCAN, JAMES s.
DUNDEE, LORD
ERLER, FRITZ
FORD, GERALD R.
FRELINGHUYSEN, PETER H.B.
FULBRIGHT, J. WILLIAM
GALLOIS, .PIERRE
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G.S.
GUBBINS, Sm CoLIN
HAEKKERUP, PER
HAUGE, GABRIEL
HEALEY, DENIS
HEENEY, ARNOLD D.P.
HEINZ II, HENRY J.
HERTER, CHRISTIAN A.
H0EGH, LEIF
HOLIFIELD, CHET
JACKSON, CHARLES D.
JACKSON, HENRY M.
]AVITS, JACOB K.
]ELLICOE, LORD
KERCHOVE D'OussELCHEM, NICOLAS W. DE
KISSINGER, HENRY A.
KLEFFENS, EELCO N. v AN
KNUDTZON, HARALD
KoHNSTAMM, MAx
KOSTER, HENRI J. DE
KRAPF, FRANZ
KUHLMANN-STUMM, KNUT fREIHERR VON
LA MALENE, CHRISTIAN DE
LA MALFA, Uco
LANGE, HALVARD
LENNEP, JoNKHEER EMILE VAN
LINDSAY, FRANKLIN A.
LIPKOWSKI, jEAN DE
LITCHFIELD JR., LAWRENCE
LOLLI, ETTORE
LuNs, JosEPH M.A.H.
11AJONICA, ERNST
FRANCE
CANADA
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
CANADA
UNITED KINGDOM
DENMARK
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
CANADA
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
NORWAY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
DENMARK
INTERNATIONAL
NETHERLA!\DS
GERMANY
GERMANY
FRANCE
ITALY
NORWAY
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
ITALY
NETHERLANDS
GERMANY
l\llALFATTI, FRANCO M.
MANSHOLT, Sicco
McCLOY, J01rn J.
McGHEE, GEORGE C.
MEYNEN,]OHANNES
MURPHY, ROBERT D.
NEBOLSINE, GEORGE
NYKOPP, ]OHAN
PEARSON, LESTER B.
PECCEI, AURELIO
PINAY, ANTOINE
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID
RoLL, Sm ERic
SCAGLIA, GIOVANNI B.
SCHMID, CARLO
SCHWEITZER, PIERRE-PAUL
SHULMAN, :MARSHALL
SMITH, H. PAGE
SNoY ET D'OPPUERs, BARON
SPEIDEL, HANS
STEWART, MICHAEL
STIKKER, DIRK u.
STONE, SHEPARD
TERKELSEN, TERKEL
UMBRIGHT, VICTOR H.
VITTORELLI, PAOLO
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
V\TESTRICK, LUDGER
WINTERS, ROBERT H.
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO
\l\fRISTON, \'\/ALTER B.
\'\TYNDI-IAM WHITE, ERIC
IN ATTENDANCE:
H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX
BRAAM HoucKGEEST, ANDREAS E. VAN
CHIUSANO, VrrTORINO
HuMELSINE, CARLISLE
.MOZER, ALFRED E.
RoY, BERTIE LE
hALY
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FINLAND
CANADA
ITALY
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
ITALY
GERMANY
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
BELGIUM
GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
SWITZERLAND
ITALY
SWEDEN
GERMANY
CANADA
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS
ITALY
UNITED STATES
BELGIUM
NETHERLANDS
5
INTRODUCTION
The thirteenth Bilderberg meeting took place on 20, 21 and 22 March 1964
in the United States at Williamsburg (Virginia) under the chairmanship of
H. R. H. the Prince of the Netherlands.
There were ninety-four participants representing the United States, Canada
and eleven West European countries as well as various international organi-
zations, and drawn from leaders in the field of politics (governments and par-
liaments), business, journalism, public service (national and international),
the liberal professions and professional associations.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each meeting, all participants spoke
in a purely personal capacity without in any way con:imitting whatever govern-
ment or organization they might belong to. In order to enable participants to
speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were confidential
with no representatives of the press being admitted. The Prince, however, did
receive press representatives on tlie eve of the conference.
The discussions were centred on the following points:
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE OF:
I APPARENT CHANGES IN THE COMMUNIST WORLD
(A) Soviet internal developments
(B) the Communist Bloc
II POSSIBLE CHANGES IN THE ATTITUDE OF THE USSR TO THE WEST
III RECENT DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE WESTERN WORLD
(A) political
r. how the Atlantic nations should organize themselves
2. attitudes toward relations with the Communist countries including
China
(B) military
1. NATO strategy
2. sharing of responsibility for nuclear deterrent
7
...
•
r
l
I
l
I
l
I'
!
!j
I
11
(C) economic
I. recent developments in the Common Market notably in relation to
agriculture and their impact
2. UN Conference on trade and development, GATT/Kennedy
Round
3. International Finance
(a) balance ofpayments adjustment and capital markets
(b) liquidity and further evolution of the international monetary
structure
4. East-West trade
(a) trade with the USSR and European satellites
(b) trade with Communist China and Cuba
(c) trading rules and restrictions of credits
(d) coordination of Atlantic Community policy.
It should be noted that item III (C) 4. (East-West trade) was dealt with at
the beginning of the discussion on Chapter III, more especially because of its
connexion with Chapter II and item III (A) 2. This is the chronological order
ofdiscussion used as the basis for the present minutes.
Additionally, item III (C) 3. (International Finance) could not be dealt
with in the time available because of the extensive exchange of views which
occurred in respect of other items.
8
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
OF APPARENT CHANGES IN THE COMMUNIST WORLD (SOVIET
INTERNAL DEVELOPMENTS AND THE COMMUNIST BLOC)
AND POSSIBLE CHANGES IN THE ATTITUDE OF THE USSR
TO THE WEST
Discussion of these various points was prepared:
- by a note received by participants prior to the meeting from an American
participant;
- by a verbal statement from a second American participant covering the
main points embodied in the note and· adding additional items for consider-
ation.
..
* *
The American participant's paper dealt with both aspects mentioned above:
APPARENT CHANGES IN THE COMMUNIST WORLD
Soviet Internal Developments
The fluctuations observed stemmed from the fluctuating state of the coun-
try's economy: rapid growth from I 956 to I 960 leading to the expectation of a
shift in the balance of power through "peaceful coexistence", followed by the
failure ofsuch hopes together with a drop in agricultural production. This led
to reorganization of the Party and the administration and to a revision ofplans
so as to free the economy from the grip of bureaucracy and face up to the agri-
cultural failure. The need to provide positive incentives as against overt co-
ercion explained destalinization and the growth of pragmatism in Party
practice. The West had welcomed these changes as indications of "liberali-
zation" but this was a fallacious acceptance of the term in comparison to its
Western significance. In fact, the Party had consolidated its position and
Khrushchev controlled both Party and system.
The Soviet economy had a great potential for expansion and power as was
shown by the comparative rate ofgrowth of heavy industry (8 to 10% per year)
and the still more rapid development of science and technology. Basic in-
vestment was continuing independently of the attitudes adopted towards
9
""""~~'"'""-''"·~-..-~,~
individual consumption while the agricultural problem, however difficult,
could be partly solved. The author of the paper concluded in this connexion
that the economic system was unlikely to be halted or turned into the creation
of domestic affluence which might lead to a less aggressive society.
The Communist Bloc
The Sino-Soviet dispute was not the only problem arising. Among the
Eastern European States, repercussions ofthis dispute, of clestalinization and of
Common Market success had led, on the one hand, to satellite pressure for
increased local autonomy and more favourable economic arrangements with
the USSR and, on the oth~r, to Soviet efforts for greater economic i~tegration.
Outside the bloc, the same forces encouraged a more independent and nation-
alistic attitude among West European Communist parties. ·
While the disagreements' between Mao and Khrushchev seemed at present
to be definitive and were giving rise to Western discussion as to how such
disagreements might best be exploited, both the Chinese and Soviet leaders
were quite correctly proclaiming that their strategy was directed towards
furthering "the triumph of socialism and communism on a worldwide scale".
Both were therefore applying the same dynamic principle.
POSSIBLE CHANGES IN THE ATTITUDE OF THE USSR TOWARDS THE WEST
Such changes would not be fundamental but would consist rather of short:
range tactical shifts in <iccorclance with the principles of "peaceful coexistence"
and "peaceful competition" which would encl neither the ideological struggle
nor the cold war. It was possible to anticipate negotiations and limited agree-
ments (e.g., on nuclear delivery systems) but the West would remain "the
enemy" and general and complete disarmament had to be regarded merely
from the propaganda angle.
Economic disappointments and the prospect Gf Soviet nuclear inferiority had
had two contradictory effects: one was the prolongation of the policy of "peace-
ful coexistence" and the atmosphere of cletente; the other consisted of a search
for short cuts to an improved power position (cf. Cuba) and the possibility of
making political use of military capabilities, including assistance to local con-
flicts, described as "wars of national liberation".
In the advanced industrial countries, revolutionary appeals to the prole-
tariat had been replaced by appeals to the bourgeoisie based on peace, na-
tionalism and trade. The Soviet purpose was still to divide non-communist
nations on these various points.
In the underdeveloped areas, Soviet policy had substituted social revolu-
tionary appeals for anti-Western nationalist appeals.
IO
Present policy, described in Russia as "creative Marxism" and in China as
"revisionism'', was defended as more prudent and more effective than Stalinist
practice. It is expected to bear fruit in from five to fifteen years, allowing for
political deterioration in Europe and economic competition among capitalist
countries, these being developments on which its supporters counted.
It might be expected that pressure would be sustained at all existing criti-
cal points (Berlin, the division p( Germany, alliances and bases) and that
others would be exploited a& they arose (cf. Cyprus, Zanzibar, Panama, etc.).
The use of force to change the territorial status quo offered undue risks so that
the USSR felt non-aggression treaties to be of value; but there would be no
entente with the West, let alone an alliance against the Chinese. The Com-
munists believed in the progressive triumph of their cause through the play of
conflicting forces. Calculated risks and "brinkmanship" would always be
carefully evaluated but the USSR and Communist China might converge in
their estimate of the extent to which nuclear deterrence permitted a more
aggressive policy.
All of this was favourable to the West since it tended to reduce immediate
hazards. The long-term effects would depend on the adequacy of Western
response. Communist probes might be encouraged by either Western bel-
licosity or Western weakness. Modest measures of collaboration might reduce
the hazard of war but only if taken in full consciousness of the situation:
certain limited autonomous trends in Western Europe might be encouraged
by carefully devised Western policy. It was, however, fundamental to re-
member that Western unity, vitality and strength were the most effective
meam to encourage evolution of the Communist world in a desirable direction.
*
* *
These various points were taken up and expanded by another American
participant in a statement preceding the discussion.
He observed that it was not easy to single out from among the changes
which had occurred in the Communist world those which were tactical and
even cyclical in nature and those which represented a genuine evolution.
Nor was it easy to single out among the latter those which were being carried
out consciously and deliberately with a view to achieving greater efficiency
and those of a more subtle kind which resulted, possibly below the conscious
level, from decisions reached by the leaders.
On the internal level, the Soviet leaders had also been compelled to adapt
themselves to the demands of an increasingly complex industrial society and
the changed style of government resulting involved certain difficulties.
II
I
ill
I~
'II.
I•
!1
..
"
The turning-point which followed on a period of euphoria and rising expec-
tations, the most spectacular manifestation being Soviet space achievements,
would seem to have occurred around 1960-1961. The most striking evidence
of this was provided by agricultural shortages, but the difficulties confronting
the Soviet regime in achieving a better rationalization of the administration
of the economy might be considered as no less important. The reorganization
plans which resulted in these two fields amounted almost to a revolution,
more especially in the transfer of a considerable proportion of Party personnel
(possibly 75 to 80%) to jobs in the administration of the economy. As far as
agriculture was concerned, this resumption of authority, at any rate in certain
experimental areas, was sometime5 accompanied by measures which were very
far removed from the traditional system of collective farms and State farms.
The comequences of such measures within the Party had been considerable
and had given rise to a certain degree of uncertainty as to the final success of
their policy.
At a higher level, namely the planning and administration level, there had
been a piling-up of supervisory and co-ordinating bodies which suggested a
certain improvization in the effort to find a balance between centralization and
decentralization. In any case, the present period was one of acute domestic
preoccupations and uncertainty as to the real strength of the economy.
While there had been considerable variation in Western estimates of the
Soviet economy's delivery possibilities, it was worth remembering that in-·
vestments in the sinews of power-i.e. heavy industry and armaments-had
continued to be substantial and hence that current difficulties could not be
regarded as wholly negating Soviet expectations of a favourable evolution in
the world balance of power. ·
In order to derive the maximum advantage from their human potential
involved in the growing complexity of these tasks, the Soviet Union was
compelled to move increasingly towards positive incentives and to some extent
to reject the old system of coercion with the result that there was a change of
style and an increased complexity in seeking a balance. What did such an
evolution signify in terms of an essentially totalitarian system? The speaker
repeated that it was vital to avoid using the term "liberalization" in the
Western meaning of the word to describe a process which had its own dis-
tinctive origin and its own rules deriving from the Soviet system. The in-
stitution of increasingly complex economic machinery had had as its counter-
part a growing centralization of control within the Party which had very
successfully managed to preserve its authority by absorbing certain "functional
groups" (industrial managers and technicians) which might otherwise have
grown up outside the Party.
12
On another level the Party's recent policy of employing widening and
narrowing latitudes of control over intellectuals and artists undoubtedly
implied a dilemma linked with an anxiety to enable the latter to meet their
public's expectations more adequately while still serving the purposes of the
regime. This involved difficult problems, more especially in regard to the
heritage of Stalinism. It was not at present clear whether the process of control
was undergoing a regressive or progressive phase but it must be assumed that
the increased freedom which intellectuals and artists were demanding lay
only within narrow limits and, more particularly, that it did not represent
any search for alternative forms of society nor any dissidence in the sense of
"opposition", Rather, it represented a means whereby artists and intellectu-
als might become more effective if less hindered by the incompetence of those
in control. In this connexion, it was extremely dangerous to try and interpret
or gauge certain controversie5 which had been reported in the West.
In regard to relations within the bloc, the Soviet Union had been engaged
for some years past in a critical experiment aimed at encouraging greater
local autonomy and this had run into several difficulties. The effect ofCommon
Market development on Eastern Europe was worth noting in this connexion.
A process of integration by induction had taken place but since January l 963
the impetus from the West had diminished while, on the other hand, the
Soviet Union had encountered difficulties in its efforts to achieve closer inte-
gration of the Eastern European economies and had accordingly been com-
pelled to fall back on a pattern of bilateral negotiations in order to obtain
the industrial goods which it so urgently needed. This situation was further
complicated by the conflict with China, the course of which could not easily
be forecast. The struggle between factions-which existed long before the
Chinese conflict which had merely revived them-was taking place behind
the scenes and had taken on the nature of a desperate civil war within the
Communist world. What was at stake was the control of the various segments
of the Communist movement throughout the world, and it was therefore
easy to understand that this was the most serious aspect of the conflict from
the point of view of the Soviet leadership.
The speaker felt that the conflict should be seen as evolving in accordance
with its own rules and that it would be extremely difficult for the West to
influence its course by intervening. Similarly, it was not clear whether the
final result might not be a more militant behaviour on the part of the Soviet
leadership. Nevertheless, the decreased unity resulting from the conflict offered
certain footholds for approaches to the Communist world, more particularly
as regards contacts with Eastern European countries, and these might eventu-
ally influence trends towards national autonomy.
13
•
In regard to Soviet foreign policy, the main difficulty for ourselves was to
distinguish the tactical and reversible shifts from those long-term changes
which might fundamentally alter our relations with the Soviet Union. It was
also difficult but important to differentiate between those actions arising
from "the atmosphere of detente" and those which changed the objective
situation.
The most interesting and important thing for us was to see beyond the
discussion of "revisionism" and "dogmatism" and to detect what, in the
Soviet Union's position, really represented a process of adaptation to the
changes which had taken place in international politics since the end of the war.
It was here that Western policy might exercise an influence. The Soviet Union
was confronted with a situation not anticipated by Marxist-Leninism, namely
the prosperity and expansion of the West instead of the disintegration and
collapse which had been prophesied. Similarly, in the underdeveloped regions,
the process of independence had exceeded the Soviets' own predictions so
that they had been obliged to adopt a long-term policy of co-operation with
the nationalist leaders which had been initially regarded as merely an alterna-
tive to revolutionary policy and a temporary expedient.
What in fact had happened was that a series of accommodations originally
considered as provisional," specifically peaceful coexistence, had become
rooted in the Russians' political outlook, having regard moreover to the
prudence which was d.ictated by the existence of thermonuclear weapons, so
that the goal was no longer rev:olution but a gradual weakening of the Western
bloc and a strengthening of the Soviet bloc. Given this approach, the appeals
to the bourgeoisie had .a part to play, whether in respect of increased trade
and financial offers to Western businessmen or offers oCco-operation to the
leaders of new countries, even jf the latter showed no inclination towards
communism.
Was this evolution a good and desirable thing from our point of view? And
what could we do to encourage those changes which we would like to see take
place on the Soviet side? The speaker felt that the evolution was a good one
from our point of view but that it had its dangers: it represented a challenge
which was no less great than during the Stalin period and the increased in-
fluence and power which was sought relied on the weaknesses and divergences
within the Western world. On the other hand, it was up to us to find appro-
priate responses and, unless we did so, the situation would be no less cata-
strophic for us in the long run.
Regarding the policy to be followed in order to encourage favourable
trends, the speaker considered that it would be a mistake to take account of
the Chinese conflict, as some people had suggested, in order to initiate a
14
policy of collaboration with the Soviet Union in the hope of achieving a modus
vivendi. He considered that the major factor which had encouraged the
Soviet trend in this direction had been the degree of strength, firmness, re-
sistance, and unity displayed by the Western nations. Under these circum-
stances the Soviets had been compelled to look for alternative policies. On the
other hand, where there had been divergences or an impression of irresolution
and lack of determination on the part of the American leadership or elsewhere,
this had encouraged a more aggressiv.e attitude, with all the clanger of mis-
calculation involved in such a situation.
It would therefore seem, the speaker concluded, that the policy to be
followed should be sought in a differentiated attitude which was firmly re-
sistant to Soviet aggressive acts but which simultaneously, without any illusion,
sought for possibilities of co-operation where there were convergent interests,
pa,rticularly as regards reducing the danger ofgeneralized war.
What should be sought was not general disarmament but more modest
safeguards based on a mutual recognition of re~ponsibility in critical situ-
ations between both parties which were both eager to reduce the hazards of
general war.
*
* *
In the course of the discussion which followed this statement, various
evaluations were forthcoming concerning the .reasoi1s and significance of
developments within the Soviet Union and certain participants based their
opinions on recent visits to that country. For example, a French participant
who had had the opportunity of a personal conversation with Mr. Khrushchev
believed that the latter had adopted attitudes which were not always enthusi-
astically backed by the whole of the Central Committee of the Soviet Com-
munist Party. It was true that most members of that Committee followed
their leader, but it also seemed likely that, if the latter were obliged to hand
over his powers, certain individuals would endeavour to revert to a Stalinist
policy on both the internal and external level (the existence of such oppo-
sition forces was likewise emphasized by an Italian participant).
The above-mentioned French participant contended that liberalization,
even if not in the "Western" sense of the term, was an undeniable fact: it was
apparent in a greater measure of freedom of speech, even when foreigners
were present, and also by improved living conditions-more marked in
Moscow, it was true, than elsewhere. The regime was making great efforts on
behalfof young people who, in particular, gave no impression of being treated
dictatorially. On the contrary, they seemed happy.
A British participant stated that his feelings were the same in this regard.
15
I
What was the attitude of Soviet young people, and especially university
students, towards the outside world and the communist system? In answer
to another British participant, the American speaker quoted above singled
out three dominant attitudes:
- many young people were sceptical where certain Marxist-Leninist
details were concerned but accepted the goals and the regime in general.
More specifically, they were strongly attached to the current modernization
process and supported Khrushchev in his struggle against bureaucracy;
- on the other hand, a small number of young people (primarily to be
found among the intellectuals and artists) felt no ties with the regime but had
no inclination towards any greater degree of dissidence. They were eager fo-
focreased contacts with the West but shrank from the practical difficulties
in which such contacts might involve them;
- the overwhelming majority of young people adopted a mid-way po-
sition and wanted a peaceful and untroubled life, feeling that politics were no
concern of theirs.
It was certain that cultural exchanges and the fact that a few people had
been able to travel to the West had had a considerable influence on the
young, but it was difficult to gauge the extent of that influence and especially
to ensure that it exercised a long-term effect.
A German participant took the view that it would, in any case, be wrong to
imagine that liberalization as conducted by Khrushchev could change the
orientation of Soviet policy since neither material nor spiritual advantages
nor the products provided by progress could stifle the dynamic impulse aroused
by the consciousness ofbuilding a new world.
The problems of the Soviet economy were discussed by a Finnish parti-
cipant who felt that the USSR leaders were still at present looking for defini-
tive solutions. He observed that one of the reasons for the agricultural failure
had hitherto lain in the fact that the regime had called on the peasants to
pay a large proportion of the cost ofindustrialization so that it was difficult to
initiate any policy change on behalfof this group without harming the whole
of the country's economy.
*
* *
Comparatively few speakers concentrated on the internal aspects of the
changes currently taking place within the Soviet Union. On the other hand,
most of them discussed at some length the internal relations within the Com-
munist bloc (and towards Western Communist parties), the Sino-Soviet
conflict and the attitude of members of the bloc on the international scene. It
was generally agreed that the Eastern European satellites now had a relatively
r6
greater degree of autonomy than in the past. In this connexion, the fact
mentioned by two German participants that some of these countries had agreed
to the inclusion of the "Berlin clause"') in commercial agreements with the
Federal Republic, despite the opposition of the Government of Eastern Ger-
many, was regarded as particularly significant. It was possible that this
flexible attitude was dictated by the economic difficulties confronting these
countries and by the urgent need to obtain certain outside supplies; it was
also possible that this increased freedom of manoeuvre resulted from the gulf
existing between the USSR and China. In any event, it was a fact worth
noting.
The attitude of the USSR towards its Eastern European satellites was not
unconnected with the German problem, concerning which certain speakers
emphasized the Soviet leader's obsession. A French participant already
quoted above stated that when in the USSR he had been conscious of the
persistence of m~mories of the last war and of a violent hatred against the
German people (even though certain Russians agreed in private conversations
that the notion of a "bad" or Western Germany as against a "good" or
Eastern Germany was artificial). Any discussion on reunification and nuclear
weapons for Germany rriet with an absolute opposition. Free elections through-
out Germany were all the more unimaginable as far as the Soviet leadership
was concerned in that they would set the seal on the return of capitalism in
East Germany, which is regarded as irrevocably tied to the communist system.
The Berlin Wall was regarded by Mr. Khrushchev as the inviolable outward
sign of a frontier. As far as German nuclear weapons were concerned, this
speaker had had the impression that this was one of'the rare subjects which
might breach the existing reserve of the Soviet leaders regarding the preser-
vation of peace in that they considered that distinctions between nAtional
armament, the European force and the multilateral force had no meaning
in this respect.
The Finnish participant quoted above spoke along similar lines when he
remarked that strategic conditions continued to dominate the thinking of
Soviet leaders. Russia had twice fought a war against Germany. Their present
system was based on the possession of advanced positions and concessions
regarding the German problem would signify its collapse. It was true that the
advent of the nuclear age had deprived that system of some of its value but
there was still a fear-voiced officially even if not always in accordance with
inner conviction-ofseeing Germany dragging its Western allies into a war in
order to recover its Eastern territories.
r.) The clause extending to West Berlin the field of application of agreements signed
by the Government of the German Federal Republic.
17
A German participant said it was worth noting that the Soviet zone of
Germany was still living under a Stalinist system. There was no sign of any
evolution towards normalization of the situation and it was clear that, if the
Soviets did not want a real detente on the German question, no such detente
would develop in other fields either. This was the crucial test and it would
seem that the only purpose of the USSR in its "European" proposals was to
isolate the Federal Republic from its Western allies.
Certain participants referred to the position of the Western Communist
parties in relation to the USSR and an Italian speaker observed that, in a
recent Communist Party conference in his country, one of the younger leaders
had demanded greater freedom of action in respect of the Soviet Union's
policy without thereby being expelled as would once have been the case.
But the position of the Communist parties in relation to the USSR, whether
in the satellite countries or in the free countries, was closely linked to the
Sino-Soviet conflict which in turn was closely linked to the problem of "de-
tente" and "peaceful coexistence". These three aspects of the question were
discussed together by a number of speakers, some of whom emphasized the
difficulty of obtaining a clear view of this conflict. Was it, asked a German
participant, a controversy such as that between the Dominicans and the
Franciscans in the Middle ages, who indulged in mutual recriminations while
still considering each other as pillars of the same Church united against the
unbelievers? Or was it a struggle between two powers sharing the same faith
and the same philosophy but competing for the right to determine the course
of history as the Houses of France and Austria had once done? It was obvious
that the Western attitude should be different depending on what was involved.
A participant belonging to an international organization who had spent
some time in Peking submitted a certain number of factors for consideration
in this respect. He observed that the Chinese were indulging in intensive
anti-Khrushchev propaganda among foreign visitors, even "capitalist"
visitors. At the same time, they loudly proclaimed that the conflict was ideo-
logical and existed at Party level rather than governmental level, the govern-
ments being still tied in their view by the treaties they had signed. Addition-
ally, both parties still had the same faith in the ultimate aims of the Commu-
nist movement. At the same time, however, the Chinese had bitterly resented
the hard blow inflicted on their economy by the withdrawal of the Russians,
a withdrawal which did not only involve technicians but, in certain cases,
equipment and even plans which had been jointly drawn up. The Chinese
continued to display a sort of obsessional preoccupation with the United States
which could almost be described as a "love-hate" attitude. In comparison
with the United States, Europe was regared by the Chinese as of secondary
18
importance. They were showing a certain realism in their relations with the
unaligned countries, primarily the African States, openly admitting that they
would never have the same capability of rendering assistance on their behalf
as the USSR.
The Finnish speaker already quoted took the view that national interest
took precedence over ideological considerations in this conflict, at any rate
from the viewpoint of the Russians, who had never looked favourably on
China's claim to be the main Asian power.
An Italian participant offered a carefully shaded interpretation of this
conflict on the basis of the impressions he had gathered in the USSR. He
conside·ed that the Russians felt they had something new to defend, namely
certain prospects for wellbeing and increased freedom-conquests, as it were,
which the "detente" would enable them to preserve in peace and which
might be brought to an end by the Chinese attitude, more especially in as
far as China was driving the underdeveloped countries towards extremist and
aggressive positions. In point of fact, said this speaker, the real conflict today
did not lie between the Soviet Union and China but between all the industri-
ally advanced countries possessing the means for providing solutions to the
problems of the backward countries and, on the other hand, China con-
sidered as the extreme expression of communist dissidence regarding those
solutions. Russia was caught between these two extreme positions. The West
should therefore, in the view of this speaker, not try to "exploit" the disagree-
ment but rather to exploit its own resources to outstrip China in its effort
to head the revolt of the underdeveloped peoples against the "have" nations.
This conclusion was in line with that of a British participant who had also
taken the view that the main threat to the West lay in the instability and
poverty of the unaligned countries and who emphasized the importance of
jointly providing them with the necessary assistance.
Several speakers considered that, whatever evaluation one might make of
the Sino-Soviet conflict, the final aims remained identical. At the begin-
ning of the discussion a Netherlands speaker observed in this connexion that,
in considering possible changes in the Soviets' attitude towards the West, it
must be remembered that the final goal of world domination would not be
changed and that there would always be people to remind us of this and thereby
limit the range of possible tactics. International treaties, for example, were
only considered as temporary expedients according to this speaker, who went
on to refer to the example of Islam where the dogma of expansion had per-
suaded the faithful for several centuries on end that such expansion was
subject to no possible limit.
A British speaker took up this comparison but none the less observed that
19
J
the triumph of the Soviet revolution in 1917 had subsequently weakened its
ideological monopoly because of the constitution of other communistsystems.
The speaker further noted that the dogma of the "socialist fatherland" re-
vealed an identification of doctrinal claims and Russian national interests, a
process which was particularly highlighted by the Russo-Chinese conflict.
Most of those participants who referred to the Sino-Soviet conflict agreed
that it was very difficult if not impossible and, at any rate, scarcely desirable
for the West to intervene directly, and therefore recommended considerable
prudence in any approach to this question.
Echoing the American speaker quoted above, a French participant con-
sidered that notwithstanding the present evolution and the existence of
"peaceful coexistence", the communist danger was none the less a real threat
as evidenced by such crisis points as Cuba, Vietnam and Germany. What-
ever the difficulties encountered by the Soviet camp and whatever their share
in formulating the idea of a "detente", Russia was deriving a very great
advantage if only because of a sort of "moral disarmament" which had over-
taken the West and which was making any coherent Western effort more
difficult. Additionally, the winning of men's minds in the unaligned countries
was thereby facilitated. Furthermore, the Western Communist parties could
now more easily break loose from the isolation in which the previous situation
had kept them. By dangling the prospect of a detente before the eyes of the
Western world on the basis of a given man or party in power, the USSR was
acquiring the possibility of permanently intervening in Western political life.
Even the Sino-Soviet conflict provided an advantage by presenting the
Russian leaders as "good communists" with the result that the West might
incautiously grant them unilateral concessions.
A British participant expressed views slightly different from those of the fore-
going speakers. While Soviet doctrine mightstill draw its vocabularyfrom Lenin,
he said, that doctrine had none the less undergone some.change in the course of
time and the conviction which the Soviet had felt fifteen years ago as to its
domination over the future ofhistory had been shaken by at least four major facts:
- the political and psychological implications of Mr. Khrushchev's decla-
rations concerning the previous "Pope";
- the splits in the Soviet world, more especially on the Chinese side;
- the halting of Communist progress and the Party's failure in other coun-
tries apart from certain limited sectors;
- the successes gained by the West in respect of economic growth and, to
some extent, political unity.
This had led to growing uncertainty which, specifically, was not uncon-
nected with the Sino-Soviet controversy on the inevitability of war. It was
20
!
interesting to note in this connexion that the nuclear impasse had not en-
couraged the Russians to launch limited aggressive action with conventional
weapons as the West had feared might be the case ten years ago. American
firmness over Cuba had taught some valuable lessons and it was improbable
that the Soviets would renew such a challenge.
The same speaker questioned whether Soviet policy in conflicts affecting
the Afro-Asian countries was really coherent and systematic. On this point,
two other British speakers expressed different views. The first remarked that
the Communist parties, not only in Africa and Asia but also in Latin America,
had received instructions to combat any social and economic improvement
whether of national or outside origin. The second recalled, as other speakers
had done, that the Communists were now appealing particularly to anti-
Western nationalist elements irrespective of their social origins. When a
conflict developed anywhere, even if purely local in origin as was the case
recently in East Africa, the Communist countries systematically supported
whichever camp was not supported by the West. Conversely, such leaders
as Messrs. Makarios, Sukarno, Nasser and Castro-whether Communist or
not-had only to speak fairly firmly to the East for the West to become
·apprehensive of an extension of the conflict and hence to feel inhibited in its
action even though it knew that it had right on its side. In this connexion,
United Nations intervention, when only temporary, provi~ed no solution and
merely resulted in strengthening still further the stronger camp which was
not necessarily the most democratic.
During this part ofthe discussion, certainspeakers took up the problem ofrecog-
nition of Communist China and the admission of that country to the United
Nations. Their remarks are summarized later in these minutes (see page 46).
H.R.H. the Prince of the Netherlands, in closing the discussion on this
first part of the agenda, resumed the conclusions of certain participants con-
cerning the problem of the detente. Whereas public opinion in our countries
was more or less persuaded that a significant change had taken place, most of
the speakers had avoided expressing any such categorical opinion and, if a
change had in fact taken place, it could only have a long-term effect in circum-
stances which we could not yet forecast. Several speakers, however, had
none the less taken the view that, whatever the nature of the change, the \\'est
should try to derive some advantage from it, more especially in seeking for fields,
however limited, where agreements based on common interest might be
possible. In doing so, it would none the less be important to avoid endorsing
the formula of a "general detente" since the facts indicated that any such
detente was more "in the air" than real and there would be a risk in taking our
desires for realities which could only ultimately benefit the Communist camp.
21
...
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE WESTERN WORLD
Economic
EAST-WEST TRADE
Before opening this part of the agenda for discussion, H.R.H. the Prince
of the Netherlands made certain observations:
The previous discussion, he observed, had covered the purely internal
problems of the Communist world and hence certain aspects of our attitude
towards those problems and there was therefore no question of problems
within the Atlantic Alliance. The question of East-West trade on the other
hand, like the rest of the agenda, involved the positions adopted by the various
partners in the Alliance. During the early Bilderberg meetings ten years ago,
the primary consideration was to strengthen relations between America on
the one hand, and Europe on the other, but the same no longer applied:
the questions discussed divided the European countries between themselves
and even divided public opinion within those countries. This gave rise to
concern over the possibilities of progress for the Western Alliance seen as a
whole. His Royal Highness went on to say that it would be desirable for the
present discussion to lead to a better understanding of the basic problems
underlying these divergences and to less rigid concepts of the possibility for
fruitful co-operation. It did not seem in the present situation that any cut-and-
dried solution could be found for all our problems. The original idea of the
Atlantic partnership was based on a dialogue between the United States and
a single Europe and on the equality ofthe two parties. In recent years, however,
we had realized that an imaginative and constructive approach was not always
within our immediate grasp. But we should not therefore conclude that we
must cease our efforts to promote the strength of our alliance. Even if the origi-
nal concept of partnership was not necessarily capable of achievement in the
immediate future, we should concentrate to our utmost on seeking means
of moving forward without sacrificing the hope of a single Europe as partner
while preserving a realistic recognition of what was possible immediately and
in the very near future. Ifwe were to build a world in conditions acceptable to
22
ourselves, we must begin by understanding what those conditions represented
for us.
*
* *
Following on these remarks, the discussion was opened by an American
participant who, while recognizing that his country was less dependent than
its partners on foreign trade, wished to indicate the broad lines of the policy
ofthe United States Government regarding East-West trade.
The US Government, he explained, drew a distinction as far ,as the Com-
munist world was concerned between four specific areas and had adopted a,
specific approach to each:
(a) USSR: This was a country which in many respects could be compared
with the United States in that it had considerable natural resources and was
not unduly dependent on imports for the development of its economy. NATO
member countries were generally in agreement as to the nature of trade with
the USSR and the Strategic Goods Committee (which draws up the "Cocom"
lists of prohibited items) was operating with success. The other Western coun-
tries had been able to avoid undue dependence on their trade with the Soviet
Union which had therefore been prevented from using this as a politicalweapon.
As regards the United States itself, that country had limited its trade with the
USSR, more especially as regarded productions of a highly advanced techni-
cal nature. The fixing of. these restrictions, however, involved discussions
covering the role played by exports in,the economic development ofthe USSR.
Recent sales of wheat to the USSR in no way indicated a change in United
States policy, the speaker pointed out, and he protested against certain er-
roneous interpretations which had been put forward abroad.
(b) Countries of Eastern Europe: The attitude of the United States
towards these countries varied from one to another ,and was more flexible
than it was towards the USSR. Trade was increasingly shifting towards
normal bases, subject to the difficulties involved in questions of credit and the
limited currency resources of those countries. One of the main aims was to
make them less dependent on the USSR.
(c) Communist China, North Korea, North Vietnam: Here the United
States' attitude was different and marked by an absolute rejection of trade.
This approach was essentially dictated by political considerations: the ag-
gressive and criminal behaviour of China which threatened the West's vital
interests, the "hard war" activities of this country and of North Korea
and North Vietnam, against which the United States had been compelled to
take direct action. In these circumstances it was felt that acceptance of trade
operations could have no positive political effect.
23
(d) Cuba: This was a special situation which had given rise to differences
of opinion with the Allies and in which the United States felt obliged to adopt
a completely rigorous attitude towards the threat which Cuba represented: a
potential military threat as revealed by the situation in 1962 but, above all,
the permanent threat of subversion against Latin America as a whole as
shown by the armed conspiracies mounted against certain governments.
Setting aside propaganda-which could not alone replace policy-the only
weapon available to the United States which would not comtitute an act of
war was the economic weapon. By refusing flatly to supply Cuba with equip-
ment, spare parts and the Western raw materials which were essential to
Cuba, with all the serious consequences which this ostracism had on its econo-
my, the United States, without imagining that this would suffice to overthrow
the Castro regime, was pursuing four main aims:
- to show the Latin American countries that "communism does not pay";
- to demonstrate to the Cuban people that the Castro regime Was not in
that people's interest;
- to weaken the Cuban potential for exporting subversion and sabotage to
the Latin American countries;
to increase the cost to the USSR of the operation of supporting a com-
munist system in an area so far removed from the Western hemisphere.
The speaker considered that this plan. had given good results but he none
the less noted that the increased price of sugar on the world market had
enabled Cuba to accumulate certain currency resources and he regretted that
other Western governments had not rejected with equal firmness the offers
which that improvement had enabled the Cuban Government to make, as
witness the recent sale of 150 British buses. It was essential, he stated in con-
clusions, that the West should adopt a more coherent attitude of "economic
opposition" towards Cuba. It was possible that the United States was to
blame for the fact that such an attitude was not fully understood in Europe
but it would be as well in any case to reflect on the grave consequences which
might arise from carrying out purely commercial operations without regard
to their political context.
A German participant next gave a brief description of the evolution of
Western opinion together with current basic facts in connexion with East-West
trade. He noted that there had recently been a change in the atmosphere in
the United States so that trade with the East was no longer taboo but, on the
contrary, was the subject of rational discussion. The notion of a Soviet mono-
lith in this field had been abandoned and trade with each particular Com-
munist country was analyzed in terms of its specific merits. One of the advan-
tages of this evolution was that it facilitated co-ordination of Western policies
24
in this field, a co-ordination already being carried out within the framework
of the European Economic Community.
Any extension of trade between the whole of the Western world, including
the United States, and the Communist world which might follow, however,
should not give rise to undue expectations and the speaker asked the Americans
not to indulge in an exaggerated view of the political effect of a certain ex-
pansion of East-West trade. There were natural limits and one of the most
important of these was the inadequacy of the goods which the USSR and
countries in the Eastern bloc could offer in exchange for their purchases. This
structural imbalance could only be offset by long-term credits and these
would amount to economic assistance which it would be unwise to grant in
view of the circumstances and the West's need of capital for its own develop-
ment.
Taking up the particular case of China, the speaker observed that that
country was turning more and more towards Japan and Western Europe for
the supply of industrial goods and the recrudescence of that market's appeal
(which coincided with France's diplomatic recognition of China) was encour-
aged by the feeling that China would be increasingly capable of paying for
its imports by exports to the Free World. Additionally, a number of people in
Europe were unable to share the view that trade with China would still be a
bad thing at the very time when improved trade in peaceful goods with the
Soviet bloc was being recommended.
On the contrary, those people felt that such commercial relations could
encourage Chinese independence of the USSR. This was a source of potential
disagreement within the Alliance and it was essential; concluded 'the speaker,
to consider it very thoroughly while, as far as possible, excluding any emo-
tional elements.
*
* *
In the discussion which followed these two statements, certain participants
limited themselves to the purely economic aspects of East-West trade while
others stressed the political context in which such trade took place. The con-
ditions required for a co-ordination of the Western approach were referred
to by most of the speakers. In this connexion, two points in particular were
dealt with in the course of the discussion, namely the question of granting
long-term credits to Communist countries and the question of the effectiveness
of economic sanctions applied to certain countries, reference being made to
the policy adopted by the United States in this field.
It was desirable to situate the problem of East-West trade with all its im-
plications (guarantees, credits) in the broader context ofworld trade, according
25
I
to an Italian participant who recalled that the next conference on world trade
in Geneva could only meet the hopes placed in it by the unaligned nations
if it led to a significant increase in world trade. This increase by itself should
lead to an increase in East-West trade-which the speaker considered both
inevitable and desirable-and we should therefore prepare for this in a co-
ordinated manner.
Nonetheless, said a Belgian participant, if we considered the relative share
of East-West trade in the foreign trade ofthe Western countries, it became clear
that the liberalization which had been b'rought about more especially by the
OECD and the Common Market had, by developing trade "between our-
selves", made our trade with the East more marginal and its relative impor-
tance had continually decreased. This evolution would con'tinue if the econo-
mic integration of the West was maintained on healthy bases and this would
still further reduce the temptation which might be found in certain· offers
from the East, more especially if credits were involved.
A similar point ofview was put forward by a French participant on the basis
of the evolution of French and German foreign trade. Tracie with the East
should not give rise to undue apprehension since it embodied its own limita-
tions and the agreements which had been reached on this point, more especially
in regard to credit limitations~particularly, the Berne Agreement-did, after
all, fix reasonable boundaries which should not be exceeded.
What benefits could the Soviet camp and the Western camp expect from
an increase in East-West trade? The Italian participant quoted above said it
was clear that it was especially a centrally planned economy which could
derive advantages from an incr.ease in its commercial transactions with indus-
trially advanced countries. This, however, should not alarm us if we bore in
mind that Soviet efforts in the years ahead would be directed at ensuring
better living conditions for the people. Additionally, the means of information
available to us and the very fact that the East's economy was centrally planned
would help us to control the use made by the Soviets of resources resulting
from increased trade with our countries.
The political evolution taking place in the USSR might be considered fa-
vourable, according to this speaker who cited the example of other countries
where the internal situation had not turned to the advantage of the West
and who considered that our trade with the East could help such an evolution.
In conclusion, the speaker said that, as far as the West was concerned,
expansion of our trade with the East could not be other than favourable since
it would open new markets for our goods, on condition that we prepared to
act in a co-ordinated manner.
An American speaker laid particular stress on the fact that political con-
26
siderations were always present in offers made by the Soviets, even when they
seemed to be purely commercial.
One of their objectives was to accentuate the division of the world into two
blocs, among other things by playing on nationalist feelings such as were emerg-
ing at various points. Their approaches to certain countries should be seen in
that context. It was therefore urgently necessary to reach a concerted agreement
between the industrial countries (including Japan) on the line to be followed,
including policy towards underdeveloped countries which represented one of
the primary objectives of the Soviet ecoJ)omic offensive. American policy in
South-East Asia could be above all explained by the desire to retain freedom
of action in this field. It was also necessary that the ·western countries in their
commercial relations·with the Communist bloc should try to establish "rules
offair play" (e.g., in respect of arbitration rules and the exploitation ofpatents
which the USSR had not hitherto recognized). Such an agreement meant
that all the Western countries had to be ready to make concessions in respect
of certain of their immediate interests as had already been recognized as essen-
tial for the establishment of the strategic lists.
Another American participant argued along similar lines and emphasized
that political and economic considerations could not be separated from each
other, as witness the example of American aid granted after the war to a Wes-
tern Europe confronted with the. Communist threat. (this example had also
been cited by the previous speaker). The important decisions to be taken re-
garding East-West trade should.aim primarily at preserving the unity of the
Western Alliance, even at the cost of the sacrifices which might be involved
in restrictions imposed on trade in certain goods (oil products, power products,
machine goods of a highly advanced technical nature). For this purpose, the
allies should have a round-table meeting, bearing in mind the importance of
political considerations.
A third American speaker, echoing the German speaker and others already
quoted, said that while American industrialists themselves were more and more
favourably inclined towards an increase in sales to the Soviet Union-an evolu-
tion which he himself considered extremely desirable-yet co-ordination of
allied policies was no less essential. The speaker recognized that all foreign
trade tended to strengthen the economic position of the bloc, but if this would
inevitably lead to a confro;1tation, this would only hasten such an event.
The need for such co-ordination, and the difficulties involved, were partic-
ularly stressed by a German participant who referred to the thorny 'problem
of commercial credits to Western countries in order to bring out the fact that
the policy of the Federal Republic, which was more restrictive in this respect
than that of some of its partners in the Common Market, had been reflected
27
I
l
I
in a significant decline of its exports towards those countries over the last
three years. The inadequacy of the goods which Eastern countries could offer
as a counterpart to their imports made it essential for them to obtain credits
for the purchase of the goods needed to implement their plans. It was all the
more regrettable that long-term credits should be granted to the Eastern coun-
tries and that the reaction of the Western countries should be dispersed, to
the detriment of those displaying the greatest rigidity. So far, discussions on
this subject, e.g., within the NATO Economic Advisers Committee and within
the Council itself, had not succeeded but, said the speaker in conclusion, we
should not abandon hope of reaching an agreement on this point eventually.
Most of the speakers who discussed the problem of long-term commercial
credits to Communist countries considered that such credits amounted to a
form of economic assistance and should therefore be ruled out but a different
point of view was expressed by a British participant. It was fallacious, he said,
to draw a distinction between long-term and short-term credits and to lay it
down that the former constituted economic assistance while the latter did not.
Even if, as was apparently the case, the United Kingdom had not granted
credits exceeding five' years to any country of the Eastern bloc, yet requests
in that country for guarantees covering credits granted to British exporters by
the banks were examined on a selective basis in terms of their commercial
interest. It would se~m reasonable to allow for a long period of repayment for
exports of goods where there could be no rapid amortization. The aim was to
encourage exports by making them more competitive and the United States
itself had authorized the Eximbank to grant credits exceeding five years. This
could not be regarded as assistance since the credits granted were subject to
interest at the normal rate. After all, the Soviet government, even if long-term
credits were refused, was capable of implementing those plans which it con-
sidered important (the production offertilizers, for example) by allocating mar-
ginal resources thereto, without thereby interfering with its armament program.
Finally, said the speaker, while it might be true that the East's economy bene-
fited from sales made by the West, this was equally applicable to American
exports of wheat to the Soviet Union!
The same participant was equally forthright in questioning the validity of
the United States' policy of economic warfare against Cuba. Earlier in the
meeting, a Norwegian speaker had discussed the problem ofeconomic sanctions
(which his own country had, as a loyal ally, accepted in spite of the importance
to Norway of international trade and shipping) and had asked whether such
sanctions did not involve certain serious consequences in exchange for a fairly
relative effectiveness. If, he had said, the application of embargos on certain
countries (cf. the United Nations resolution on South Africa regarding "apart-
28
heid" and the Lagos Conference's decisions against Portugal) were to be extend-
ed, the machinery ofinternationdl trade might, almost by accident, be thrown
out of gear and the free world would be the first to suffer.
Discussing the Cuban problem (and likewise referring to the example of
South Africa), the British speaker already quoted expressed the view that no
economic boycott could ever induce a regime to alter its policy and, on the
contrary, was likely to make it still more stubborn and to line the population
up behind the regime concerned. Even in respect of the unaligned countries,
the refusal to supply goods which were not included in the "Cocom" list did
not have favourable results. It was for this reason that the British government
had not considered it necessary to oppose the sale of buses to Cuba. '
Some observations on the possibilities and limitations ofcooperation between
NATO member countries regarding East-West trade were put forward by a
Turkish participant who strongly emphasized the need for the West to display
a realistic attitude, having regard particularly to the existence of individual
interests which were sometimes divergent, and hence the impossibility of achiev-
ing complete harmony between member countries' actions. After all, he
said, the fact that there were divergencies within the Communist world itself
enabled us to diversify cur economic and financial policies to some extent. On
this basis, a certain minimum discipline and cooperation should be possible,
more especially by adopting the two following criteria:
- the export of strategic goods should be strictly supervised and variations of
opinion in the matter repuced to a minimum,
- we should insure that our economic, and especially our financial, relations
with the USSR should not develop into a form of assistance enabling that coun-
try to continue its armament programme without having to suffer the con-
sequences.
It likewise seemed undeniable-although the point was sometimes debated-
that the political implications of relations which might be established with a
Communist country should never be overlooked.
Reverting to certain earlier contributions to the discussion and more es-
pecially the remarks of the British speaker, an American participant observed
that the improvement of trade relations between the West and the Soviet
camp was due to the latter, not for sentimental reasons since Communist
aims remained unchanged but quite simply because the USSR urgently needed
such improvement. The whole world, said this speaker, was coming to realize
that there was one camp which "worked"-i.e., ours-and another which
"did not work". This explained such contrasts as that existing between the
economic prosperity of Malaysia and the fiasco of Mr. Sukarno's regime in
nearby Indonesia. This consideration dictated its behaviour to the West:
29
r
'J'
'!
T J
i
everything should be done to expand the camp which "worked'', thereby
strengthening the demonstration of the effectiveness of its principles in the
eyes of the world. In this connexion, said the speaker, "credit" was a key word
and he pointed out that the Eximbank, previously cited by way of example,
had never granted long-term loans to a Communist country. '
During the discussion of American wheat sales to the USSR, a Norwegian
participant, already quoted, contended that it was not so much the operation
itself which had given rise to objections in Europe, but some of the conditions
in which it had been conducted, more especially lmder pressure from the
American trade unions. Specifically, some of the American demands regard-
ing the transport of this wheat under the United States flag were discrimina-
tory in relation to other maritime countries and, by contrast, showed the USSR
in the light of a reasonable partner trying to obtain goods at their normal price
and all of this was regrettable. Nor should it be forgotten that any restrictive
policy in regard to shipping tended to favour the building up of the Russian
merchant marine.
In bringing the discussion of this part of the agenda to a close, H.R.H. the
Prince of the Netherlands observed that it had brought out the need to assem-
ble around the same table, and in a way yet to be decided on, all those Western
leaders responsible for foreign trade with aview to reaching agreement, par-
ticularly on the use of credits, the trade structure and such other details as the
lists of prohibited goods. This was ·required in order to avoid at all costs ariy
friction between allies. The opposite camp could ask nothing better than an
opportunity to exploit such friction;
30
t
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE WESTERN WORLD
Political
1 - How the Atlantic nations should organize themselves
2 - Attitudes towards relations with the Communist countries, including
China
Military
1 - NATO strategy
2 - Sharing of responsibility for nuclear deterrent
These items of the agenda were dealt with together and the discussion wa~
introduced by three statements made respectively by the American author of
the introductory note concerning the first paragraph of the agenda who
expanded a certain number of general considerations, by an international
participant who described certain problems confronting NATO together with
the possible solutions and, finally, by a French participant who explained his
government's position in respect of the various questions under consideration.
*
* *
The American speaker pointed out that the Russians established their
policy not on the basis of emotional considerations but on their evaluation of
what they call "objective reality" and that our action should therefore be
concentrated on that reality. Our efforts should be applied to the things that
lay within our power, in other words we should insure that our alliance
developed and that it became stronger rather than try to persuade the
Russians.
How should the alliance organize itself? Should we follow the French
government's line or aim at genuine unity? The speaker opted for the latter
solution on the grounds that it represented our only hope ofsecurity in a world
which was no longer the world of the nineteenth century but which was
divided into hostile societies. The attitude of the countries of Latin America,
31
I
I
:I
l
I
l
j
I
I
II'
Asia, Africa and elsewhere would depend on the alliance's unity and strength
and it was above all essential to avoid turning the Atlantic Ocean into a
demarcation line within the Alliance.
At the same time, this was not the moment for new "big ideas", if only
because of the attitude of the French government. On the other hand, there
was a real possibility of achieving "small things" which would enable us to
move forward.
The important thing, said the speaker, was to examine two factors: on the
one hand, there was the fundamental problem ofCentral Europe which was still
unsolved and which was of vital importance to one of our allies, i.e., Germany
(which meant that its partners could not take the matter lightly), on the
other hand, the Alliance had a duty to concentrate unremittingly on the state
ofits forces. What forces were needed? What type offorces? Where should they
be situated and how should they be organized? This did not mean that there
was any question of going to war in order to eliminate Russian influence in
Central Europe; it did mean that it was essential to consider the balance of
power needed to cope with three types of situation which the speaker felt
might arise:
- general nuclear war, the most frequently discussed and least probable
contingency but precisely the one which could only be avoided by the
existence of a deterre-nt;
- the variable attitude of the Russians towards the civil populations of
Central Europe: this attitude would be all the more cautious if the Russians
were aware that they were confronted with "conventional" forces which
would prevent them from having recourse to their own conventional forces to
thwart an evolution among those populations thereby making it all the more
difficult to maintain Communist regimes in power;
- violent local conflicts (rebellions, revolts). Here again, conventional forces
were very important in encouraging an evolution towards peaceful solutions
since the use of tactical atomic weapons from the outset of hostilities involved
considerable clangers.
On the assumption, therefore, that the West had nothing but its nuclear
power with which to oppose the Russians, it might be felt that the latter would
be tempted to go very far in repressing any move away from Communism
which might occur in Central Europe. In this connexion, the West had shown
itself as unduly blinded by nuclear weapons with the result that other aspects
of the problem had been obscured.
What action, therefore, could be taken? The speaker singled out three
possibilities:
- joint determination of our Alliance's basic objectives;
32
- determination of the nature and relatiomhip of forces and the strategies
required for each objective;
- joint action on everything which, on the nuclear level, might prove of
immediate value without undue concern for the ultimate form which such
activity might take, European force or otherwise. In this connexion, the multi-
lateral force project ("MLF") represented a possible advance. French par-
ticipation in this task was highly desirable but, even if not forthcoming, it was
essential to keep moving forward.
In regard to Germany, the speaker recommended that a moderate policy
be followed which would leave the way open for discussion between all those
concerned and hence Germany first and foremost.
* * *
The international speaker who made the second statement aimed at
being fundamentally practical and pragmatic, an attitude which, he argued,
was made all the more necessary by the uneasiness which might legitimately
be felt concerning the future of our Alliance.
It seemed difficult to contemplate any institutional changes to the Alliance in
the years ahead, whether aim.ed at greater integration or, conversely, at a
recrudescence of nationalism. The important thing was to preserve the "trans-
atlantic" nature of the Organization since any "continentalism" on either
side of the Atlantic would have a very serious effect on the future.
The existing framework, however, was sufficiently flexible to enable some
evolution to take place. The speaker recalled in this connexion that it was
within those limits that the report of the "Three Wise Men" in 1956-1957
was made and that if that report had been followed a great many of our
present difficulties could have been avoided.
What was that framework?
It should not be forgotten that NATO was an organization of sovereign
states having equal rights. Its Secretariat was international (in other words,
it received no instructions from any government at all). It had the right to
take initiatives and to offer suggestions in preparation for the work of the
Council which made all the decisions subsequently carried out by the Secre-
tariat. Similarly, in the military field, the main Atlantic commands were
international although this situation was somewhat complicated on account
of the strategic part played by the Standing Group in Washington which
received its instructions from the various governments and was accordingly
multinational in nature (United States, United Kingdom, France).
What improvements could be introduced in this framework?
33
One of them related to the rule of unanimity which might be interpreted
as follows: "No country may be forced to do anything which it does not want
to do, even if all the others are in favour; no country may force the others to do
what it wants". But there was a third aspect to this rule which might be ex-
pressed as follows: "No country may make it impossible for all the others to
do as they wish should one country disagree with a given move". In this
connexion, the speaker cited the precedent o(OECD where the "rule of
abstention" enabled one or two countries to state that they considered what the
others wanted to do as being wrong but that they themselves would not wish
to hinder them. A similar rule might be applied in the case ofNATO.
Other improvements concerned what might be done to reconcile the re-
quirements of the Atlantic commands with the resources available, having
regard to strategic objectives and the gross national product and fiscal re-
venue of each country. Studies had been undertaken along these lines within
the NATO Secretariat and revealed the necessity for a more satisfactory
distribution of contributions including assistance from the wealthier countrie~
to the less wealthy. Other supplementary studies covering the cost of each
country's effort (army, fleets, airports, etc.) reduced to comparable units
revealed consideraple disparities between the European effort and the
American contribution. It was essential to achieve "better expenditure".
While, therefore, it seemed desirable to establish a more equitable distri-
bution of costs, it also seemed that a corresponding distribution of responsi-
bilities should follow. Many members of the Alliance felt that two countries
"did everything" and that their fate was therefore in the hands of those coun-
tries. This essential move towards shared responsibilities was necessarily linked
to strategic problems and that was why a cautious and gradual approach was
necessary, including a sort of "nuclear education" for certain countri.es (the
Athens guiding lines and the Ottawa decisions concerning the creation of an
inter-allied nuclear force represented interesting precedents in this connexion).
From this angle, the multilateral force project represented a desirable
advance for both political and military reasons.
Finally, there was another field in which significant progress might be made,
namely that of relations between the civil and military authorities within
NATO. NATO's international personnel in Paris was purely civilian and
had no military advisers. In principle, the necessary opinions should be given
by the Standing Group and hence reach the Secretariat-when they were in
fact given to the Secretariat which was not always the case-through the
intermediary of the national political authorities. Generally speaking, there-
fore, the Secretariat could only give political opinions (and sometimes, there-
fore, no opinions at all!). It should be noted that the Standing Group was
34
informed of everything which took place within the Council but this information
was a one-way traffic. Additionally, some of the information or opinions from
military sources involved political aspects which had been neglected. It was
therefore necessary to set up an appropriate system based on reciprocity.
Several European speakers and an American participant said that they felt
able to support the adaptations of NATO structure suggested by the inter-
national participant.
"
* *
A French participant gave a detailed explanation and defense of his govern-
ment's position on the problems under discussion. He differentiated between
three separate fields:
- Europe
- the Atlantic Alliance
- the rest of the world.
Europe
The building of Europe had begun on the basis of six countries, not seven,
and the speaker emphasized, even before 1964. In regard to the establishment
of the Common Market, France had consistently taken an active part both
before and after the return to power of General de Gaulle. But the French
government did not wish this "Europe of Six" to be either protectionist or
self-sufficient, as was evidenced by the Community's expanded trade with
the United States and Great Britain.
The creation of a "political Europe", however, involved greater difficul-
ties since we were emerging from a scholastic dispute in which the speaker
felt that two concepts had come into conflict. He regretted that an oppor-
tunity had been lost on 17 April 1962 when the "Fouchet Plan" had been
rejected, two of the partners among the Six having raised the "British pre-
condition". Great Britain, however, did not seem ready to join a political
organization of Europe and it was then that France and Germany had reached
their agreement which should not be interpreted as a "Paris-Bonn axis" at
the expense of the other partners nor as an effort to make Bonn "choose
between Paris and Washington".
The dispute over supra-nationality seemed all the more artificial, said the
speaker, in view of the fact that everybody recognized that stages were neces-
sary. "A federation is a confederation which has succeeded".
For the present, more particularly because the "British pre-condition"
was still being raised, we had to recognize that political Europe had come to
a standstill without France being in any way responsible. After all, we were
35
on the eve of elections in the main countries concerned and this explained
that decisive orientations could not be made.
Atlantic Alliance
France was unshakably faithful to the Atlantic organization, said the
speaker who quoted observations by General de Gaulle on this subject. What
was desired, having regard to developments since the epoch when the Pact
was concluded-an epoch when America was the only country with the ulti-
mate weapon and the means to deliver it-was an adaptation of the Alliance
in the light of those developments, a "rebalance" of the Alliance whereby
Europe would have a greater share in the responsibilities and decisions.
France had only decided to set up its own deterrent force after having tried
in vain to have its position within the Alliance revised. A memorandum in
this connection was addressed to the allies but had not received a satisfactory
reply. After 1958 it was decided to speed up a process which had already been
decided on. This was in no way directed against the United States. France
was convinced that in 99.9 cases out of a hundred, she could count on America
defending her, but no state worthy of the name could permanently rely on
another for its defense. The French force was not meant to compete with that
of the United States but was an addition to it, said the speaker, who used the
example of an "emergency parachute". Although the MacMahon Law had
prevented the French government from having access to United States secrets,
France was ready to place her force if needed at the disposal of her partners
and was ready as of now to join them in making certain studies (e.g., tar-
getting). The French force obviously made no claim to be on the same scale
as those of the United States and the USSR but "overkill" was not a par-
ticularly valid strategic concept. It was preferable to have a few bombs which
could be used in case of necessity without waiting for the support-which
might come too late-of allies who did not see the gravity of certain strategic
situations in the same way.
This force, moreover, might become European when Europe acquired a
political authority and a single European chief of staff. That might one clay be
possible but it was not the case today.
The danger of "proliferation" was often raised against the French force. In
fact, this clanger scarcely existed since the possession of a nuclear deterrent
force was dependent on a variety of conditions (financial and technical po-
tential, industrial substratum, raw materials and testing grounds) which not
many countries could meet.
In these circumstances, why was France being criticized? asked the speaker
who observed that his country was only following the path blazed by the
36
United Kingdom whose decisions had given rise to no such discussion. Even
the Socialists, he went on, did not plan to abandon the British nuclear force if
they returned to power so much as to combine it with the American force.
The French force was likewise criticized for relying on an "anti-town"
strategy which was regarded as blameworthy. But a purely "anti-force"
strategy could not hope to achieve complete destruction of the enemy's nu-
clear potential (if only because of the existence of submarines) and an "anti-
town" strategy therefore became inevitable.
Finally, on a purely technical level, it was impossible to overlook the fact
that the installation of a nuclear potential on European soil represented a
source of benefit.
Policy towards tlze rest oftlze world
French policy, said the speaker, needed to be understood. It was untrue, as
some people asserted, that that policy was aimed at undermining United
States influence. If differences sometimes arose, no systematic plan should be.
suspected. It was simply because the views of the French government 'on
certain situations were not the same as those of the American government and
also perhaps because the interests of the two parties sometimes diverged as
the American government had itself demonstrated in connexion with In-
donesia, Algeria and the Congo. After all, it was as well in certain cases that
alternative solutions should be found when the United States solution was not
considered perfect. Nobody could believe in the infallability of a single leader.
The speaker went on to outline·the reasons which had recently led France
to recognize the government of Peking (this part of his statement is summa-
rized later, see page 46). '
In regard to Latin America, the interest which France displayed in that
part of the world was due to the close relations which had always existed
between Latin America and Europe and to a certain common heritage, the
roots of which lay more especially in both the Catholic religion and the
traditions of the French Revolution. French relations with Latin America were
thus easier than those of the United States. Moreover, in the face of develop-
ments which were in many ways disturbing, it was a service to the free world
and to the United States itself to ensure that a European influence more and
more replaced American influence, said the speaker, who recalled a remark
made to him personally by the late President Kennedy, namely that, in the
interest of the free world, Europe should concern itself to a greater extent with
Latin America. We have no wish to ward off influences, said the speaker, on
the contrary we want to encourage them and there is no question of wishing
to enter a "game preserve". Moreover, there are no longer any such preserves
37
in the world today and it is better to have partners rather than adversaries
move in.
The speaker also considered that the United States position as regards
Cuba might well fail to be borne out by the facts. Castro would be more and
more in the hands of those who supplied Cuba and increasingly came to look
like a victim in the eyes of Latin American opinion.
In concluding his statement, the speaker said he was convinced that current
divergencies would not endanger the Atlantic Alliance or Franco-American
friendship. It was simply that the "bi-polarity" of the world (United States-
USSR) was gradually giving way to multi-polarity and it was desirable that
the Alliance and its main leader should take this into account. It was none-
theless a fact that the allies were all, for better or worse, in the same boat
and, however sharp, their discussions could fairly be compared to those which
occasionally arose between members of the same family.
*
* *
Several points from these observations were taken \IP in the discussion
which followed. Although a number of speakers dealt with the various sectors
together, three main centres of interest could be singled out in the various
comments forthcoming: ·
- improved operation of NATO and its defense arrangements, with par-
ticular reference to the problems of shared responsibilities, the advantages
and disadvantages of the multilateral force project ("MLF") bt;ing examined
in this connexion; ·
- the problems of European political unity;
- the general 'evolution of the world, the attitude of the West towards Com-
munist countries (speakers dwelt especially on the Chinese problem) and to-
wards the unaligned nations in the political field.
* * *
Referring to the attitude of the French government towards defense, a Ger-
man participant expressed the view that it created a conflict not only between
Europe and the United States but also between the present French govern-
ment and its allies, not to mention certain sectors of French opinion which
did not share the governmental views. He recognized that some ofthe arguments
now used by the French government had previously been employed by the
British government but the situation had changed since the 1950 decade, at
the beginning of which the United States had enjoyed a nuclear monopoly.
38
Since that period, the USSR had acquired a complete range of weapons and
missiles and the West had to be equipped to face threats of varying degrees.
This was apparent in Berlin but the Cuban crisis had perhaps played the most
important part in this respect by demonstrating the danger of recourse to the
ultimate weapons. Moreover, even if the political construction of Europe had
now been brought to a standstill, the fact remained that that continent had
experienced an unprecedented economic advance. While this implied a new
distribution of tasks and responsibilities, it was nonetheless true that the de-
fense of Europe was a joint undertaking which, for a variety of reasons (space,
technology, finance), necessarily lay within the Atlantic framework and inclu-
ded participation by the United States and the United Kingdom. No member
of the Alliance could by itself possess all the necessary means of defense but,
conversely, all the available means should protect each and every member
and this must guide the joint determination of a strategy which left some other
alternative to capitulation or suicide. For every sort of threat, there had to be
a response which would enable us not to destroy any more of our national soil
than was necessary in order to halt aggression. Our strategy, he contended,
should have three objectives:
- to maintain peace by discouraging aggression;
to provide for our defense if deterrents failed;
- to prepare for our survival after any conflict.
Since the American nuclear monopoly was a thing of the past, partnership
had become essential. Ifthe European allies did not feel that they were sharing
the efforts and responsibilities involved, national trends would be encouraged
and, whether this led to a "proliferation" or to an independent European force,
it was Germany which would be threatened with destruction.
At the same time, the "credibility" of our deterrent necessitated that there
should be only one centre of decision. What was needed, therefore, was joint
strategic planning (including, as far as the study of objectives was concerned,
an agreement between the allies on the deployment and equipment of forces
and on the logistic infrastructure) and likewise solutions based more completely
on a "community" system for the development and production of modern
weapons which would ensure a proper division of labour between the partners
and which would exclude national monopolies. Any other solution would be
incompatable with a genuine partnership. But this meant that there should be
a steadily increased integration in the future, likewise including our American
friends, said the speaker, who added that, in return, Europe could share the
American burden and responsibilities in the rest of the world.
Who should take the decisions needed in the event of war? It should not be
forgotten that, because of the defensive nature of our Alliance, these would
39
"'
be retaliations and the speaker singled out several basic hypotheses. A nuclear
attack involved a nuclear retaliation. In local frontier conflicts, the forces on
the spot would be able to react immediately without a nuclear response being
involved. In the other cases, the possible circumstances could and should be
jointly examined. If an instantaneous nuclear retaliation were essential, the
decision should be made by the authority best situated to do so, i.e., the Pre-
sident of the United States of America acting, however, as the trustee of the
Alliance in applying rules previously agreed on jointly.
The speaker considered that the multilateral force project (MLF) represen-
ted a "second choice". If the MLF were decided on, however, it would be
essential to avoid applying too many resources to this at the expense of con-
ventional forces since we would thereby weaken our defemive position for the
reasons already mentioned. The MLF project would enable the United States
potential to be steadily integrated in such a force and this was necessary to
prevent European isolation, said the speaker, who added that the idea of an
independent European force was backed precisely by those who rejected in-
tegration and the political institutions which it implied. For the moment, it
was better to have a lesser influence over the whole.ofAmerican potential than
to exercise a firm control over an insignificant fraction of that potential.
After all in regard to the example given by England and France, the other
European allies would not in the long run accept relations which those coun-
tries rejected as far as they themselves were concerned vis-a-vis the United
States. Germany did not wish to possess its own atomic weapons, said the
speaker, simultaneously observing that the younger generation in Germany
which had not had any experience of Hitler would never understand why their
country should be kept in an inferior position to its European neighbours.
The need for some political integration within the Alliance was taken up by
other speakers whose opinions varied as to the merits of the multilateral force
but who opposed the idea ofany cleavage leading to "continentalism" on either
side of the Atlantic Ocean. Among those who argued along these lines were
a Canadian participant, a Netherlands and an Italian participant and a Nor-
wegian speaker who pointed out that the existence of nuclear weapons was
one of the main factors which demonstrated that some aspects of national so-
vereignty were out of date. The same participant, and an American speaker,
expressed interest in the possibility of abandoning or, at any rate, modifying
the rule of unanimity in NATO and appealed to the French government to
increase its participation which was essential to the work of that organization.
In this connexion, the American speaker referred to the difficulty experien-
ced by his government in replying to the French government's 1958 memoran-
dum mentioned earlier. After pointing out that, contrary to what is sometimes
40
alleged, a long and carefully considered reply to that document was provided
by President Eisenhower, the speaker observed that the government of the
United States did not feel it had the right to assume that any single govern-
ment in Western Europe, no matter which, had been chosen as spokesman for
all the others.
The Canadian speaker quoted above particularly stressed the disadvantages
arising for the Western camp from its lack of unity and emphasized that, as
things stood, all efforts should be aimed at integrating the means available
to each country since it would be illusory to imagine that our salvation could
lie in national strength alone, just..as the concept of national sovereignty could
not provide the basis of our Alliance. This naturally implied that the Alliance
should be considered as the property of all its members and not merely of the
most powerful, and it was for this reason that steps taken in this direction were
valuable and necessary.
The real disagreement, said a British speaker, lay in Europe and, in this
connexion, he criticized General de Gaulle's policy which made European
unity illusory and hence encouraged Communism. Before aiming at a highly
desirable synthesis between French and British policies, we must recognize
the differences ofprinciple which divided them and which, unhappily, seemed
to be irreconciliable if the speaker was right in thinking that the General wan-
ted a "Europe of Six" headed by France relying on its national strike force
and supporting the Alliance with America for its security but rejecting any
principle of transatlantic interdependence.
Various views were put forward during the discussion in regard to the MLF.
None of the speakers regarded it as perfect but several of them emphasized
that its employment would make it possible to avoid major disadvantages
for the Alliance and even that it offered genuine advantages. Other speakers,
however, raised serious objections to the project.
A British participant, for instance, considered that it would be a waste to
switch considerable funds away from convenitonal forces, exacerbating at the
same time psychological reactions among the public towards nuclear arma-
ments. The speaker did not believe that the MLF could constitute the be-
ginning of European control over the United States nuclear force. He recog-
nized that a British decision to give up independent control over its nuclear
weapons and to integrate them in the Alliance's potential would facilitate
solution of this problem by changing the psychological context. Similarly,
the Norwegian participant quoted above expressed the fear that the pro-
ject would rapidly lead to a deadlock. An Italian speaker referred to the
existence of large Communist parties in certain European countries and
feared that the MLF might seem to encourage further nuclear dissemina-
41
tion and hence might look like a step taking us still further away from
disarmament. Would the MLF extend the control exercised by the Euro-
pean countries? The speaker further remarked that new governments had
recently been formed in the German Federal Republic and Italy, that elections
in the United Kingdom would shortly take place and that the new government
would certainly not be the one which had originally accepted the MLF pro-
ject. It was essential to recognize the significance of this chance in Western
Europe's governing class, said the speaker, and he advised a certain caution
in view of this new element. The struggle was not taking place on a purely
military level, he pointed out, and in countries like Italy where a certain politi-
cal instability at present prevailed it was ·extremely important to combat
Communist influence on public opinion. After all, the idea of the MLF was
due to a sort of "question bf confidence" in regard to the United States and
a fear that that country might not act as a genuine trustee.
Was it really necessary to present the problem in this way and would it
not be better, in agreement with the Americans and on the assumption that
the atomic monopoly was a reality, to examine the possibility of a more satis-
factory division of responsibilities without creating "intermediate realities"?
Another Italian participant quoted earlier observed that the MLF, in the
view of three political parties in his country, offered the only alternative to
the nuclear force. Speaking along similar lines, an American participant
expressed the opinion that the political disadvantages of the MLF would out-
weigh its technical advantages by reviving anti•American and anti-nuclear
feelings in the West. The speaker added that agreement must first be reached
on control and thereafter on nuclear weapons themselves since it was a politi-
cal and not a technical question which was involved. A British participant
hailed the MLF as representing an honourable effort-all the more so since
no other proposal had been forthcoming-but one which might raise insoluble
problems regarding its' control. The speaker asked whether the project really
met the wishes of the allies and, more especially, the Germans. He said he
understood the French use of the same arguments previously employed by
the English to justify their strike force but wondered whether the French might
not have the same experience as the English, many of whom were now asking
whether the national nuclear force was within the country's financial and tech-
nical possibilities. It might be better to seek improved co-ordination or even
a genuinely integrated control of all the means at present deployed in Western
Europe with particular attention being paid to the naval sector. Experience
had already shown, said this speaker, that consultation between allies was
most effective when concerned with specific questions and as far removed from
theory as possible. Moreover, he added, it might be reasonable to fear that
42
"
the MLF would be considered as a new factor in nuclear dissemination and
an addition to national forces which did not thereby do away with those forces.
The project was hybrid in nature, according to a Netherlands participant
who said that his government preferred it to a proliferation of national forces
but was afraid that it might look like a cover for a bi- or trilateral force or like
a veil discreetly covering German atomic rearmament and that it might
open the way to a new and dangerous political crisis. In view of the distrust
which the creation of the MLF might arouse on the part of tlle Soviets, would
it not be possible for the Americans to find a solution free of the implications
which the speaker apprehended? After all, the MLF was of doubtful military
value and might well involve the participants in heavy additional expenditure.
It could not replace the integration and partnership which the speaker would
wish to see.
The MLF was certainly not the ideal solution, said an American participant,
but it must be remembered that the United States had not launched the idea in
its own interest but because nothing better had been found to meet its part-
ner's deep desire to exercise increased control over the Alliance. In drawing
up the plan, America had not acted single-handedly but in cooperation with
its partners out of a desire to satisfy political and psychological needs. The
difficulty derived from different estimates not only from count1y to country
but also within indivudial countries as to the means required for the purpose.
It was because the project represented a new stage in nuclear control by
all the allies that the government of the Federal Republic had received it
favourably, said a German participant who thereby voiced his agreement
with the other German speaker already quoted. Along similar lines, a British
participant took the view that the MLF could constitute a starting point based
on genuine possibilities so long as it did not go beyond the framework of the
Atlantic Organization.
Another British participant, already quoted in connexion with the MLF,
put forward certain views based both on strategic considerations and on the
present political situation. It was true, he said, that the prospect of a nuclear
war was the least likely eventuality at the present time and no European
country, including the United Kingdom, could afford to face the USSR
single-handed in this field. But there was a sort of conflict between the fear of
seeing deterrent strength concentrated in the hands of a single power on the
other side of the Atlantic and the need for that power's European allies to
feel secure no matter what happened. This psychological problem was still
further complicated by the fact that many people considered a missile equip-
ped with a nuclear warhead ofseveral megatons as a &art of"symbol ofvirility"
in the nuclear age.
43
I'
The speaker shared the opinion of a German participant that the Germans
were unlikely to forego possession of nuclear weapons for ever if the United
Kingdom and France continued to claim the right to have such weapons. But,
added the speaker, while it was essential for the Alliance to have a highly mo-
bile conventional force in order to deal with any conflict which might occur
"accidentally", it might be wondered whether it was desirable to increase our
forces in Western Europe and thereby perhaps impel the Soviets to strengthen
their pressure on the countrie5 of Central Europe. On the other hand, should
it prove possible to reach agreement with the Soviets on "freezing'' the existing
balance of both nuclear and conventional power in Europe-naturally accom-
panied by adequate control-not only would our own security not suffer
but more favourable conditions might thereby be created for a better devel-
opment of the situation in Central Europe and a settlement of the German
problem.
Reflecting the preoccupations expressed in his country, one of the German
participants already quoted emphasized the extent to which Germany, deeply
and permanently conscious of its division, was attached to NATO and the
protection offered by the United States. It was for this reason that Germany
was so keenly aware of the fact that there did not seem to be any unque5tioned
strategy in respect of Central Europe. At what point did the "threshold" lie
which would unleash the use of the various weapons? How was it calculated
in respect of tactical atomic weapons? What would happen to the anti-force
strategy if the Soviets succeeded in making their reprisal forces invulnerable?
It was not felt in the Federal Republic that there were any differences between
American strategy. and European needs which could not be reduced. But it was
becoming urgently necessary to clarify these as soon as possible so as to avoid
a growing wave of suspicion, however unjustified.
It was for this reason that all decisions (not only the MLF project but also
the approaches laid down in Ottawa and Athens) intended to give non-nuclear
nations a share in the preparation and control of nuclear strategy had been
welcomed in Germany. It was also for this reason that Germany did not look
favourably on national nuclear forces since, apart from the fact that they
were neither effective nor invulnerable nor credible, it was feared that they
would encourage the United States to reduce its efforts in Europe. Additional-
ly, if certain European powers were to enjoy a preferential status, the very
notion of European union would be endangered.
However important the strategic problem might be, said this speaker in
conclusion, it must ultimately reflect a joint policy ofthe NATO countries. That
was why the lack or mutual consultation over recent years within that orga-
nization was extremely serious, as shown by the "Three Wise Men" in 1956.
44
Equally serious was the fact that there was less and less question of partner-
ship between Europe and the United States.
Echoing this participant, an American speaker emphasized the extent to
which the growing inadequacy of the Alliance's operation exercised a harm-
ful effect on both American public opinion and its representatives in Congress,
more especially when it was a question, on a budgetary level and on the
level of general policy, of voting measures to enable the United States to play
its world-wide part (e.g., in respect of aid). In regard to the role of trustee in
deciding on the use of the nuclear force, which several previous speakers had
wished to see entrusted to America, it would be desirable for the allies to sub-
mit more detailed proposals to the United States on this question, specifically
in connexion with the means of mutual consultation involved.
The speaker concluded by expressing his deep regret that certain people,
more especially in France, seemed to question America's fidelity to the Alliance
and her determination to defend Europe. He emphasized that nothing since
the Alliance had been in existence justified the slightest confusion on this point.
*
* *
In the course of the discussion, several speakers discussed European inte.
gration, emphasizing present difficulties and the importance of this problem
for the survival and impetus of the Alliance, having regard ·more especially
to the requirements of a genuine partnership.
One of the German participants already quoted stressed that the Franco-
German Treaty should be considered as a fortunate development on condi-
tion that it was not envisaged as excluding the two countries' allies. The Ger-
mans regarded a European community without France as inconceivable .inst
as European defense without the United States would be. The speaker went
on to make an urgent appeal to prevent proposals for political unity from sig-
nifying a weakening of existing community institutions. A political community
should not be a sort of "higher court" to which governments could appeal
against the decisions of those institutions, he said, and·he emphasized the ex-
tent to which the community spirit which inspired the six countrie5 was·em-
bodied in the EEC Commission.
A Netherlands participant, quoted above, considered that the failure of the
Fouchet Plan in April 1962 was due not so much to the "English pre-condition"
as to the determination of the French government not to accept a concept of
political union which, while based on national sovereignty, retained the pos-
sibility of future integration. The English, moreover, had expressed their
willingness to accept all the political responsibilities implied by their entry
45
into the European community. He went on to say that the "Six" did not alone
represent Europe and it was for this reason that the Netherlands would be
ready to contemplate a broad organization based on the principles of the
Fouchet Plan on condition that it was open to all, but would not consider such
an organization restricted to the six countries unless it involved the possibility
of a greater degree of integration.
An Italian participant and a Belgian speaker spoke along similar lines, the
former pointing out that Italy had been ready from the beginning to enter a
European political union having a supranational basis. But the problem arose
of this basis proving unacceptable' to the United Kingdom whose participation
in European construction was considered necessary. In these circumstances,
Italy had been greatly surprised to see steps taken in such a direction and even
the Franco-German agreement signed without the question of English partici-
pation in European construction having been settled first. The speaker observed
that, if the Fouchet Plan had been accepted, the disagreement between the
French position and that of its allies would have been all the more marked
during the exchanges of views which application of the plan would have in-
volved, a state of affairs which would have been extremely harmful. The
Belgian speaker explained his country's position and emphasized that only a
new institutional balance going beyond mere intergovernmental cooperation
(which had been successfully initiated as early as 1947 with the Marshall Plan
and OEEC) and in which the higher interest of European construction would
prevail over national interests could provide the smaller countries with the
guarantees they needed. An inorganic political structure would not insure a
balance between the Six and would continu~ to be a burden on community
institutional o~erations as established in Rome.
*
* *
Several of those participants who advocated greater political integration
within NATO simultaneously urged that the organization's competence be
extended to world problems in relation to the cold war. Most of the speakers
hoped that, in any case, the West would adopt a more unified attitude towards
those problems. Certain speakers, however, emphasized that some diversity
of opinion was not necessarily harmful, more especially in that it facilitated
the adoption of "alternative solutions" in the event of a setback. Among the
problems affected by these considerations, particular reference was made to
China and Southeast Asia and the relations established by the French govern-
ment with Latin American countries were likewise mentioned.
During discussion of the first item on the agenda, a Danish speaker had ex-
pressed the view that China's isolation might provoke dangerous difficulties
46
in the future, both because of the growing importance of that country on the
international scene and because of the need to induce it eventually to respect
the rules deriving from its admission to the family of nations. Conversely, an
American participant, in outlining his country's policy, warned the meeting
of the grave dangers which might arise from recognition of Communist China
and its admission to the United Nations, developments which would weaken
the free world's resistance and which many undecided nations would regard
as a reward for China's aggressive and subversive policy in many regions of the
world, particularly India, Korea and Vietnam. The only thing which might
induce Communist China to change its attitude, said the speaker, would be
to recognize its sovereignty over Formosa as well and this was not acceptable
to the free countries.
A French participant, already quoted, explained his government's recog-
nition of Communist China as follows: China, he said, was henceforward
following a policy of independence in regard to the Soviet bloc and certain
problems could not be solved without taking its position into account. Speci-
fically, China was a factor in any political solutions for salvaging what could
be still salvaged in Southeast Asia. Moreover, a country's development could
not be changed by ignoring that country's existence.
After recalling the ties, historical and otherwise, between his country and
France, an American participant said that it was precisely in order to save
Southeast Asia as a whole from the Communist grasp that the United States
had decided on an uncompromising line of defence in South Vietnam which
was considered as the symbol of the preservation of liberty and democracy in
that part of the world. IfSouth Vietnam was lost, it would not be only Burma,
Thailand and North India which would be threatened but also Australia and
New Zealand. Nor should we forget, said the speaker, the vital role played by
the Chinese in many sectors ofSoutheast Asia's economy and hence the impor-
tance of their allegiance to a non-Communist regime.
In line with this statement and that ofa Canadian participant who favoured
uniform reaction by NATO member countries to various situations and who
had asked whether France intended to use its growing influence within the
framework of the Alliance or outside it, an American participant referred to
the serious apprehensions occasioned in his country by the French attitude
towards Peking and Vietnam. He asked whether this attitude was intended
to create an appearance or to bring about an actual change in the situation.
This was a question of a general nature but the latter eventuality would be
extremely serious if applied to a field of action in which the United States had
committed all its strength with no thought of compromise. It would be impor-
tant to have some reassurance on this point from the French.
47
"
At the end of the discussion, a French participant, while recognizing the
extent of the obstacles to be overcome, defended the idea of a final neutraliza-
tion of Vietnam. The situation in that country, he said, had steadily deteriora-
ted for eight years past and the Americans had been no more successful than
the French in imbuing the population with a national determination to de-
fend it8elf. There were only three possibilities for the West:
- to withdraw purely and simply. The speaker rejected this possibility out
of hand as disastrous and implying the danger of Communist expansion
throughout Southeast Asia;
as in Korea, to send two or three hundred thousand men to fight in Viet-
nam, which would be much more difficult;
- to try and achieve some measure of neutralization, to create a sort of
"free zone" in which neither China nor the West would introduce their quarrel,
a fully independent state based on an international quarantee and provided
with means for achieving economic prosperity which would make it a centre of
attraction, especially for the North. This could only be done step by step and
would certainly not be easy, but the longer we delayed taking that course the
greater the difficulties which would be involved, according to this speaker,
who added that he saw no other possible solutio{i.
Expanding the geographical framework of the discussion, certain speakers
expressed widely divergent views on the attitude of the West towards the una-
ligned nations. as a whole. ·
A British participant said it was unfortunate that the Western nations were
not in a position either to give additional aid to their allies on other continents
faced with their own problems (e.g., Pakistan, a member of SEATO, as regards
Kashmir) nor, through mutual support, to cope with changing situations in
which the immediate threat did not consist solely of aggressive Communism
as such but of explosive circumstances which the Communists were only too
happy to exploit for their own benefit and which they did exploit methodically.
The speaker went on to say that, in these circumstances, it was essential for the
European countries to support the United States (e.g., in the Cuban conflict)
and for the latter in turn to support its allies wherever those allies were com-
mitted. What was needed was a system of security on a world-wide scale,
with individual approaches sacrificed where need be.
Comparing the situation to a game of bridge where the players were using
different calling systems, another British participant nonetheless took the
view that certain improvements had taken place, at any rate between his
country and the United States, as could be seen in the Middle East, Africa
and the Far East.
A French participant explained his government's position by situating it in
48
the psychological context. In the face of a threat which was essentially ideolo-
gical, allowance must be made for human beings and their feelings. It was
important for people to feel involved, to see that their own in.terests were taken
into consideration. The people of the unaligned nations had a different psycho-
logy to our own and our patterns could not be applied to them. As far as they
were concerned, it was not political freedom which counted but economic
freedom. Such phrases as "capitalism" and "free enterprise" meant nothing
to them and it was only on the basis of their own intellectual patterns, which
had nothing in common with ours, that they could resist Communism. We
must therefore avoid committing the same blunders as in the case of Chiang
Kai Chek or Bao Dai and now Cuba.
The very divisions of Communism might be ofservice to Communism where
such peoples were concerned, said the speaker, by enabling it to show three
different faces, depending on the countries it was dealing with: Khrushchev
for the industrialized peoples, Tito for the semi-developed peoples and Mao
for the peoples "in rags". It was as well, therefore, that the free world should
show flexibility and should also be able to offer a certain difference of aspect,.
said the speaker, taking as an example France's influence over the more radi-
cal leaders which strengthened the free world's capacity for resisting Commu-
nism.
These views were contested by an American participant who considered
that the world had remained "bipolar" and that many countries-particularly
by acting or threatening to act unilaterally-tried to derive some advantage
from that bipolarity. The speaker regretted that his own country had sometimes
acted independently in relation to the unaligned nations and that this had been
harmful to the Alliance. But it had to be recognized that none of the nuclear
powers could afford a fundamental change in the balance of power. This
fact outweighed all other considerations and explained that the "neutral"
countries were sometimes protected by the United States as efficiently as
its allies (India, Pakistan).
It was essential, said the speaker; to consider together the main problems
(disarmament, underdeveloped countries, etc.) and to decide which ones neces-
sitated a unified diplomatic position and which ones could be appraoched with
a greater degree of flexibility. But in any case, he concluded-echoing a
French participant who had regretted the policy ofthe "fait accompli" followed
by his government-it was necessary that a thorough discussion should first
take place between the allies.
At the end of the discussion, another American speaker regretted a certain
passivity displayed by the free world (more especially .in failing to exploit the
Sino-Soviet breach), a passivity which was aggravated by the appeal of
49
•
"peaceful coexistence" where public opinion in the Western countries was
concerned.
*
* *
In the course of the discussion on Western unity, a Canadian and a British
participant bitterly regretted that no solution to the Cyprus problem had been
found within the framework of the Atlantic organization and that the West
had been obliged to allow third parties to intervene in the conflict and Com-
munist propaganda to stir it up for its own ends. A Turkish participant put
forward a certain number of views on this problem which he described as a
test for the Alliance.
The agreement reached in 1960, he recalled, represented a: compromise
between parties having divergent interests: in exchange for independence
and abandonment by the three contracting parties of their rights over Cyprus,
a constitution was adopted which guaranteed that the rights of the Turks as a
community on the island would be respected. Archbishop Makarios, however,
although he had signed this constitution, had made it inoperable. His activity
was aimed at the extermination of the Turks and relied on four factors:
- the Turks' limited means of defense;
- the support of the USSR;
- the support of the present Greek government;
- the allies' egalitarian approach which induced them to treat both parties
on the same footing and to do no more than preach moderation.
As far as the first factor was concerned, said the speaker, the NATO allies
could do a great deal by guiding the forces engaged in preserving order and
by preventing Makarios from encouraging massacres.
In respect of the second factor, it should be remembered that Archbishop
Makarios could become a second Castro and that the USSR would be only
too happy to gain a footing in the Mediterranean.
Concerning the attitude of the Greek government, the speaker recognized
that it would find it difficult to make any open criticism of Marakios. It could,
however, bring pressure to beai; on him to respect the treaties he has signed. It
was unfortunate that that government threatened to withdraw from NATO
unless Archbishop Makarios' position was upheld.
As far as the allies were concerned, they in turn should bring pressure to bear on
the Greek government in order to induce it to display moderation instead of
treating the innocent and the guilty on the same footing. Only ifArchbishop Ma-
karios were prevented from persisting in his terrorist activity could future solu-
tions be looked for, said the speaker, who concluded by emphasizing the danger
of creating a precedent harmful to the unity and effectiveness of our Alliance.
50
f
,.
THE CONSEQUENCES FOR THE ATLANTIC ALLIANCE
OF RECENT DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE WESTERN WORLD
Economic
1- recent developments in the Common Market notably in relation to
agriculture and their impact
2- U.N. Conference on trade and development, GATT/Kennedy Round.
Prior to the Meeting, participants had received a note mainly dealing with
the agricultural problems which had been prepared by an international par-
ticipant who put forward a certain number of supplementary considerations
during the session. The discussion was likewise introduced by an American
participant who reviewed certain' current aspects of GATT, 'the United Na-
tions Conference and the negotiations known as the "Kennedy Round".
*
* *
In a preamble to his note, the author put forward certain general observa-
tions. He observed that partnership simultaneously implied a determination
to defend our own position and a recognition of obligations towards the out-
side world. In this connexion, it might be considered regrettable that present
demands for equality were mainly concentrated -On nuclear weapons; the non-
military aspects of the partnership deserved closer attention. How could we
achieve an Atlantic concept which offered a satisfactory internal solution while
taking equally our obligations to the non-Atlantic world into account?
The first point to be noted was the lack of harmony between economic policy
in general and agricultural policy in particular. One of the first tasks, therefore,
was to fit agriculture into overall economic policy. Agriculture had by no
means lagged behind the general economy in respect of output since, in the
Western countries, the proportion of farm workers in the total labour force
had dropped from 80% to 10% or 15% while production had increased many
times over. But this state of affairs had given rise to social changes which had
in turn provoked strong resistance among those concerned. At the same time,
considerations of national strategy had encouraged autarkic situations which
isolated the agricultural sector from world competition.
51
~
It was for these reasons that agriculture had been almost automatically
excluded from international agreements. Even in the EEC, those who drew
up the Treaty had left to the Commission the task of putting forward propo-
sals on policy within the first two years of the transitional period. The Com-
mission was therefore confronted with the following alternative:
(a) It could try to harmonize the miscellaneous solutions adopted by the
six countries which would mean adopting a negative attitude toward~ the
rest of the world as national agricultural policies had done (licences, quotas,
compulsory deliveries, state trading, etc.).
(b) It could formulate a common agricultural policy by seizing this oppor-
tunity to try and fit farm policy into the general economic policy, thereby
giving agriculture a place in the world-wide economic order which was already
taken as a matter of course in the case of the industrial economy.
The Commission preferred the second alternative. The key factor in this
policy consisted of applying simple means: the patchwork of state trading
practices had to be replaced by a system of variable levies comparable to the
variable duties in respect of tariffs for industrial goods. The difficulties involved
in this proposal gave rise to conflicting anxieties: within the Community,
there was a fear that agriculture would be exposed without any protection to
every form of fair or unfair competition; outside the Community, there was
fear of a self-sufficiency which would exclude non-Member countries from the
Community's internal market.
One of the real difficulties to be confronted was that the transition from
separate agricultural policies to a concerted agricultural policy must· take
place simultaneously with the formulation of a joint intra-Community agricul-
tural policy. The author of the note refused to accept that there was any con-
tradiction between the two tasks although he did not attempt to conceal the
difficulties. We were negotiating with other countries, he said, as if we were
already a fully-fledged community whereas we were actually involved in a
difficult process of internal harmonization: we had to apply the levy system
among Member States of the Community, gradually reducing these lievies
until l January 1970, so as to facilitate alignment of those Member States on
a point which was the subject of much controversy, namely prices.
On the intra-Community level, prices that were too high might produce
the threat of an autarkic development but, at the same time, a "fair" price
must not be achieved at the expense of the present generation of farmers. The
Kennedy Round would be the occasion for a grand confrontation of these
two obligations in the Atlantic area.
Accordingly, the Community would need to know the price of the major
agricultural products. It would have to be prepared-and was prepared as a
52
result of the Meeting of the Council of Ministers on 23 December 1963-to
bind the support given (the difference between the Community price and the
world market price) with a requirement that the other parties reciprocated.
Any alteration of the support given would then be subject to GATT rules as in
the case of industrial products.
The dangers of this new procedure should not be unclere~timated. Within
the Community, they concerned the fixing of a price to give reasonable and
justifiable protection to ag~·iculture while avoiding the risk of autarky. If the
best elements within the Community were trying to find solutions acceptable
to the Atlantic partner and the rest of the world, it was nonetheless essential,
the authorof the note emphasized, that that partner should be conscious of the
importance of those efforts and of its own responsibilities. If the negotiations
failed, it would be a double failure: our agriculture would not be fitted into
the rest of the economy and an Atlantic policy for agriculture as a contribution
to the solution of the agricultural problems of the "third world" would not
be possible.
*
* *
At the beginning of his statement, the American rapporteur emphasized
that the scope of the Kennedy Round far exceeded a mere bilateral discmsion
between the United States and the Common Market, in view of the trade links
established by the former with the Member Countries of the European Free
Trade Association, Canada, and Japan, to mention only the most important.
Some of the difficulties due to arise could not yet be identified, said the
speaker, in view of the fact that discussions had so far onlf.covered procedure.
On the other hand, it would be a mistake to imagine that the interests of the
United States ran counter to those of the Common Market. A certain un-
certainty might effect negotiations because of the fact that the Power~ of the
EEC Commission were not clearly laid down after l 966.
Among the difficulties already apparent, primary attention was paid to
agriculture. But others had arisen, more especially the problem of disparities
between tariff levels for similar positions, which likewise affected the third
parties who were the main suppliers of the Common Market in respect of
some of those products.
The Trade Expansion Act, which laid down the framework of the American
positions, made important exeptions for certain strategic goods (e.g. oil). If
other countries likewise excepted certain goods, difficulties might result and
special formulas should be found for the settlement of specific cases and this
would take a certain time. It must be hoped that such exceptions would be
reduced to a minimum.
53
-·~-""'-~....-·-'
Non-tariff barriers formed another problem. For both American exporters
and those of other countries, this problem which was sometimes bilateral in
nature and sometimes multilateral, was of great importance in respect of
certain products. A special sub-Committee was working on the question. It
was very possible that the solution of these various problems would ultimately
require a "package deal'', in which, having reg·ard to political considerations
as well, each country would try and achieve a reasonable degree of reci-
procity in maintaining certain protections.
One of the thorniest problems, said the speaker, was the problem of the
underdeveloped countries and he referred to the discussions which had brought
118 nations together in Geneva. The foreign trade of the underdeveloped
countries in the last three years had dropped to between one third and one
fifth of world trade despite a general trade increase.· In the face of the under-
standable discontent of those countries, it would be a serious risk for the West,
because of basically political considerations, to dangle hopes before them
which it could not satisfy.
Some of the underdeveloped countries had even reached the point of re-
questing generalized preferences, citing as precedence, those granted in the
Commonwealth, the Common Market and Philippines. It must be borne in
mind, however, that the more advanced countries would not be able to demand
strict reciprocity on the part of the underdeveloped countries which could fall
back on GATT rules to maintain certain protections.
Reverting to the problem of agriculture, the speaker emphasized that this
h~d a political significance in almost all countries. The United States, more
than a quarter of whose exports to the Common Market consisted of agri-
cultural products, was somewhat concerned over the line developing within
the Common Market since this might well prove protectionist for a number
of reasons. Would the amount of variable levies, which was basic to the Com-
mission's plan, be sacrosanct? To what products would it apply? Which
products would be "negotiable" and which would not? Furthermore, the
United States was obliged by the GATT rules to extend certain exemptions
from duty and it was reasonable to ask what compensations it would obtain
in return. There was a fear that the Community would adopt a policy of "fait
accompli" which would be an obstacle to any genuine liberalization.
Ultimately, said the speaker in conclusion, the Kennedy Round could not
succeed solely through the efforts of technicians,; success could only be a-
chieved by firm political decisions by the highest authorities, fully conscious of
the necessity for the union and cohesion of the free world.
* * *
54
The author of the note was the next speaker and submitted a certain number
of supplementary observations and clarifications:
The most important problem at present confronting the EEC in respect of
agriculture was the fixing of European prices for basic products, more es-
pecially cereals. Two reasons were paramount: on the one hand, farmers must
begin to adapt their output in relation to those prices (in this connexion, the
speaker regretted the unduly high level of German prices and the resistance
to any lowering which was revealed by a recent resolution of the Bonn Parli-
ment); on the other hand, the existence of those prices was essential to the
Kennedy Round negotiations in order to play the part already played by the
joint outside tariff in respect of industrial products.
What could the EEC propose, asked the speaker, and in order to demon-
strate the difficulty of the problem, he observed that neither GATT, norFAO,
nor even the OECD had ever found a solution to agricultural problems which
were still shaped by national policies. What should be proposed was a con-
solidation, a "freezing", of the maximal global protection granted by the EEC
to each of the products involved and this should be done by reference to a
world price, having regard, on the one hand, to that price and on the other to the
farm price within each country. The way in which this protection might be
carried out was of little importance; what mattered was the total amount (a
difficulty arose from the fact that GATT only dealt with tariffs and not with
other forms of protection). But this presupposed approaching the problem
on the international level so as to fix a reasonable reference price which, having
regard to transport and other costs, could be calculated at whichever price
permitted unsubsidized exportation by countries having a rational production;
thus, the Common Market's variable levy could be fixed and would become
a normal tariff; at the present stage, it was variable because of the conditions
of the world market and because it was a question of obtaining fixed prices
within the Community where quantitative restrictions had been abolished.
The speaker strongly urged that we should take account of the under-
developed peoples' desire to raise their living standards through increased
exports. In 1962, exports from such countries amounted to a total of 20 billion
dollars, 12 billion being in the form of agricultural products. Expert calcu-
lations, however, had shown that the more advanced countries' capacity for
absorbing agricultural goods was limited to 18 billion. If we were to take the
relatively modest goal of increasing the underdeveloped countries' exports
to 50 billion by 1980, it would therefore be essential for their industrial ex-
ports to quadruple within that same period.
In the Kennedy Round, therefore, the Western countries would have to
resist the temptation to conclude an arrangement which only concerned
55
~
themselves and .would have to bear in mind the necessity for doing something
in common on behalf of the third world in the form of co-ordinated proposals
of a preferential nature, even extending to cancellation of customs duty for
manufactured goods.
* *
"'
In the discussion which followed these statements, most of the speakers
dealt with the three main subjects previously discussed-agriculture, the
Kennedy Round and the Geneva Conference-together.
* * *
What positive guarantees could the European Economic Community
grant countries exporting agricultural products, asked an international
participant who, while recognizing the constructive nature of the proposals
put forward, expressed a fear that traditional trade channels might be dis-
turbed if the Co.mmission's policy were to stimulate too strongly the Common
Market's agricultural output. Exporters of agricultural products in other
countries would do well to take this into account. There were very im-
portant opportunities on the political level, e.g. Po.land had approached the
Western countries on the occasion of the Kennedy Round in order to increase
trade with those countries even in the face of Soviet opposition.
Stressing the fact that EEC decisions on agricultural prices would neces-
sarily take on a political aspect-since, in this field, one could not rely solely
on the law of supply and demand-a Danish participant expressed the fear
that unduly high prices would encourage over-production and this would
prevent a rational division of labour on the international level. The costs of
the operation would be partly borne by the budgets of the protecting countries
(the speaker particularly referred to Germany) but also by farmers in other
countries which produced rationally.
The speaker asked what mandate had been given on this point to the EEC
Commission in respect of the Kennedy Round. Was the level of prices un-
touchable or could it be negotiated? The speaker recognized that global pro-
tection could be taken as a basis but could such global protection be rene-
gotiated in the event of a shift in world prices? If rigidity were the rule in
these fields, he said, the Kennedy Round would have little chance ofsucceeding
in the agricultural sector.
A British participant expressed similar apprehensions. The long and short
of it was, he said, that the supposed projects of the EEC involved three dan-
gers:
56
- would they really guarantee access to exporting third countries?
- would they not encourage excess production in Europe itself?
- would they not ultimately lead to an increase in world surpluses?
It might be asked whether the variable levy system was the best available,
said the speaker, who added that the British system revealed more clearly
the cost to the Community of the protection granted to each sector. He con-
cluded by saying that, instead of incorporating agriculture in the world
liberal framework, the Commission's approach might result in cop.fining the
problem of world food products within the limits of the Common Market's
own policy.
An American participant, who had insisted that agriculture should be
included in the Kennedy Round, considered that in fact it was impossible
to say whether the system proposed by the EEC was good or bad in itself.
Everything would depend on the use made of it, in a protectionist direction
or a liberal one.
Answering certain speakers, the author of the note observed that, having
regard to the transitional situation in which it was placed, it was difficult for
the EEC to give its Commission an absolutely precise mandate in respect of
prices. Examination of the level of protection granted offered a basis for ne-
gotiation which was both more flexible and more effective. Additionally,
the EEC would probably be ready to re-examine the effects of the measures
adopted with all those concerned, e.g. every three years.
A Netherlands participant stressed the difficult position of the EEC Com-
mission confronted with "six angry men", the Ministers of Agriculture in
the Member Countries who were, in· turn, under pressure from farmers who
sometimes considered that their customers were governments rather than the
consumers themselves. This led to overproduction, especially as regards
cereals, which was certainly not economically justified. The speaker did not
suggest leaving farmers to their fate, although they were already strongly
protected, but he considered structural adaptations to be essential.
In this connexion, two German participants indicated that their country's
present attitude towards agriculture should not be considered final and that
certain decisions remained to be taken. They emphasized that German farmers
should be gradually induced to make the necessary changes without their
standards of living being reduced and this, said one of the speakers, would
be all the more necessary politically because many German farmers lived
and worked in the immediate vicinity of the Iron Curtain. Several subsequent
speakers disagreed with this reasoning.
An American participant emphasized the harmful effects which non-tariff
obstacles had on international trade and stressed the importance to his country
57
"
of agricultural exports. The "chicken war", he said, was not to be taken lightly
and the United States would not agree that the Kennedy Round should only
deal with industrial goods.
*
* *
While most of the observations devoted to the Kennedy Round related to
agricultural problems, several participants also dealt 'with other aspects of
the negotiations, either the general features or, more particularly, industrial
products. Observing that the Common Market could be considered an eco-
nomic success but had not served as a stage in achieving a broader market
and that there was no longer any immediate po~sibility of the EFTA countries
joining it en bloc, a German participant, already quoted, expressed satis-
faction that the Kennedy Round would make it possible to consider lowering
the foreign tariffs not only of the Common Market but also of the EFTA
countries and the United States.
Nonetheless, the speaker cited concrete examples in stressing two problems
whose solution was essential to the success of the Kennedy Round. On the
one hand, there were tariff diversities: the tariffs of the Common Market and
the United States must be brought into line. At the present time, the Common
Market tariffs comprised 23 positiorts with customs duty above 25% and 6
above 30%. In America, 514 positions were rated between 20% and 30%,
386 between 30% and 35% and 427 above 35%. No adaptation could be
achieved by a "product by product" discussion because it would lead to a
deadlock; on the other hand, there were extra-tariff arrangements existing
in all countries which often hindered the exchange of goods to a greater extent
than import duties.
The problem of tariff disparities was one of those which could be dealt
with, said an international participant, already quoted, who, supported by a
British participant, considered the Kennedy Round had three major objectives:
- to encourage adjustments made necessary by the creation of the Common
Market and to "capitalize", in the positive sense of the term, the fortunate
results achieved by the Common Market;
- to provide an alternative method of achieving some of the aims which
had been attached to the United Kingdom's entry into the Common Market
(a Swiss and a Danish participant expressed a similar point of view in regard
to all the EFTA countries, the latter also expressing a fear that economic
relations between the Common Market and EFTA, which had already
deteriorated, might grow still worse with regrettable and lasting consequences;
it would mean a disastrous division of Europe) ;
- to meet the difficulties deriving from the problem of backward countries.
58
To achieve this, however, the speaker, who referred to the precedent of
the Treaty of Rome negotiations, strongly emphasized that it would be ne-
cessary to display a political determination which alone could enable the
technical problems to be solved. An American participant spoke along similar
lines and urged that, if it became necessary in order to establish political
priorities, a group of "wise men" should be called on as had been clone in
the case of NATO.
A Netherlands participant, already quoted, considered that the Common
Market industrialists hoped that the Kennedy Round would be a success
and himself expressed the hope that frank statements by representatives of
the various professional branches, even if intended to defend their own in-
terests, might help the negotiations to advance with a clear view of the diffi-
culties to be overcome. Referring to the opinion of the same circles on the
other side of the Atlantic, an American participant indicated the broad lines
of a memorandum recently adopted by an important group of businessmen
in his country:
- the United States should seek to obtain concessions of a reciprocal nature
from its trade partners, coming as close as possible to a 50% reduction of free
world tariffs. Exceptions to this rule should be as few and as unimportant as
possible;
- non-tariff barriers should be done away with or significantly reduced
in the same way as the tariff barriers;
- the negotiations should ensure that the United States and other agri-
cultural exporters had access to a share of the EEC market comparable to
that of the past;
- reciprocity might take the form of an identical percentage reduction
in the average tariffs of all the main trading countries;
- the reduction of tariffs could be staggered over at least five stages of one
year each (or more where a given industry was due to suffer serious injury);
- the United States should reduce the support it granted to agricultural
products to a level corresponding to market prices and should liberalize its
quotas on agricultural imports, customs duty on such products being reduced
by 50% as in all other cases;
- if any important unit of the free world were unable or unwilling to en-
courage the freeing of its trade to the extent desired by the free world as a
whole, the other nations concerned should investigate methods of nonetheless
obtaining the advantages of a liberalized and increased trade;
- the United States, the EEC countries and the other industrial nations
should, on the basis of the most favoured nation clause, extend to the under-
developed countries of the free world whatever tariff reductions they had
59
decided to grant without immediately insisting on complete reciprocity.
This exception would be considered temporary in nature and would be con-
tinually re-examined by GATT. The underdeveloped countries should agree
to reduce their average tariffs as soon as the balance of payments made it
possible (this idea was also advanced by another American participant);
- the more advanced countries should reduce their tariffs on tropical
products to zero. American quotas on lead, zinc, and oil, together with the
American tariff on copper, should gradually be done away with.
The speaker especially mentioned the case of oil which represented r r% of
American imports and which was excluded from the negotiations for strategic
reasons. The Committee considered that so considerable an exclusion was
calculated to reduce very substantiaIJy the concessions which the United
States could expect from the rest of the world.
Speaking at the end of the discussion, a Canadian participant emphasized
that his country, whose foreign trade represented 15% of the gross national
product and whose custom protection was already very low, offered a favour-
able field for the success of the negotiations.
* * *
The particular situation of the underdeveloped countries and the prospects
for the United Nations Conference in Geneva were touched on in the course
of several statements. In this connexion, a Netherlands participant, already
quoted, said that an initial success for the Kennedy Round would provide a
better basis for solving the problems of those countries. The Danish participant
already quoted, however, said that, since the Geneva Conference was due to
begin at any moment, it was profoundly regrettable that the Western countries
had been unable to establish a positive policy in common towards that Con-
ference and that such a policy could not be replaced by laying down vague
broad principles. The speaker considered that there was a considerable clanger
of seeing an aggressive resolution jointly adopted by the poorer countries
and that it would be impossible to put anything up against such a resolution
which would be exploited by Communist propaganda. A similar conclusion
was reached by a British and an American participant, already quoted. The
former took up a view already expressed by one of the Rapporteurs and
voiced the hope that greater access would be given to the industrial products
of the developing nations, emphasizing that his country had already set a
good example in this regard. The second speaker pointed out that the United
States and France were the two countries which had clone most on behalf of
the underdeveloped nations and expressed the hope that the Common Market
60
as a whole would assume a greater measure of responsibility towards them.
Another American speaker referred to the ineffectiveness of the most favoured
nation clause when it was a question of solving the problems of the uncler-
clevelopecl countries.
A Swiss participant put forward several views on the attitude of the West
towards the demands of the third world and said these made an impressive
total when added together and if account were taken of the most extreme.
He contended that it was desirable for all aid to those countries to be accom-
panied by conditions, not of a political but of an economic nature: assistance
should be repayable so as to encourage its use on viable and productive pro-
jects for which allocations should be laid down before the aid was
granted. He went on to say that, in this connexion, it was likewise desirable
that no new body should be set up in Geneva since the existing institutions
were amply sufficient. Similarly, the Conference must not result in the de-
struction of GATT since that organization had demonstrated its very con-
siderable effectiveness and its disappearance wo.ulcl also signify abandonment
of certain rules which had made free trade so vigorous.
*
* *
In closing the Meeting, H.R.H. the Prince of the Netherlands stressed
several of the ideas which had been brought out.
During the Cannes Meeting a year before, he observed, participants were
still reacting to the shock of the Brussels negotiations on Great Britain's entry
into the Common Market and nobody knew what to suggest to enable Western
unity to resume its forward movement. The Williamsburg Discussions had
revealed that everyone now felt that it was urgently necessary to find a way
of doing something to ensure progress and, in this connexion, certain of the
suggestions put forward gave grounds for hope and were rich in possibilities
of achieving results, It was symptomatic that all those speakers who had
commented on the Kennedy Round had strongly emphasized the need to
succeed just as, in respect of the Geneva Conference, there had been agreement
on the necessity of doing something more than merely paying a verbal tribute
to the aspirations and needs of the underdeveloped countries. And if certain
problems such as that of agriculture (and the particular case of Germany
in this connexion) remained extremely thorny by their very nature, the
Chairman went on to say, yet the statements made had not given the im-
pression that the Common Market wished to retire within itself by adopting
a protectionist attitude.
*
* *
61
)
I
In conclusion, the Chairman, on behalf of all those present, expressed his
warmest appreciation to the American hosts and their colleagues together
with the Members of the Secretariat, the Press and the interpreters, and
spoke highly of the admirable and pleasant way in which everything had
been arranged.
Prior to the closure of the Meeting, an American participant, speaking on
behalf of all those present, expressed the gratitude of one and all towards His
Royal Highness for the outstanding work which, thanks to the stimulus he
had provided, had been accomplished by the Bilderberg Meetings, whose
tenth anniversary was marked by the Williamsburg Conference.
62
