-<
m
-n
cc
m:o
~o
zO
0
m
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
RYE BROOK
CONFERENCE
10-12 May 1985
NOT FOR QUOTATION
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS ........................................................................ 5
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................... I I
AGENDA .............................................................................................. II
1. DIVERGENT SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC TRENDS
IN THE ATLANTIC WORLD
German Working Paper ...................................................................... I3
American Working Paper·.................................................................... I6
American Working Paper .................................................................... I9
Discussion .......................................................................................23
II. HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH THE SOVIET BLOC? ~
German Working Paper ......................................................................29
French Background Paper ..............................-
... :-:-: ...............................32
Discussion .......................................................................................4I
111. THE STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE ........................................ .47
IV. HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES?
British Working Paper ....................................................................... .53
American Working Paper ....................................................................55
Discussion .......................................................................................59
V. CURRENT EVENTS: THE U.s: BUDGET
AND THE EUROPEAN PERSPECTIVE..............................................65
VI. OPERATING THE ALLIANCE
Belgian Working Paper .......................................................................73
American Working Paper ....................................................................79
Discussion .......................................................................................82
CLOSING REMARKS .............................................................................87
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR THp UNITED STATES:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.* ·" ,
Dean, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University
ITA
USA
NOR
AUS
USA
USA
POR
CAN
USA
NOR
TUR
USA
TUR
ICE
CAN
USA
USA
USA
USA
USA
ITA
GRE
FRA
GIOVANNI AGNELLI**
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
JOHAN H. ANDRESEN
HANNES ANDROSCH*
HANS H. ANGERMUELLER
GEORGE W. BALL**
FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO
THOMAS J. BATA
JACK F. BENNETT*
EIVINNBERG
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
JOHN C. BIERWIRTH
M. NURI BIRGI
BJORN BJARNASON
CONRAD M. BLACK
BILL BRADLEY
NICHOLAS F. BRADY
ZBIGNIEW BRZEZINSKI
WILLIAM P. BUNDY**
LOUIS W. CABOT
UMBERTO CAPPUZZO
COSTA CARRAS*
President, FIAT S.p.A.
Chairman, Archer-Daniels-Midland
Company, Inc.
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
Tiedemann Group
Chairman of the Managing Board,
Creditanstalt-Bankverein; Former
Vice-Chancellor and Minister of Finance
Vice Chairman, Citibank N.A.
Former Under Secretary of State
Former Prime Minister; Director, "Joma!
Expresso"
Chairman, Bata Ltd.
Director and Senior Vice President,
Exxon Corporation
Ambassador and Permanent
Representative, Norwegian Delegation to
NATO; Former State Secretary
Director of Companies
Chairman, Gr_umman Corporation
Ambassador at L1rrge
Assistant Editor-in-Chief,
"Morgunbladid"
Chairman, Argus Corporation, Ltd.
U.S. Senator, New Jersey
Chairman, Dillon, Read & Company,
Inc., Former U.S. Senator (New Jersey)
Herbert Lehman Professor of
Government, Columbia University;
Former Assistant to President Carter for
National Security Affairs
Former Editor, "Foreign Affairs"
Chairman, Cabot Corporation
Chief of Staff, Italian Army
Member of the Board, Greek Shipping
Cooperation Committee
HELENE CARRERE D'ENCAUSSE Professor, Institut d'Etudes Politiques de
Paris; Professor of History and Political
Science of the Soviet Union at the
Sorbonne
5
SPA JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO* Chairman, Banco Hispano Industrial USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &
SWI KASPAR V. CASSANI Senior Vice President, IBM Corporation; Feld; Former President, National Urban
Chairman, IBM World Trade EMEA League
Corporation GRE BASIL KAFIRIS Governor, Agricultural Bank of Greece
SPA JUAN LUIS CEBRIAN Director and Editor-in-Chief, "El Pais" FRG KARL KAISER Director, Research Institute of the
INT A. W. CLAUSEN President, The World Bank German Society for Foreign Affairs
POR JOSE MANUEL TORRES COUTO Secretary-General, General Trade Union TUR' JAKV. KAMHI Chairman of the Board, Profilo Holding
UGT A.S.
FRG RALF DAHRENDORF Professor, Konstanz University (School UK GEOFFREY C. KENT Chairman and Chief Executive, Imperial
of Social Sciences) Group, PLC
USA KENNETH W. DAM Deputy Secretary of State USA HENRY A. KISSINGER* Former Secretary of State; Professor,
BEL ETIENNE DAVIGNON Former Member, Commission of the Center for Strategic and International
European Communities I
Studies, Georgetown University
USA MURRAY H. FINLEY* President, Amalgamated Clothing and UK ANDREW KNIGHT* Editor, "The Economist"
Textile Workers Union, AFL-CIO INT EMILE VAN LENNEP Former Secretary-General, OECD
IRE GARRET FITZGERALD Prime Minister of the Irish Republic UK LORD LEVER OF MANCHESTER Former Cabinet Minister and Financial
FRA JEAN FRAN<;:OIS-PONCET Former Minister of Foreign Affairs Secretary; Former Member of Parliament
FRA MICHEL FRAN<;:OIS-PONCET Chairman, Paribas North America LIE H.S.H. PRINCE HANS-ADAM
USA CHARLES GETCHELL* Partner, Gray & Wendell; Rapporteur VON LIECHTENSTEIN
Bilderberg Meetings NET HANS B. VAN LIEMT Chairman of the Managing Board of
FRA MICHEL GIRAUD Senator; President, Regional Council of Directors, D.S.M.
Ile de France POR ERNANI RODRIGUES LOPES Minister of Finance
USA DONALD GREGG Assistant to the Vice President for USA WINSTON LORD* President, The Council on Foreign
National Security Affairs Relations, Inc.
USA WILLIAM E. GRIFFITH Professor, Political Science Department, CAN DONALDS. MACDONALD* Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy;
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Chairman, Royal Commission on the
CAN FRANKLYN GRIFFITHS Professor, Center for Russian and East Economic l.Jnion and Development
European Studies, University of Toronto Prospects for Canada
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON* Chairman of the Board, Saab-Scania AB CAN ROY MACLAREN President, CB Media Ltd. and Publisher,
ICE GEIR HALLGRIMSSON* Minister of Foreign Affairs Canadian Business; Former Member of
SWI HANS HECKMANN Executive Vice President, Member of the Parliament and Minister of National
-·
Executive Board, Union Bank of Revenue
Switzerland USA BRUCE K. MACLAURY* President, The Brookings Institution
USA HENRY J. HEINZ II** Chairman, H.J. Heinz Company, Inc.. FRA JACQUES MAISONROUGE Vice Chairman, Liquid Air Corporation
SWE MATS HELLSTROEM Minister for Foreign Trade USA CHARLES Mee. MATHIAS, JR.* U.S. Senator, Maryland
FRG ALFRED HERRHAUSEN* Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A.G. FRG ALOIS MERTES Minister of State, Ministry of Foreign
USA JOHN J. HORAN Chairman, Merck & Compa11y, Inc. Affairs
USA ROBERT HORMATS Director, Goldman Sachs International FRA THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of
Corporation; Former Assistant Secretary International Relations; Profesor of
of State for Economic and Business Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
Affairs ITA MARIO MONTI* Professor of Monetary Theory and Policy
FIN JAAKKO ILONIEMI Member of the Management Board, The and Director of the Institute of
Union Bank of Finland; Former Economics, Bocconi University, Milan
Ambassador to the U.S. SWI FELICIEN MOREL Director of Finance, Canton of Fribourg;
UK MARTIN W. JACOMB Vice Chairman, Kleinwort, Benson Former M.P.
Limited DEN NIELS N0RLUND* Editor-in-Chief, "Berlingske Tidende"
BEL DANIELE. JANSSEN* Member Executive Committee, Solvay & TUR 0SMAN0LCAY Ambassador to NATO; Former Foreign
Cie, S.A. Minister
USA JAMES R. JONES U.S. Congressman, Oklahoma INT ROBERT O'NEILL Director, International Institute for
Strategic Studies
6 7
INT JEAN-CLAUDE PAYE Secretary-General, OECD UK LORD YOUNG OF GRAFFHAM Minister witho.ut Portfolio· Member
USA RICHARD PERLE Assistant Secretary for International
ITA PAOLO ZANNONI*
Prime Minister's Cabinet '
Security Policy, U.S. Department of Director, Department of Political
Defense Analysis, FIAT S.p.A.
USA LELAND S. PRUSSIA Chairman, Bank of America
USA ROZANNE L. RlDGWAY U.S. Ambassador to the German
Democratic Republic IN ATTENDANCE:
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER** Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank
International Advisory Committee UK JOHN HENNINGS Organizer, 1986 conference; Former High
INT BERNARD W. ROGERS Supreme Allied Commander Europe Commissioner in Singapore
UK LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN** Chairman, S. G. Warburg & Co., Ltd. USA CHARLES W. MULLER President, Murden and Company
ITA GurnoRossI Lawyer AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMAN Managing Director,
NET H. ONNO RUDING Minister of Finance, Chairman of the Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Interim Committee of the IMF
ITA GIOVANN~ SARTORI Albert Schweitzer Professor in the
RAPPORTEURS:
Humanities, Columbia University
USA RICHARD M. SCAMMON Director, Elections Research Center
ITA MARIO SCHIMBERNI President, Montedison USA CHARLES GETCHELL Partner, Gray & Wendell
USA BRENT SCOWCROFT Vice Chairman, Kissinger Associates; USA GRANT F. WINTHROP Communications and Public Relations
Former Member of President's General Consultant
Advisory Committee on Arms Control
FRA E. ANTOINE SEILLIERE* Director-General, Compagnie Generale
d'Industrie et de Participations LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS:
UK PATRICK SHEEHY Chairman, BAT Industries, PLC
SPA JAVIER SOLANA MADARIAGA Minister of Culture i AUS Austria
FRG THEO SOMMER* Publisher, "Die Zeit" BEL Belgium
USA HERBERT STEIN Senior Fellow, American Enterprise CAN Canada
Institute DEN Denmark
UK NORMAN TEBBIT Secretary of Trade and Industry; FIN Finland
Member of Parliament, Member of the FRA France
Prime Minister's Cabinet FRG Fedsral Republic of Germany
CAN PIERRE ELLIOTT TRUDEAU Former Prime Minister GRE Greece
SWI VICTOR UMBRICHT** Member of the Advisory Board, ICE Iceland
Ciba-Geigy Ltd.; Mediator, East African INT International
Community IRE Ireland
NET JOOP M. DEN UYL Parliamentary Leader, Labour Party; ITA Italy
Former Prime Minister LIE Liechtenstein
AUS FRANZ VRANITZKY Minister of Finance LUX Luxembourg
UK MARK WEINBERG Chairman, Hambro Life Assurance, PLC NET Netherlands
NOR NIELS WERRING, JR.* Senior Partner, Wilh. Wilhelmsen NOR Norway
USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD Chairman, International Advisory Board, POR Portugal
Goldman Sachs & Co., Inc. SPA Spain
FRG NORBERT WIECZOREK Member of Parliament SWE Sweden
USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN President, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc. SWI Switzerland
FRG OTTO WOLFF VON Chairman of the Board of Management, TUR Turkey
AMERONGEN** Otto Wolff A.G. UK United Kingdom
CAN BERNARD WOOD Director, North-South Institute USA United States
FRG MANFRED WORNER Minister of Defense
USA EDWIN H. YEO III Managing Director, Morgan Stanley & * Member of the Steering Committee
Company, Inc., former Under Secretary ** Member of the Advisory Committee
of the Treasury
8 9
INTRODUCTION
This report was prepared by Grant F. Winthrop and Charles Getchell.joint rappor-
teurs. The various individual interventions summarized in the "Discussion" sections
have been grouped according to subject matter, and do not necessarily follow the
exact chronological order ofthe actual discus~i01J:S.
* * * * *
The thirty-third Bilderberg Meeting was held at Arrowwood of Westchester, Rye
Brook, New York, on May IO, 11, and 12, 1985. At the request of Mr. Walter Scheel,
Chairman ofthe Bilderberg Meetings, who was unable to attend because ofthe serious
illness of his wife, Lord Roll of Ipsden opened the conference, and Mr. Giovanni
Agnelli presided over the closing session.
There were 113 participants from 19 European nations, the United States, Canada,
and various intergovernmental organizations. They came from government, politics,
business, industry, finance, trade unions, diplomacy, the law, education, journalism,
the military, and institutes specializing in national and international studies.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without committing in any way the
organizations or governments to which they belonged. As usual at Bilderberg Meet-
ings, in order to permit frank and open discussions, no reporting of the conference
sessions was allowed.
In opening the conference, Lord Roll conveyed to the participants Mr. Scheel's
regret at not being able to attend and his best wishes for a successful meeting. In
addition, he read the text of a message of thanks and good wishes to the American
people, to be sent on behalf of all those at the Bilderberg Meeting to the President of
the United States.
Lord Roll observed that this year's conference was taking placejust a few days after
the fortieth anniversary of VE day. Out of that event had grown the NATO Alliance,
and Bilderberg, while not formally a part ofthe Alliance, had been born alongside it. In
its 32 meetings, Bilderberg had proven its value by bringing together, in an environ-
ment conducive to the free and open exchange of views, those people who had to
create and carry out policy, make decisions, and form opinions in the countries of
North America and Western Europe.
The agenda was as follows:
I. DIVERGENT SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC TRENDS IN THE
ATLANTIC WORLD
Moderator: David Rockefeller
Discussion panelists: Ralf Dahrendorf, Richard Scammon and Herbert
Stein (all authors of working papers)
II. HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH THE SOVIET BLOC?
Moderator: Andrew Knight
Discussion panelists: Zbigniew Brzezinski, Helene Carrere d'Encausse
(author of background paper), Karl Kaiser (author of working paper),
and Manfred Worner
III.
IV.
v.
VI.
12
THE STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
Introduction: Richard Perle
HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES?
Moderator: Daniel Janssen
Discussion panelists: Lord Lever of Manchester and Edwin H. Yeo III
(both authors of working papers)
CURRENT EVENTS: THE U.S. BUDGET AND THE EUROPEAN
PERSPECTIVE
Moderator: Theo Sommer
Discussion panelists: James R. Jones, Charles McC. Mathias, Jr.,
H. Onno Ruding
OPERATING THE ALLIANCE
Moderator: Giovanni Agnelli
Discussion panelists: Etienne Davignon and Brent Scowcroft (authors of
working papers) and Jean Fran~ois-Poncet
I. DIVERGENT SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC. TRENDS
IN THE ATLANTIC WORLD
* * * * *
"Social, Economic and Political Developments in Europe and America"
Working Paper Prepared by RalfDahrendorf,
Professor, School ofSocial Sciences, Konstanz University
Europe means above all difference. There is probably a European interest which is
the motive force of what progress has been made towards European integration.
There are also certain underlying socio-political and socio-economic developments
which can be traced in most,'ifnot all European countries. But in reality, differences in
history, in the conditions of economic development, in political structure and in
cultural heritage are what matters to people above all. This is the grain of salt with
which the following general comments have to be taken.
One major socio-political development may well link most OECD countries, includ-
ing those of Europe and North America. A century of struggles for citizenship rights
for all has been largely successful. Everywhere, equality before the law has been
followed by universal suffrage and further, by the setting up of a social state which
guarantees that citizenship is more than an empty promise. From bourgeois societies
dominated by a privileged class of those with property, power and opportunity, mod-
ern societies have turned into citizens' societies in which the overwhelming majority
can hope to live a worthwhile life. At least two-thirds ofall people in the OECD world
are citizens in this emphatic sense of the word.
However, more recently, two new developments have complicated the picture. At
one end of the social scale, a growing number of well-trained and often able younger
people (the "yuppies", or young urban professionals among them) have become impa-
tient with a sense of stagnation and stifling equality in the citizens' society. They
demand the revival of the values of achievement by tax incentives, greater flexibility
of social and economic structures, a new social Darwinism which creates the condi-
tions for the survival ofthe "fittest". These new achievers are usually associated with
the service and. information industries, or. rather "post-industries", because they
espouse many of the post-industrial values described by Daniel Bell.
At the other end of the scale, the society of citizens has begun to marginalize, if not
define out a growing number ofpeople. Unemployment is the most striking illustration
ofthis process. The "natural"-which really means structural-rate ofunemployment
seems to stabilize at not much less than ten per cent. More and more unemployed have
been in that condition for a year or more, so that they are no longer eligible for
unemployment benefits. Marginalization by unemployment has been aggravated by
the treatment of ethnic minorities, the condition of inner cities, and, most seriously,
the state of social suspense in which many young people are held. It is as if those who
are "in", are closing ranks in order to protect their status, which means that those who
are not or not yet "in" are condemned to becoming a new underclass. This is a class of
restless individuals, a kind of lumpenproletariat, liable to threaten law and order and
form a reserve army ofriots and rebellions. The size ofthis underclass varies. It is not
one-third of the population (as those imply who describe modern societies as "two-
thirds' societies"), but it is larger than ten per cent everywhere.
13
The political consequences of such developments lead us straight into the world of
difference. There is probably, in the OECD countries of Europe and North America
(as well as some others), a large middle ground of those who believe that prevailing
con,s:fitions permit sufficient improvement to be fundamentally desirable and worth
defending. There is also an impatient political wing which wants change, including
supply-side economic policies, incentives for initiative and achievement, support for
elite education, law and order, perhaps a new patriotism to go along with the values of
achievement. Then there is the situational, disorganized, but serious threat to social
order by the underclass and those who claim to speak on its behalf; there are demands
for a more social state, if not for a total transformation of the system.
But these forces are expressed very differently in different countries, depending on
their peculiar political structures. In Germany, the scramble for the centre is still
pronounced. All major parties are eager to conqu.er the middle ground. As a result, the
new political wings flutter as much outside the official world of politics as inside it.
Britain, on the other hand, has a more eccentric political tradition. Both traditional
parties have in fact been run from their respective extremes for a number of years.
There has even been a sense that the middle ground has been deserted; this has given
rise to the formation of the Liberal-Social Democratic Alliance, but also strengthened
the hands of more traditional Disraeli Tories and even the Labour right. Many other
countries display variants of these two themes, with specific national traditions and
issues complicating the picture.
It is important to add that while the political center is likely to remain dominant for
some time to come, it has become essentially a defensive force. The wings represent
more aggressive groups, including the Greens in Germany who give voice to a genera-
tion of young opponents of the system, the National Front in France which expresses
the impatience of the new achievers, but also many in the middle ground who are
motivated by perceived or real threats to law and order; the Glistrup antitax voters in
Denmark who are frustrated with the rigidities ofthe prevailing system; the aggressive
New Left in a number of countries. Times ahead will not be quiet politically. Above
all. there is likely to be as much action at the margin or outside political institutions as
within them.
The eminently agreeable condition sustained by the large middle ground of OECD
societies is also responsible for what has been described as the sclerosis of modern
societies. This has many aspects, but the most important single one is probably the
ambivalence of the social, or welfare state. It was the keystone of the creation of
citizens' societies.
But it also involved a heavy tax burden as well as the setting-up of bureaucracies
which put us all in that "iron cage of bondage" which Max Weber foresaw seventy
years ago. The social state has taken as much liberty as it has given equality. The
dilemma today is how we can undo the damage without re-creating the conditions of
deprivation which gave rise to the social state in the first place.
The sclerosis ofmodern societies is strengthened by the interests ofgroups. Mancur
Olson has vividly described the coalitions of special-interest groups which make
innovation difficult. Trade unions are by no means the only organizations which
contribute to the growing rigidity ofreal wages, conditions ofemployment, systems of
taxation, even principles of economic policy. Whether these rigidities make for an
actual "decline of nations" (as Olson claims), may be debatable. But it is certain that
they are obstacles in the way ofthose technical developments, or rather their applica-
tion, which form the basis of lasting prosperity in the developed world.
14
It is often said that social rigidities are much greater in Europe than in the United
States. "Eurosc!erosis" has become a widely used catchword. The observation is
probably correct, but requires two qualifications. One is that such rigidities are by no
means absent in the United States, nor is their presence confined to the East Coast.
The other qualification is that the very tradition of rigidities in Europe has led to the
development ofmechanisms of coping which are not always ineffective. "Concerted
action-;" "co-determination," "social partnership" can be elements of sclerosis, but
they may be instruments of change as welJ.
A time of change is often a time of fear. A time offear, however, makes confident
international co-operation more difficult. This is clearly true so far as the process of
European co-operation and integration is concerned.
Several factors combine to suggest a less than sanguine prognosis for European
integration in the coming ,years. Widespread defensiveness and the consequent
tendency to look inward is one ofthem. There is also the reaction against the "big is
beautiful" obsession of the 1960s; decentralization is the order ofthe day. Then there
is simply disappointment with what has been achieved so far. (AU these factors are at
work in the United States, and in American attitudes to international arrangements
and organizations as well.) The net result of such trends is not only a new patriotism,
but the beginning of a new nationalism and a new isolationism as well.
In the case of the European Community, the main danger is that it wilJ become an
organization for the cushioning of decline. Already, it is most active with respect to
declining industries like agriculture and steel; its funds and rules are used to protect
rather than to innovate. New developments take place at the margin ofthe institutions
ofthe Community or entirely outside them. The European Monetary System (EMS) is
an example ofthe former, the European Roundtable ofbusinessmen one ofthe latter.
The weakness of the European Community is all the more serious in view of the
decomposition ofthe post-war international system. Europe has to organize itselfnot
only as a response to the European interest, but also as a kind ofsecond-best response
to questions raised on the wider international plane. However, this requires a counter-
cyclical orientation on the part of those in power. Too many seem to look inward at a
time at which-we.are less and less able to afford this luxury.
This is a gloomy analysis at a time at which optimism rather than dependency is in
demand. A coajunctural desire to get out of a decade of long faces and worried
questions combines with the silver lining ofthe new opportunities ofthe "information
society" and an understandable pride in the accomplishments of the citizens' society
to make people want to look up and forward·.
Even in Germany, there are signs that the generation ofGreens will be followed by
one of happy achievers. This new mood of optimism is clearly highly desirable.
However, self-congratulation and pride in past achievements are not enough. The new
buoyancy will last only ifit helps us cope with the majorissues ofthe day. On the basis
of the analyses sketched in this paper, they can be put in a series of questions:
- How can we set rigid societies and sclerotic economies on a new path of move-
ment which is more than the costly luxury of a Darwinian struggle for survival?
- How can we safeguard full and effective citizenship rights for all without the
expensive cage of bondage of the bureaucratized welfare state?
- How can we cope with unemployment in view ofthe fact that the work society of
old will not return, and that neither growth nor schemes ofjob creation will solve
the problem?
15
- How can we guarantee law and order without abandoning the liberal advances of
the last decades?
- How can we open the boundary ofthe society of citizens to those who now remain
at or outside it, including many of the young? ·
- How can we make sure that the principle, "as much decentralization as possible,
as much centralization as necessary'', is taken seriously in both its parts, and
notably that there is a new understanding of the exigencies of international co-
operation?
Practical answers to these large questions will inevitably fall short of what is desir-
able and even necessary, but any step in the right direction is preferable to the worsen-
ing sclerosis of societies dominated by a hardening and defensive majority.
* *
*
"Some Aspects of the American Political System"
Working Paper Prepared by Richard M. Scammon,
Director, Elections Research Center
Last November the American political system produced an overwhelming re-
election victory for Republican Presid€nt Reagan. At the same moment in time it gave
Democrats their fifteenth consecutive majority in the national House of Representa-
tives. To those accustomed to parliamentary systems, disciplined national parties,
and at least some degree ofalleged ideological unity, some words ofcomment might be
helpful. The classic example of the American voter's tendency to spread himself all
over the political landscape took place in 1968, the year the electors of Arkansas gave
their support to a Republican for Governor, a Democrat for Senator, and an Indepen-
dent (George Wallace) for President of the United States. And this is not uncommon.
Last November President Reagan carried some 90 per cent of the Congressional
districts in the eleven Southern states. At the same time, a majority ofDemocrats were
elected from the South to serve in the House of Representatives.
Basically, this circumstance evolves from the fact that American "label parties" are
far more federal in nature than is the Republic itself. The national party does not
determine who runs for the Senate or for the House or for local offices. These nomina-
tions are determined almost entirely by so-called "primary" elections. These elec-
tions. held some months before the General Election in November, are not restricted
to dues-paying, card-carrying party members. Any citizen who so wishes may say he
is a Democrat, and thereby be entitled to vote in choosing the Democratic party
nominee for any available office. In the Congress today all members are either Repub-
licans or Democrats, but the label means whatever the member may wish it to mean.
Moreover, once elected. members may or may not follow the leadership oftheir party
group in a legislative body. Since they are first nominated, and second elected, by a
large mass of local state or district voters, it is to this mass they must look for re-
election, not to a national party ideology or to a national party apparatus nor to a
national party leader.
This local control, plus the non-parliamentary and non-PR character of American
politics, has meant that on most public issues compromise is a more likely winner than
a stronger ideological party dogma on either side. Not always; sometimes there is a
16
"hundred days" for President Roosevelt or a "first year" for President Reagan. But
indeed, caucus organizations of members are common, expecially in the House-a
Black caucus, an Hispanic caucus, a Farm caucus (cotton, peanuts, tobacco, corn-
hog, dairy, wheat, etc.), a Northeast caucus-these and many others tend to unite
common interests of members across party lines (if any).
Of course, on many issues there is a "White House" line, or policy-on deficits, on
MX missiles; bn Central America and the like. But these policies are only incidentally
Republican (or Democratic).
"Voting the District" is so common in American political practice tli.at a Detroit
congressman (of either party) who supported unlimited import of Japanese auto-
mobiles would be regarded as more than a little offhis rocker. But, since local interests
of this sort tend to compete with one another in varying parts of the country, a
mid-point tends to develop in support of a centrist solution to problems.
Within this context, then, the results of the 1984 voting were not abnormal. Mr.
Reagan won re-election by a very substantial majority indeed, carrying virtually every
segment of the population saving only black, Jewish and Hispanic voters. Within the
rest of the electorate, sex, age, education, income, occupation, religion ... none of
these provided Mr. Mondale with a majority. There were differences, of course;
women voted for Mr. Reagan less than did men, trade union families less than non-
trade union families, low income less than high income. But he won them all, saving
only the blacks (10 per cent Reagan), the Jewish (35 per cent Reagan) and the Hispanic
(35 per cent Reagan).
Though this victory has suggested to some a new alignment of American politics,
this seems unlikely. As has been suggested, the Democratic label has had a majority in
the House for 30 years. Since the beginning of the modern Presidential era in 1952,
with the election of General Eisenhower, Republicans have won the White House six
times, the Democrats only three. Moreover, each Republican elected for the first time
for the Presidency (Eisenhower, Nixon, Reagan) has won re-election and won it with
an increased majority. Since the Roosevelt era, the only elected Democrat who tried
for a second term was Jimmy Carter-he lost. So this anomaly might continue for
years. It may be illogi&al, but it exists ... and it continues.
Nor do many voters see anything unreasonable in this arrangement. Few may
divide their ballots as did the Arkansas voters in the election of 1968, but every
Democratic Senator re-elected last fall was elected in a state carried by President
Reagan ... and Mr. Mondale's home state of Minnesota (the only staie the Demo-
crats carried for President) saw an incumbent Republican Senator re-elected.
There are many proposals for change in the American political system ... a longer
term for the President, campaign finance reform, changes in the Presidential nominat-
ing process . . . but almost never is a voice heard for either Parliamentarianism or for
tightly disciplined political parties. What may change in the next 15 years ofAmerican
politics-as indeed it has changed in the past 40--may be the group relationships
which sustain the "normal" pattern ofparty support. With all that has been said about
voters shifting around, it is still true that in circumstances where other things are
equal, the party label does have a considerable pull. If not, it would not be possible to
say that some of the strongest bases of Democratic Party voting have been in the
South, Roman Catholics, and, since Franklin Roosevelt, blacks and blue-collar white
workers. But other things are not always equal, especially for the Presidency. This is
the only office in America in which the parties express themselves through a single
individual candidate. You cannot give a Presidential candidate's left arm to the liber-
als and his right arm to the conservatives, though you may certainly elect liberal
17
Democratic House Members in the North and conservative Democratic House Mem-
bers in the South. With this in mind, it is not surprising to note that in three of the last
four Presidential elections (excepting only the Carter victory in 1976) blue-collar white
workers, Roman Catholics and white Southerners have voted Republican for
President.
In the political future Republicans will obviously try to extend their Presidential
primacy down as far as they can. Democrats, in reverse, will try to win back for the
head of the ticket those elements of past support which have left them.
Special targets will be younger voters (the maturing postwar baby boom), women
and Hispanic voters, plus always the enlarging middle class.
Basically, America's next half-generation of politics will rest upon this post-New
Deal middle class. Many would claim that the greatest success ofthe New Deal was in
creating this new middle class, the more so as the occupational shift of American life
moves from arm-and-hammer to service trades and public employment. The decline
oftrade union membership, particularly in heavy industry, is well-known. Perhaps not
so well known is the massive postwar increase in higher education availabilities to
those who cannot afford to "go away to college", but can manage living at home and
attending a possibly less-prestigious state or community college. For this group, the
key to the rise into the middle class is the mass availability of a college degree.
Two areas of geographic movement may also shape new party loyalties by the year
2000. The American population is moving south and west and there seems to be no
reason for this tendency to alter. In fact, recent surveys ofnew job opportunities in the
next decade indicate that 25 of the 30 expanding-job metropolitan areas will be in the
south and west, only five in the east and midwest.
In Presidential elections this area of the country has been strong for Republicans
and in 1984 none of the top ten Democratic jurisdictions were in the south or further
west than Minnesota. This has not been true in Congressional voting, but here the
members elected, whatever their party label, take on the programmatic view of their
constituents.
Secondly, the impact of the older core cities, especially in the east and midwest, is
declining. The share of the state's vote cast in such cities as Boston, New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Cleveland, Detroit, Chicago, St. Louis and the like is sub-
stantially below what it was a generation ago and the number of the members of the
House from these core cities tends to drop after the realignment of House seats which
follows each decennial census. Since these cities are strongly Democratic, many of
the middle class are apparently moving out physically and rightward politically.
Further, the nature of the new citizenship changes. Mass immigration today tends
to come much more from Latin America than from Europe or Africa. As these immig-
rants become citizens and as their children are born as citizens, they will become an
increasingly important segment of the electorate. This is a group to which Republican
leadership extends many invitations to activity. Over a third of the Hispanic vote for
President was given to Mr. Reagan last fall, and, while the Republican strategy does-
not eliminate the black voter, it appears to find more useful targets among Hispanics.
But whatever the planning, demographic or otherwise, of political strategists of
both parties, these next political years cannot be easily catalogued or easily projected.
It is quite conceivable that the Republican hold on the White House might weaken or
that the Democratic hold on the House of Representatives might weaken. These are
not the likely courses, but they are certainly possible. The appeal of many campaigns
above and beyond the party label directly to the individual voter, both in primary and
general elections, cannot be overestimated. Label loyalty still exists but it can be
18
shaken on questions ofleadership, issue images, the workabilityofthe economy, and
even the personal character of the candidate.
The only certainties of these next years appear to be the predominance of accom-
modation and centrism. One observer put it that most frequently in America the
extreme is the extreme center.
* *
*
"The American Economic 'Miracle"'
Working Paper Prepared by Herbert Stein,
Senior Fell~w, American Enterprise Institute
Four years ago I began a paper for the Bilderberg conference with these remarks:
"There is no need to approach the present economic problems of the industrial
democracies in a mood ofdespair or crisis. Our generation lived through an economic
miracle, which went on for almost twenty-five years after World War II. Now we are
in an age of reality, and the contrast with the period of the miracle is naturally dis-
appointing. But the reality is, after all, not so bad."
Things seem to have changed in the four years since then. Once more there is talk of
an economic miracle. 'Specifically, there is talk of an American miracle, in which
Europe has conspicuously not shared. So one way oflooking at our subject today is to
consider whether there has indeed been an American economic miracle and if so why
Europe has not participated.
The word "miracle," although commonly used in this connection, is really not very
appropriate. "Miracle" refers to an event whose cause is unknown and may be super-
natural. But those people who claim that there has been an American economic
miracle have no doubt about what caused it. They believe that they did.
I am going to t;ilk mainly about developments in the United States and then offer
some brief commenn on why European experience has been different.
Recent American economic history breaks rather conveniently into two periods,
one from 1960 to 1973 and the other from 1973 to 1984. The dividing year, 1973, is the
last before the oil shock. Perhaps for that reason, but not necessarily, it divides
periods of better and worse economic performance.
The second period, taken as a whole, was inferior to the first in almost every
respect. Real output (GNP) increased by 4.2 percent per annum in the first period and
2.5 percent per annum in the second period. Output per hour and per person rose less
than half as fast in the second period as in the first. The average rate of inflation more
than doubled. In the first period the rise of output was half as large as the rise of total
spending; in the second period only one-fourth of the rise of spending generated an
increase ofreal output. Between 1960 and 1973 unemployment fell from 5.4 percent to
4.8; by 1984 unemployment had risen to 7.4 percent.
The one dimension in which the performance of the second period was not worse
than that ofthe first was the rise ofemployment. Employment rose at exactly the same
rate-1.9 percent per annum-in both periods. This is somewhat surprising, because
the strong rise of employment in the last ten or 14 years is often considered one of the
main signs of the American economic miracle.
The slower rise ofoutput in the second period was not due to lack ofdemand. Total
19
spending rose faster in the more recent period-9.2 percent per annum compared with
7.7 percent. The cause was the slowdown of productivity growth. There are many
factors that probably contributed to that slowdown. These include a smaller increase
in the ratio of capital to labor, various consequences of the sharp rise in energy costs,
diminution of the gains to be realized from transferring resources out of agriculture,
the rise of marginal tax rates and the economic and psychological consequences ofthe
inflation. We do not know the relative weights to assign to these factors and there is a
common belief that the factors we can reasonably measure do not supply an exhaus-
tive explanation. There is a true mystery left in the slowdown of productivity growth.
The rapid rise of employment in the second period could be explained by the slow
growth of productivity. Given the growth of output the rise of output per worker
explains the growth in the number of workers. But that is arithmetic, not economics.
The rise of output was not given. If the rise of employment had been less the rise of
output would have been less, although not necessarily in the same proportion. In fact,
one might expect that with productivity rising less rapidly employment would also
have risen less rapidly, because the employment of labor would have been less profit-
able. This, of course, points to the key factor-which is the wage rate. If American
workers had been able to insist on real wages rising by 2.5 percent per annum, as they
had done between 1960 and 1973, there would have been much less increase of both
employment and output between 1973 and 1984. In fact, real wages hardly rose-by
only about one-tenth of one percent per annum-between 1973 and 1984.
This point should be obvious but it is commonly overlooked. We have fallen into the
habit of asking why this economy creates jobs whereas other economies do not. But
economies do not create or fail to createjobs-aside from cyclical fluctuations. Work-
ers willing to work for a wage that does not exceed the value of their productivity
create jobs. The increase of employment from 1973 to 1984 in the U.S. was simply a
measure of how many such workers there were.
The years 1973-1984 taken as a whole were certainly not a miracle, although they
were to some extent a mystery. If there was or is a miracle it began sometime in the
latter part of that period. That is, the miracle would have occurred in the years after
1979 or 1980 or 1981. This makes the claim difficult to analyze, because we are dealing
with a period so short that the trend is mixed up with the business cycle. It is hard to
tell whether we are looking at a change in the trend of the economy or only at the
expansion phase of a business cycle-an expansion that may be a little stronger than
the average but not dramatically so. The shorter the period we look at the more
miraculous it seems-but the more likely we are to be observing only a cyclical
phenomenon. Analysis of our recent experience is also obscured by the intrusion of
partisan claims. Many who assert that there has been an economic miracle are also
claiming that there has been a Reagan miracle, or, even more specifically, a supply-
side miracle.
The performance of the U.S. economy has certainly been better in the latter part of
the 1973-1984 period than in the earlier part. Total output rose somewhat faster in the
"good" years, 1980 to 1984, than in the "bad" years, 1973 to 1980, but not by much-
2.7 percent per annum compared to 2.3 percent. The big and critical difference has
been in productivity. From 1973 to 1980, for example, output per hour in the private
business sector rose by only six-tenths of one percent per annum; between 1980 and
1984 it rose by 2.1 percent per annum. And of course, the inflation rate has been much
lower in the last few years than it was between 1973 and 1980.
Until the last six or nine months it appeared that employment had risen less rapidly
after 1979 or 1980 than it had risen earlier, but a recent surge in employment has raised
20
the growth rate close to that in the period before 1979. The only respect in which there
seems to be deterioration is in the unemployment rate which, at a little over 7 percent,
is still higher than in 1978 or 1979. But we have been living with a rising trend of the
unemployment rate for some time, and the recent increase in the trend is not greater
than we had been experiencing.
Does all ofthis constitute an economic miracle? rn·my opinion, the answer to that is
no. We have had an unusually rapid recovery from an unusually deep recession, but
our present level of output is not exceptionally high relative to previous pre-recession
levels. The annual rate of increase over the past three, four or five years is still below
our longer-term increase. Until a year ago there was much disagreement among econ-
omists about whether, aside from cyclical factors, we had yet surpassed the low rates
of productivity growth experienced from 1973 to 1979. Probably the preponderance of
the evidence was in the negative. Today the appraisal would be a little different, after
the good performance in 1984. But still, the most one could claim is that the growth of
productivity has been better than in our worst years 1973-1979 but is still not up to our
postwar average.
That is an improvement not to be dismissed as insignificant. We do not know all the
causes of the improvement, any more than we know the causes of the previous
slowdown. The shift of the energy position probably had something to do with it, as
did the lessening of the need to devote capital to cope with environmental and other
regulations. In my opinion.the deep recession of 1981-82 had much to do with the
improvement of productivity. It shocked American management and labor into a
realization of the need for self-help on the productivity front as they had not been
shocked for a long time. In many important industries that shock was intensified by
foreign competition, which was in turn strengthened by the rise in the exchange rate of
the dollar.
The big supply-side tax cut of 1981 had little to do with the rise of output and
productivity. There is no evidence that the tax cut has raised either the rate of saving
or the supply oflabor, as had been claimed it would. Meanwhile, the big budget deficit
to which the tax cut contributed reduced American saving available for private invest-
ment. The tax cut...did increase the after-tax return to investment in the United States
and made this a good place in which to invest. As a result a larger part of the world's
saving was invested in the U.S. Thus we had in total a fairly high rate of investment,
despite the deficits, but the rate of investment owned by Americans was fairly low.
This investment in the U.S. owned by foreigners would yield product that appeared in
our productivity statistics but that belonged to foreigners. (I have more to say about
that later.)
What comes closest to a miracle is the reduction in the inflation rate, from 13
percent in 1979 to 4 percent in 1984 as measured by the Consumer Price Index. Few
people in 1980 or 1981 would have predicted that by this time, after two and a half
years of recovery and with the unemployment rate down to 7.2 percent, the inflation
rate would still be 4 percent. This achievement was largely due to the sharpness of the
1981-82 recession and to the evident determination of the Federal Reserve and the
Administration not to try to pump the economy back to high levels prematurely and at
the cost ofrenewed inflation. The rising exchange rate ofthe dollar also contributed to
the achievement.
We have made progress on a number offronts, but there is still a distance to go and
continued improvement is not assured. Although this is not the Garden of Eden it is
nevertheless said to contain a number of serpents that threaten tranquility. Specifical-
ly there are the four intertwined "imbalances"-the U.S. budget deficit, the U.S. trade
21
deficit, the U.S. capital inflow and the high exchange rate of the dollar. It is desirable
to try to disentangle these serpents, especially because the effort provides a transition
to discussing the economic situation in Europe.
The U.S. decided in 1981 to raise defense expenditures, to cut taxes, especially to
cut taxes on the return of capital, and by implication to run a large budget deficit. This
decision would have certain consequences for the distribution of output and income in
the U.S. If the U.S. were a closed economy without international trade or capital
flows, the consequences would be as follows:-There would be an increase in the output
devoted to defense and to consumption, and an increase in the activity in defense and
consumer goods industries. Despite the tax cuts intended to stimulate investment
there would be less private investment than there would otherwise have been, because
the deficit would be absorbing part ofthe private savings. The high demand for capital
resulting from the deficit and from the pro-capital tax cut would raise interest rates.
There would be a shift of income to savers who supply capital. There would be a shift
ofincome from wage earners. Their productivity would be held down by the growth of
the capital stock and they would have to pay some of the taxes to service the Federal
debt.
Despite recurrent fears over the last few years, there was nothing in this picture to
prevent a recovery or cause a recession. It involved a change in the composition of
output, not a depression ofthe total. It would not prevent a rise ofemployment as long
as workers were willing to accept the slower growth in their real incomes that was
implied.
If the deficit was more than of a certain size this process could not go on forever.
(The knowledge ofeconomists seems to consist entirely ofa list ofthing that cannot go
on forever.) The deficit adds to the debt which adds to the interest burden which adds
to the deficit and so on. If the deficit is initially too big this cumulation leads to larger
and larger deficits and debts relative to GNP. If continued, that would absorb not only
all private net savings but also all private gross savings, so that in the end the capital
stock would be reduced to zero. Presumably even a short-sighted government would
change course before that point was reached. A deficit ofless than the critical size, in a
growing economy, could go on forever, with a stable ratio of debt to GNP but with
slower growth than if the deficit were smaller.
Since the U.S. is not a closed economy, this whole scenario is being acted out on
larger stage. The U.S. budget deficit reduces the world's total investment. But our tax
changes favorable to investment have attracted a large part ofthe world's total invest-
ment to the U.S. So we have a larger net capital inflow. Total investment in the U.S. is
larger than in the closed-economy case, but more of that investment is owned by
foreigners. The capital stock owned by Americans is no larger than without the inflow.
Similarly the capital stock in the rest of the world is low~r, but the rest of the world
owns more capital in the U.S. The capital stock owned by the rest of the world is no
less than it would have been, but more of it is located in the U.S. The gains that U.S.
savers would have obtained are now shared with savers around the world, who earn
higher interest than they would otherwise have earned. The losses that U.S. workers
would have suffered are reduced and spread to workers elsewhere, who have smaller
capital stock to work with. The inflow ofcapital to the U.S. raises the exchange rate of
the dollar and causes a net inflow of goods and services.
Nothing in all this requires stagnation or high unemployment in the rest ofthe world.
There will be less investment in the rest of the world but also higher net exports and
more accumulation of assets in the U.S. The composition of output in the rest of the
world, and the distribution of income, will be different, but the level ofoutput and real
22
income need be no different. There need be no increase of unemployment, if workers
accept the real wages that the slower rise of productivity requires.
We may or may not like this distribution of the world's output and income, which
supports investment in the U.S. and exports elsewhere, and raises capital incomes
and restrains labor incomes. But it is not a prescription for stagnation and unemploy-
ment.
Let me turn.FJow briefly to Europe (by which I mean OECD Europe). The basic facts
are these. The rate of increase of total output fell after 1973 in Europe as it did in the
U.S. The European fall was great and has shown much less sign of revival than in the
U.S. The European rate of increase of productivity was greater than the American
before 1973 and fell as in America after 1973, but has remained higher than in the U.S.
The rate of growth of demand-of GNP in current marks, pounds, francs, and so
on-has fallen in recent years but has remained higher than in the U.S.
The big problem, of course has been the failure of employment to rise, and the
consequence big rise ofunemployment. This was not due, in any reasonable sense, to
inadequate demand. From 1981to1984 total demand in Europe rose by 9.8 percent per
annum, but total output rose by only 1.4 percent per annum, or about 14 percent as
much. Almost all of the increase in demand was dissipated in higher prices. Neither
was the stagnation of employment due to inadequate productivity, which was still
rising faster than in the U.S. We are back, at last, to the classical explanations of
unemployment. There is unemployment when workers will not work for a wage that is
supported by their productivity. If there is any American miracle, it is that we redis-
covered that first.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
The German author introduced his paper with the observation that there was a
broad similarity among-the countries of the Atlantic world in "all essentials of social,
political, and economic development." They had experienced forty years of peace,
and they were governed by stable democratic insti'tutions and the rule of law. The
overwhelming majority of their people enjoyed effective citizenship rights and the
highest standard of living ever.
Yet there were problems. Prosperity and stability notwithstanding, there had
emerged in our populations an underclass-a significant number ofpeople who did not
enjoy the benefits.and opportunities our societies had to offer. Three important de-
velopments accounted for this. First, it had become apparent that certain groups could
no longer benefit from the services of the welfare, or social, state. Financially, the
social state was no longer viable. And the extreme bureaucratization ofsocial services
had rendered them inpersonal, eclipsing the individual qualities they should have.
Second, the increasing preoccupation with economic developments had led to a
tendency not to recognize minorities, and to a cessation ofthe important attempts that
had been made earlier to confer full citizenship on them. The third factor was the
phenomenon of "boom unemployment," in which significant economic growth and
significant unemployment existed simultaneously. This unemployment could not be
explained in traditional terms, nor could we cope with it in the traditional ways. In
short, there was now a boundary in our societies below which a fair number of our
23
people were living. It was not a group with revolutionary potential, but it was a
disturbing indication of our inability to give all people a decent life.
Another disturbing contemporary phenomenon was what some commentators had
labelled "sclerosis"-the extreme difficulty we seemed to have in producing a sense of
initiative and forward motion in our societies and economies. The rigidities giving rise
to this condition existed both in the U.S. and Europe, though they were more pro-
nounced in Europe, where the social safety net was tighter, the bureaucracies larger,
the immobility of the people greater, the special interest groups more powerful, and
wages "stickier." In the U.S. there was a tendency to believe that a return to tradition-
al American values would solve the problems and lead to progress. In Europe, there
were different ideas of how to break out of the rigidities-the ideas of alternative
political groups, ofthose who believed in new technologies, and ofthose who hoped to
revive a new entrepreneurial spirit in Europe-none of which, the author felt, had yet
shown much promise.
* * *
The author of the working paper on the American political system pointed out that
the political systems of the U.S. and Europe were very different, not just in the sense
that the American system was non-parliamentary, but different at the "fundamental
level of electoral method." American political parties were "disorganized, inchoate,
and weak." They were controlled from the bottom up. That politics in America was
essentially local was observable in the process ofnominating candidates among whom
the electorate chose. In this process,·a series of "centers" predominated, such as
Congressional districts and states. Congress was an amalgam ofthese centers, which,
in all their great diversity, were where American political expression took place.
In the U.S., public opinion was basic to the political system. But it was also malle-
able. For example, public opinion had traditionally held that foreign aid was the first
thing that should go in reducing federal expenditures. That this had never happened
illustrated that public opinion could be channelled and led. Yet its primacy was para-
mount and its essentially personal and parochial nature had to be remembered in any
discussion of divergent trends in the Atlantic world.
* * *
In his introductory remarks, the author of the paper on the American economy
sought to provide a perspective on the current combination of high U.S. budget and
trade deficits, the strong dollar, and heavy capital inflows. This situation was caused
in part by U.S. actions and in part by developments abroad. In the U.S., advocates of
cutting taxes and increasing defense expenditures had not expected a large budget
deficit to occur as a result. As it turned out, they had made three erroneous assump-
tions: that cutting taxes would increase revenue, that there would be more room for
making cuts in the non-defense part of the budget then there actually was, and that the
transition from a high inflation to a moderate inflation economy could be made without
going through a recession. In addition to tax cuts and higher defense outlays, changes
were made in the tax code which increased the after-tax return to capital and made the
U.S. a more attractive place to invest.
At the same time, investment abroad, especially in the developing countries, was
becoming less attractive. Unwise governmental policies and the actions of "overex-
uberant'' bankers had led to disinflation and disinvestment. And economic policies
which had rendered Europe less able to adapt to a disinflationary world had reduced
the attractiveness of investing there.
24
In the U.S., all this had led to high interest rates, a large net capital inflow, and high
net imports. The rate ofinvestment in the U.S. relative to GNP was also high, but very
little of it was owned by Americans.
Many had viewed these developments in the U.S. economy with great concern. The
budget deficit, it was feared, would abort or at least weaken and shorten the recovery,
cause inflation to return, and slow down economic growth. The strong dollar and high
net imports would result in a sluggish economy, damage industry, and turn the U.S.
into a service economy. It was also said that U.S. policies were inhibiting Europe's
recovery and impoverishing the LDC's.
But, continued the speaker, the budget deficit had not stopped or weakened the
recovery or caused inflation. The increase in imports had not depressed the economy.
While some industries had been hurt, there was no evidence to suggest that the U.S.
was losing goods production; statistics indicated the opposite was true. U.S. policies
were not causing stagflation in Europe. Rather, they were changing the composition of
European output, giving Europe a low investment, high net export economy. In
general, the deficit was shifting income distribution in the world from labor supplier to
capital supplier by reducing the stock of capital with which labor had to work. This
was bad for the LDC's, which were labor suppliers.
The speaker's prescription for action was to avoid protectionist measures and the
temptation to intervene in the capital markets. Europe had to adopt measures to
promote its revival, and the LDC's had to take steps to attract capital. The U.S. had to
reduce its budget deficit to avoid increasing further the ratio of debt to GNP. Howev-
er, there were, concluded the speaker, "worse things than budget deficits."
* * *
Addressing the question of social welfare policies, an American speaker felt that his
country was in a "period of retreat." After an era of extraordinary changes for the
better in terms of conferring rights on those previously denied them and benefits on
those at the bottom rung of the social ladder, the current policy seemed to be "benign
neglect." Many Americans who had themselves been helped by government assist-
ance programs w_~re now indifferent to the plight of the poor and the dispossessed.
While political rhetoric on the subject of social expenditures focused on the poor, the
unemployed, and those on welfare and food stamps, the fact was obscured that 80
percent ofthe total federal welfare expenditure went to the middle class, while only 14
percent went to low income recipients.
It was the speaker's view that it was not beyond the government's fiscal capacity to
sustain the cost of current social services. While it was perhaps true that the
bureaucracy had gotten out of hand to the detriment of the programs and constituen-
cies, the problem was manageable. Certainly the number of recipients had expanded
beyond what was originally intended; we needed to find out why and what to do about
it.
The social welfare situation was very different in Europe, said a German. In almost
all European countries, the cost ofsocial services was too high, with built-in increases
no country could cope with, no matter how strong its economy. The bureaucracy of
the social state had to be thoroughly dismantled. Too many people were receiving in
transfer income as much as they had paid in taxes, less the costs of bureaucracy. A
substantial reform of the welfare state was needed so that benefits could be provided
at an affordable cost.
Europe, argued a Briton, had gone "too far down the welfare state .road." His
country was striving to reverse direction. Of the U.K. 's £130 in public expenditures,
£40 billion went to pensions and other cash benefits, £18 billion to medical care. There
25
were 2.3 people of working age to each person retired; the ratio would change to 1.8 to
one by the year 2030. Welfare beneficiaries could ultimately outnumber the payers,
which, the speaker believed, would endanger the democratic process. Revolutionary
action was more likely to come from the "oppressed minority ofthose left paying than
from the increasing majority" of recipients.
Another British speaker felt there was a direct link between the level of welfare
payments and the rate of unemployment. There was a disincentive effect when people
could get 80 to 90 percent of their take-home pay in the form of welfare.
It was a Dutch participant's view that the high benefits and resulting high costs of
social programs in Europe contributed to high labor costs, and to a flight to the "black
market." In fact, the unemployment situation was perhaps not as bad as the statistics
indicated, because they did not include this hidden part of the economy. Because of
this and because of the high level ofbenefits from the social welfare system, it was not
likely, the speaker concluded, that the underclass would become revolutionary in its
attitudes.
Other speakers were more concerned about the revolutionary potential of the
underclass. Its very existence was, in a Dutch participant's opinion, "politically ex-
plosive." The potential for revolutionary attitudes would increase as the underclass
became more politically aware. A German pointed out that, in his country, the highest
unemployment rates were among 20- to 24-year olds-those just completing their
education or vocational training. This was a literate group that was beginnning to
question the traditional values of society, which, in its view, did not offer the oppor-
tunity to share in the benefits of society. The established political parties had to
recognize the potential for radicalism and address the question ofvalues. The problem
of youth unemployment was also very significant in the U.S., said an American. The
U.S. had not been successful at dealing with the difficulty its young were havin~ in
finding entry-level employment. There would be serious social implic<itions if those
who could not get entry level jobs continued to fall ever farther behind. This was a
particular problem in the inner cities and could lead to social confrontation.
The question of youth unemployment prompted an Austrian to wonder whether our
countries' educational and vocational training programs were equipping the young
with the qualificatons necessary for today's jobs. In spite of high unemployment in
Europe, it was still difficult to find qualified people to fill many jobs.
An Italian viewed with alarm the "fatal" prospect ofcontinuing high unemployment
in Europe. Partly to blame was the "inelasticity of the system," and also the "psycho-
logical inelasticity" of the worker. It was harder to change jobs in Europe than in the
U.S. Before 1980 Italy had had an export labor force; since that time it had imported a
million workers from other countries, yet it still had 10 percent unemployment. Signi-
ficant investments had been made to keep alive industries that should have been
allowed to die, while not enough had been invested in new job-creating industries. In
Europe, the speaker concluded, things that should die did so too slowly; things that
should be born were born too slowly.
In assessing the difference between the employment situation in Europe and the
U.S., it was necessary, pointed out an American, to recognize fundamental differ-
ences in the environment in whichjob creation took place. One element was bankrupt-
cy laws, which, in the U.S., all9wed people to be risk takers. They could start a
business, fail, go bankrupt, and then start all over again. In Europe, bankruptcy laws
were restrictive and discouraged risk taking. Another factor was that the duration of
unemployment was far longer in Europe than in the U.S. Recent productivity im-
provements in Europe had occurred because there had been a great deal of capital
investment at the expense of labor; because ofrestrictive labor laws, businesses were
trying to avoid hiring new workers.
26
It was a German speaker's conclusion that we no longer needed as much per capita
employment to produce and increase wealth. There was a declining need for work at
the level we could afford to pay for it. The problem then became how to guarantee
peoples' sense of self worth. A Canadian wondered if we needed a new means of
structuring peoples' lives the way work had done in the past.
* * *
The.discussion ofthe structural impediments faced by Western societies and econo-
mies and their potential political consequences prompted a German speaker to pro-
vide an analysis of the political situation in the Federal Republic. The three classical
parties-Christian Democrats, Social Democrats, and Liberal Democrats-still
polled over 90 percent of the vote. The Liberals were far from dead, and seemed to
gain new life at each election. The once seemingly unstoppable growth of the Greens
was over; their strength at the polls had never exceeded 10 percent. Indeed, they were
viewed by many younger people as a party of30- and 40-yearolds. Many young people
were neoconservative and regarded the Greens as "peddlers ofhorror scenarios bear-
ing no relationship to reality."
Would the Social Democrats return to power in the 1987 election? And would the
West Germans leave the Alliance and adopt neutralism, pacificism, and anti-
Americanism? The speaker thought not. There would be no change in 1987. For one
thing, the political cycles in the Federal Republic were long: there had been 17 years of
Christian Democrat chancellors (1949-1966) followed by 13 and a half years of Social
Democrat rule, lasting until 1982. Furthermore, the Social Democrats were exhausted
and disorganized, with no new programs and new leaders yet visible. The CDU was,
on the other hand, "pragmatic, realistic, and opportunistic." Already there were
voices within the party calling for a new distributionary policy. It was the speaker's
conclusion that the party would shift "quickly and subtly enough to insure Chancellor
Kohl's reelection in 1987."
* * *
Commenting on the American economic working paper, a French speaker agreed
with the thesis that unemployment occurred when workers would not work for a wage
level supportea by their productivity. The U.S., despite a period oflow productivity
growth, still had one of the world's most productive economies. And it had made
recent productivity gains by automating, robotizing, and emphasizing quality.
Europe, on the other hand, was competetive today only because of the high dollar.
Although fluctuations in the dollar rate were hard to predict, European industry
should assume adecline in the dollar's value of 15 to 20 percent in the next three years.
The challenge facing Europe was, then, to become a low cost producer; only this
would stop "Eurosclerosis." And no European country alone could be competitive;
only together could Europe compete effectively with the U.S. and Japan.
An Italian agreed that high real wages were an important factor in causing stagfla-
tion and unemployment in Europe. But wage moderation alone would not solve the
problem. It was also necessary to cut non-wage labor costs and to increase aggregate
demand. Direct wage costs in Europe and the U.S. were not so different. Europe had
to bear, in addition, indirect labor costs associated with institutional rigidities. It was
perhaps more important to change these constraints then to simply moderate wages.
There was also a link between demand and unemployment, the speaker continued.
There had been a significant increase in unemployment between 1981and1984, when
contractionary policies were in effectinmany European countries. The time had come
for those countries that had had some success at controlling deficits and inflation to
implement less restrictive demand policies.
27
A Spaniard doubted that wage moderation by itself had created jobs in the U.S. or
would do so in Europe. Other major institutional changes had to be made. In a Dutch
speaker's view, these changes would include attacking the inflexibility and immobility
of labor markets, including the lack ofdifferentiation in wage rates and rigid dismissal
procedures, and lowering the labor costs brought about by the high benefit level of
existing social welfare programs. But, he went on, such changes would be difficult to
make because a fundamental difference between the U.S. and Europe was that many
in Europe were more concerned about the distributionary aspect ofwealth and nation-
al income than about increasing national wealth for the benefit of all.
Two speakers voiced skepticism that either wage moderation or increased flexibil-
ity and mobility oflabor would reduce unemployment and promote economic growth.
A German pointed out that, with wages "stagnant" in his country in recent years, there
had been productivity gains, but no new jobs. A Dutch participant felt that the size of
its population gave the U.S. a different kind of economic dynamism. The mobility of
captial and labor that characterized the U.S. was not possible or desirable in Europe.
Several speakers felt the economic situation in the West was a good deal more
complex and called for more urgent action than the discussion indicated. A Briton
rejected altogether any fundamental connection between economic growth and the
"indisciplines" ofthe social state. The real hindrances to growth were the absence ofa
system to provide stability in the world's currencies and the lack of a "coherent
policy" to finance world deficits. It was these failures in Western economic strategy
that had "disrupted progress toward interdependent prosperity."
It was an American's view that a crisis was brewing in the international economic
system, as evidenced by growing debt and great instability in exchange rates and
interest rates. Yet we seemed unprepared to take any action to head off the crisis,
merely because it was not yet imminent. We needed some mechanism to anticipate
crises before they happened and to take action.
In this vein, another American felt that the economic working paper "painted too
innocuous a picture ofthe effects of U.S. budget deficits." The paper overemphasized
the "frictionlessness" with which resource shifts, internal and across national bound-
aries, could be accomplished. The budget deficit and its effect on exchange rates and
international trade had speeded up the need for difficult adjustments that societies had
to make to adapt to new technologies. The robust recovery and expansion in the U.S.
had been based on a borrowing from the future that was "unsustainable, undesirable,
and unnecessary."
* * *
In concluding the discussion, the author ofthe American economic paper made the
following observations. (I) There was no declining need for human work; rather we
had an increasing supply of unemployment. We hadicreated conditions whereby the
effects of unemployment were not as bad as they used to be for those who were
unemployed. We had adequate demand, but were unable to convert it into an increase
in output and employment. The problem was in the factors determining the cost of
production. (2) The international monetary system had in fact worked quite well in the
last four or five years. It had adapted to and reflected fundamental changes in the
world economic system. To intervene would not solve the world's economic
problems.
* *
*
28
II. HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH THE SOVIET BLOC?
* * * * *
Working Paper Prepared by Karl Kaiser,
Director, Research Institute ofthe German Society for Foreign Affairs
1. The election of Gorbachev has brought a man to the helm of the Soviet Union
who has a good chance of leading his country into the twenty-first century (what
Western leader today can be expected to have such a chance?), and who is likely to
leave a personal mark on Soviet society comparable to the Jong reign of Stalin or
Breshnev.
The conservatives in the Soviet Union have understood that the country's second
rank as superpower is only tenuously based on military power and that consistent
economic failure, which Breshnev hoped to overcome through economic cooperation
with the West, will eventually endanger the Soviet power position at home and
abroad. Only thorough reform of Soviet society can preserve her status as a world
power and that will be Gorbachev's mission.
Domestic change is likely to combine with external flexibility. Western, notably
American, media, so easily beguiled by a Soviet leader's smiles, good manners and an
attractive wife, welcome though they are, will soon discover that Gorbachev will fight
for his country's interests as toughly as his predecessors, but in all likelihood with
great astuteness. With "peace offensives" by him-SDI opening new vulnerable
flanks in the West-he will represent agreater challenge than the ineffective and dying
leaders of the past, now mourned with nostalgia by some in the West. The party is
over.
2. The "Soviet Bloc" that Stalin and his successors created no longer exists. Be-
sides the split with China, considerable variety has seeped in both with regard to the
degree of internal liberalization and differences in foreign policy. Moreover, overseas
areas of influence have been added. A Western policy that treats the Soviet power
sphere as one unit while neglecting the internal differences is likely to forego major
opportunities (and-to-underestimate its own_successes of the past).
3. If a superpower is defined by its capacity to create and sustain an international
order that can accommodate the interests of lesser powers, only the U.S. can claim
that status. But during the recent past a loss of generosity towards the developing
world and an excessively confrontational mood and rhetoric vis-a-vis the Communist
world have somewhat undermined the old role. An American and Western policy is
needed that offers a realistic and genuine chance for a long-term improvement of
relations with the Eastern countries.
4. At the heart of our policy vis-a-vis the Soviet Union lie two questions:
a) What changes can we expect of the Soviet Union?
b) Can we influence it from outside?
a) After almost seven decades of Soviet history and one decade of Soviet handling
of detente in the 1970s, past experience should guard against unrealistic expectations
of change. What is likely to remain more or less constant?
- The Soviet Union's one-dimensional character as a system based on military
power and the rule of the party elite;
- Her yearning for over-insurance with all the problems it creates for her environ-
ment.
29
---------sC"C':-;;..";.;~"'-"""...-~----
It would be unrealistic, if not naive, to expect her to undergo significant liberaliza-
tion in this century or to voluntarily withdraw from existing power positions in Europe
or Asia. Policies based on different assumptions are likely to suffer deep disappoint-
ments, notably plans for a Soviet withdrawal from Eastern Europe or for a neutralized
and re-united Germany.
b) Can Soviet behaviour be influenced from outside? Libraries have been filled
supporting both sides of the argument. I believe there is some margin for impact,
though a rather small one, and it only exists inside the limits designed above. A Soviet
Union accepted as a world power and engaged in a constructive dialogue on a broad
front is more likely to follow minimum rules of international stability than under
conditions·of Western siege, implementing a "management of decline."
In order to preserve and recreate the economic and social prerequisites of a world
power, the Soviet Union has to implement change and reformfor many years to come,
!
more radical than at any time after World War II. There is, therefore, a chance for a
reactivated Western policy in economic areas. However, such a policy ofengagement
s likely to succeed only ifit is combined with firmness on essential Western positions,
as shown, for example, on the issue of intermediate nuclear forces.
5. A policy of economic and technological cooperation with the East reaches its
limits where it violates the rule of not delivering military technology to an adversary.
Some of the restrictive measures undertaken in recent years were overdue. But the
totality of restrictions now seriously threatens to curtail the free exchange of goods
and know-how within the West and to create tensions among Allies.
6. Europe's line ofdivision created by t\le Yalta Agreements or, depending on one's
perspective, by their non-implementation, is going to stay for a long time, even if the
strengthening of human rights of the autonomy of Eastern Europe's nations remains
the West's ardent wish and policy. An overt strategy calling for a Western repudiation
of Yalta, as Zbigniew Brzezinski recently did in Foreign Affairs and Europa-Archiv,
may even strengthen resistance to desirable change. There is a bitter lesson of many
post-war attempts to increase autonomy within the Soviet bloc thus acting against the
Soviet requirements of security as defined above: they end in a blood bath or political
repression.
Evolution is possible only within certain limits. Those Europeans, notably Ger-
mans, treated almost with contempt at the time by Americans, when they reluctantly
accepted Jaruzelski's military intervention as the lesser evil, turned out to be right in
the end: without his measures, Soviet (and East German) military intervention would
have caused a blood bath with unpredictable consequences for East-West relations;
today Poland has the highest degree of liberalization or, in other words, the lowest
degree of political repression of any country in the Soviet orbit. Surely Western
(including European) pressure helped as well, but on the December 1981 measures,
the West was divided.
7. A policy that violates essentials of Soviet interests is likely to be blocked by
Soviet resistance, if necessary by the Red Army. Change that takes place, however,
within (1) a framework with some Soviet participation, or (2) in a frame of reference
that the Soviets cannot totally reject, has a chance of producing evolution towards
more autonomy and human rights. The CSCE process is an example of the first,
economic cooperation an example of the second approach. A lower state of interna-
tional tensions is a prerequisite-though no guarantee-for evolution within the Com-
munist countries outside the Soviet Union. Finally, gradual evolution is the only kind
of change likely to produce results desirable to the West.
8. A policy ofdifferentiation is necessary vis-a-vis Eastern Europe: Wherever steps
toward human rights (e.g., Poland) or more autonomy in foreign policy (e.g., East
30
Germany or Rumania) are possible, they should be quietly supported. Public distinc-
tions between "good" and "bad" countries (as Vice President Bush used them in his
Vienna speech) are counter-productive and an obstacle to evolution. Discretion and
subtlety are the prerequisites for movement. The leaders ofBulgaria, Czechoslovakia,
East Germany, Hungary, Rumania (and also Albania) are ofadvanced age. Therefore,
change is to be expected in these countries and will require careful attention along
these lines.
9. A reduttion of the American presence in Europe, as advocated by Zbigniew
Brzezinski, may possibly support a similar move of the Soviet Union in Central
Europe but it does not guarantee it. Given Soviet priorities, it is rather unlikely, in
fact. Greater unification ofWestern European security policy is an end in itselfand not
likely to decrease Soviet presence. Schemes that advocate Western unilateralism
project onto the Soviet system Western values and behaviour patterns which are
partially alien to it. There are no majorities in Western Europe supporting the notion of
an independent Europe with a dramatically reduced U.S. presence in order to induce
the Soviet Union's withdrawal from Central Europe. A neutral re-united German is
unfeasible since the Soviet Union is unlikely to release East Germany, and since the
West Germans, except for a small minority, do not want to expose themselves to the
hair-raising risks of such a course.
10. The Soviet Union is above all a military power. Her reckless exploitation of the
detente period for a vast arms program demonstrates her priorities. On INF she
suffered only a partial defeat, for her weapons are there today and Western Europe is
more divided. But her one-dimensional policy has stretched her resources to a danger
point unprecedented in peace time. Here lie chances for an imaginative Western
policy.
11. President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative may offer the chance of a new
mix between defensive and offensive weapons and thereby of increased stability. It
should therefore be explored. To the Soviet Union it both offers opportunities and
represents a challenge. SDI and its public presentation in the West discredit a strategy
("immorality of nuclear deterrence", "elimination of all nuclear weapons," etc.) that
the West will need to preserve peace for the rest of this century, thus opening new
opportunities for ~ovie~propaganda, aggravated oy the amL:·:z..!.:;-;:::: :::;:' S~: ~.: ~ inter-
nal Alliance relations. Moreover, the forthcoming negotiations may recreate the same
dilemmas as were met in the INF negotiations: the Soviets are likely to use the
Western public process to gain the results which they failed to achieve at the negotiat-
ing table.
Simultaneously SDI represents a tremendous challenge to the Soviets: the danger of
U.S. superiority, a leap in the arms competition of unprecedented, indeed critical,
proportions to the Soviet Union, a dramatic innovative advance of Western technolo-.
gy. These elements may combine with possible disadvantages to the West, or a mutual
recognition of the advantages of shared strategic defense, to produce the basis of
future agreement. But the road to that result will be long and rugged.
* *
*
31
Background Paper Prepared by Helene Carrere d'Encausse,
Professor, Jnstitut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris and
Professor at the Sorbonne in Soviet Union History and Political Science
Fo< yea<' a heatod debate divided people conwned with the futu« of the USSR
(,tate,men, expe•")' bow to deol with the Sovietbloc, and p<imMilY with Mo,cow, in
onle< to tum the Soviet <egime towMd' mo<e modecate mtitud<' at home and in
international life? Two maio< point. a<e di.cu,.ed with '"pect tu thi' debateo eco-
nomic <elatioTI' and political/milita.-Y orientatioTI'. A' <eg"'d' the economic and trade
<elatioTI' with the £a>;tembloc, two oppo.ed idea' ""' at the bottom ofthe debate. On
the one ,ide, ,ome expert' .,,umethat th<0ugh economic exchange' andtechnologic·
al .,,i,tance, the W"' will be able to enhance the po•ition oftho.e who, in the USSR,
"'' infavo< ofdramatic <efonn•, which eventuallY would aeate the p<econditioTI' fm
a libe.-al tum of the Soviot 'Y'tem. (Samual Pi"' i' the b<'t example of ,uch on
attitude.) On the othec ,;de, ,ome expert' claim that, thrnugh trade the W<'l ;, ,ub·
'idizing the Soviet economY '"d giving Mo.cow the me'"' fo< tran,feciDll mme
'"ou<C<' to the militfil'Y "clO'- ln,tead of encom·aging the modecate o< refo<mi,t
tendencie. in the USSR, trade and technological .,,;,tance would end in ,upport to
the tough<'t and moce con.e.vative port of the Soviet bienrrchY. (I'ip<' ;, one ofthe
major representatives of this trend.)
A' "ganl' the military/political dimmion, the di,pute more o< I<'' follow' the
,ame line.. Tho" who 'upport d6tente ond a lowennilitfil'Y e!Iort in theW"'in onle<
to develop ,;milor tendenci" in the E"'t (the ,u-called "Soviet-dove,") ru-e oppo"d
by tbo.ewho M,ume that d6tente and relaxationinthe aDU' <acehavealwaY• '"ulted
in •ome Soviet rulventuri•m (Angola, Afghani"on) and in on ine<ea" in Soviet mili-
lan' powe'- (The SS-20' we<e deployed in a period dominated by the SALT arrange-
ment.) The whole di"u"ion, in onle< to be unde<'tandable, ,hould be place'1 in the
framewo<k of the majo< debate ovec the natu" of the Soviet regllne. and ove< the
nature of linkage between it' dom<'tic and fo<eign policie.. Jn the late ,;xti<' and in
the ,eventi<', the M'umption wM of a Soviet<egime getting rid ofi" ideologicalb"'i'
and turning out to behave like eve<Y modem powe< e.peciallY in it' international
policy (Hough). The P""nt decade;, chMacterized by thnevival ofthe mo« b·adi-
tional view that the Soviet <egime could not tran'fo'm it,elf, that it' vecy ""nee;,
unchanged, and that expan,ioni'm i' the majo< con.equence ofthat. Expan,ioni•m ;,
explained eithe< M rnoted in the ""nee ofthe Soviet regime, committedfo< ideolog·
ical ""'on' to a wodd-wide <evolutiona<Y dC'igo (Pipe,). o<" a con"quence of
Soviet dom<'tic p<0blem', ,ome ofthem being a port ofthe Soviet ,rate o<ganizatioo
it.elf-the multi-ethnical ,tate-'ome of them being more ci«UU''tantiaJ-ecooomic
and pment ,ocial trouble,. All the" facto<' account foc the militarization of the
,y,,em, the contiouou' development of a militan' \o<ee, which in tum prnduce<l
militan' ambitioTI' ab<Orul· It i• oot po,,ible to an,wec the que.tion how to deal with
Moscow, without putting the Soviet domestic problems-political, imperial, eco-
nomic-in their present context.
For years, it was assumed in the western world that the major Soviet problem was
the political 'ucce"ioo. The choice of,ucce"ive ,;Jing and aged lerulmWM ,een M a
manife,tatioo of a political ,y,tem unable to ,ulve the que.tion ofthe political powe<
and of it' tran'f" from ooe leadmhip to anothe< and from geoe<atioo to gene,..tioo.
Eve<Y unexpected Soviet move-invading Afghoni,tan, downing a South Ko<ean
ai<erofi-W"' M'igned to a ,hakY and divided leade<'hiP and fed the .,rnmption of a
hawki•h g..uup, acting on i" own initiative in uni« to enhance it. po,ition in the
''"'ggle fo< powe" The l"t ",ucce,,ion epi•ode," which gave powe< ,moothly to a
32
representative ofa new political generation, demonstrated that the Soviet system was
able to solve this chronic problem. Even the two previous transitional successions
(Andropov and Tchernenko) helped to institutionalize the mechanisms of succession
and to get rid of some of its "psycho-dramatic" aspects. Clearly, the system is work-
able: losing power, struggling for power, being defeated, are no longer tragedies. The
once defeated Tchernenko (1982) and Gorbachev (1984) turned their defeat into vic-
tories during the second round of the political succession. Moreover, every Soviet
candidate to leadership, before coming to power, had elaborated a more or less similar
program for the use of the Western world. After the alleged pro-detente stance of
Brejnev, Andropov was identified (via Mr. Arbatov) as a "Westerner" and reform-
oriented man; when succeeding him, Tchernenko was presented as Brejnev's heir,
which also pointed to his detente postures. Presently, Mr. Gorbachev has built up the
reputation as a technocrat, mainly concerned with economic reforms and ready to
face the West with open-mindedness and good will. During the last 10 years, Soviet
political life was seen in the West as characterized by its division between two political
postures, opposing a pro-detente political leader, to a tough, conservative, hawkish,
military and heavy-industry establishment. This view prevailed during the whole
period in spite of the fact that Brejnev presiifP(! c, er the Afghan invasion and Andro-
pov withdrew from strategic negotiations.
The Soviet Union went back to Geneva only after President Reagan's re-election.
Obviously the succession problem has been solved in the USSR without troubles. A
new generation is on its way to replace, step by step, the dying cohort. But the
Gorbachev leadership will have to face many political problems which could affect
Soviet foreign behavior. First, we know from Soviet history that the leader in charne
of suoreme power needs several years to establish his authority over the ".'h;:,1e sys-
tem. Brejnev, as an exa:T!rle. v·~~ ::.;.;~ ;,, d1'1fgc 0i tlie 111ajor foreign policy problems
until the early seventies. Until 1971, Kossyguine was the "partner" responsible for the
Western world, Podgorny for the Third World; Brejnev was in competition with
Kossyguine, Podgorny and Chelepin at home, and started promoting his own clients in
order to extend his bureaucratic sphere of influence. The span of time needed for
consolidating power at]10me will tend to discourage any Soviet leader from taking
initiatives-foreign or domestic-which could endanger his position with the party
apparatus ("Nomenklatura"). Moreover, in the very near future, Mr. Gorbachev will
be concerned primarily with the reshaping and rebuilding of the decision-making
system. Because ofa lasting transitional period, ofan ailing leadership (Brejnev was in
poor health as far back as 1976), the Politburo, which worked smoothly in a collective
way under the wise arbitrage ofMr. Brejnev, became Jess efficient, more divided, less
coherent. Indecisiveness, contradictory or dispersed initiatives, became common.
The need for recreating conditions for a coherent and unchallenged decision-making
system is obvious; past experience has taught us that it is not an easy task. And this
requires attention and ti1ne which will probably prevent more spectacular initiatives.
The workability ofthe political system is far from being the sole problem for the new
Soviet leadership. The present state of the Soviet economy is also a source of trouble
and concern. Recent figures for Soviet economic performance by the end of the
eleventh five-year-plan period show a gloomy picture, a slowdown marking the whole
period since the mid-seventies. In spite of a slight improvement in the industrial and
agricultural sectors in 1983-84 (as shown by Soviet data), stagnation characterizes the
state of the Soviet economy and prospects for the near future are not bright. As
regards the growth targets for the 1981-1985 plan-period, all growth data point to
fig~res below the original targets and the real growth of GNP has been of the order of
2.::rpercent a year. The energy sector is particularly troublesome. In view of the
33
continued lag in its nuclear power program, the Soviet energy balance is still prob-
lematic. Output of the three main primary fuels has barely surpassed Soviet domestic
energy usage, which is estimated to have grown at an annual rate ofabout 2.4 percent
(1982-1983). In other words, the Soviet Union has managed to increase net energy
exports slightly in addition to buying Middle Eastern oil (mainly for arms) and re-
exporting it. The output of oil, however, was down marginally in 1984; an increase in
energy exports in 1985 as called for in the annual plan, and the increase of2 percent in
oil production and 1.6 percent in coal production planned for 1985 look optimistic. The
Soviet leadership is continually calling for more energy conservation, showing great
concern· with respect to this problem. The question related to this general economic
slowdown, is whether any changes have occurred in priorities between the end uses of
outputfor consumption, investment and defense. The Minister ofFinance, Garbuzov,
announced an increase of 12 percent in the official defense budget between 1984-1985
(Pravda, Nov. 28, 1984); such information is economically meaningless, it is certainly
a gross understatement of the real Soviet defense budget. Defense spending was
decreased (at least officially) in 1977. and 1981, to signal a peace-seeking attitude; in
1984, it was increased to show a determination to match American efforts. Such data
are to be understood more as a signalling device than as a measure. The American
Defense Intelligence Agency assumes that Soviet defense spending began to grow at
an annual rate of at least five percent a year as early as 1983. As regards priority for
consumption, Baibakov, the chairman ofthe Gosplan, stressed that the manufacturing
sector is to grow faster than total industry and that planned growth of industrial
consumer goods is to be marginally faster in 1985 than that of industrial production of
producer goods. Such claims suggest that there has been a slight consumption-
oriented shift, which is especially obvious in housing policy.
Many contradictory statistics and claims suggest that the Soviet policy-makers are
faced with diverse pressures which leave them little room for maneuver.
To the poor economic performance one should add an explanation and a com-
plementary problem, the deficiencies in economic mechanisms. Some authors (e.g.,
the academician Fedorenko inEkonomitcheskaia Gazeta, January 1985) have pointed
to weakness in the way management is using the automated control system (Automati-
zirovanaia sistema upravlenia, or "ASU".)
A chain of attack is developing against the researchers who are not sustaining the
impetus towards practical application of their research; against the economists who
are not trying to educate management personnel; and eventually against the industrial
ministries themselves, obstructing ASU-programs in their sectors. The main problem
obviously lies in the way the information is collected. The Soviet computer systems do
not have the capacity to handle the problem, at the present level of centralization.
Moreover, the ASU has been unable to produce a significant improvement in informa-
tional flows. Soviet industry was much more successful in assimilating computeriza-
tion and mathematical methods at the level of the production process than at the level
of economic planning. It has to be borne in mind that the old reformers-Liberman,
Nemchinov, Kanterovitch-used to link introduction ofmathematical methods and
decentralization, in order to turn the economy towards more efficiency. In the later
years of the Brezjnev period, there was a euphoric mood about the possibilities for
rationalizing central planning by means of computerization. But the issues of central-
ization and decentralization were not talked about.
When one looks now at the economic deficiencies in the USSR, one has the feeling
of being back in the early sixties. What are the prospects, in such a gloomy situation,
for some dramatic initiative due to Gorbachev's fresh authority? Two elements are
34
running in favor of such initiatives. First, a large part of the Soviet elite-economic
and even bureaucratic-expects and may even welcome some real changes in eco-
nomic policy. Second, Gorbachev's age provides some assurance that he will be
around long enough to make his policies stick. The options available to him are:
changes in priorities, or changes in organization. The first option seems to be quite
restricted. There is, however, the possibility of seeking benefits to be gained from
tracfe~'
This would involve returning to more active cultivation of trade with the West,
either at the expense of trade within Comecon, or by efforts to expand Soviet foreign
trade in general. Gorbachev's visit to Britain in December 1984 suggests that he
appreciates the practical importance of East-West trade. As far as organizational
changes are concerned, the kind ofchange most frequently discussed is a reform ofthe
Hungarian-type, that wou~d free enterprises to pursue profits in a market-like system,
choosing their supplies and competing for customers.
But such a reform seems uneasy to put in practice in the Soviet environment. First,
the issue of economic decentralization has not been discussed in the USSR for years,
and everybody seems eager to avoid it. The Soviet establishment obviously thinks
that the party would lose political power in a decentralized economy. Unlike the East
European Communist parties, the Soviet elite knows that in case ofslipping out of the
party system, there would not be an "elder brother" for keeping them in power by
force. Powerful interests identifying themselves with the existing system, including
regional party secretaries, military, and branch ministry officials, are probably
opposed to any dramatic organizational change. To impose a reform on such opposing
groups, Gorbachev would need a very strong personal position, and the support of a
coherent Politburo. Presently, Gorbachev has to develop his own power base and
authority, and to get rid of the "old guard" in the leadership.
Moreover, there is no clear evidence that Gorbachev is personally inclined towards
"market socialism." Indeea, there was some interest shown in the Soviet h'ierarchy
during recent years in the Chinese reform experiment. And the relative warming in
Soviet-Chinese relations (Arkhipov's recent visit to China and the signing in Decem-
ber 1984 or an agreement on trade and technical cooperation between the two coun-
tries point to a better relationship) could facilitate a discussion in the USSR about the
'Chinese pattern. Peking could contribute, as have Budapest and East Berlin to the
Soviet search for new economic ideas. But to what extent is the Chinese way relevant
and acceptable in the USSR? Ifit is too early to discuss this issue, because of insuffi-
cient evidence about the Sovietjudgmenton the Chinese attempt, one should note that
the political tension and obstruction on the part of the party cadres and local appar-
atchiks are part of the Chinese picture. And this could also be food for thought in
Moscow, where this kind of obstructionism has always doomed decentralizing re-
form. The open debate in China about the fierce bureaucratic opposition to reform, on
the other hand, could give comfort to those favoring reforms in the USSR, by showing
them that such attitudes can be openly discussed.
Some changes are less problematic and they could be of some help to the Soviet
economy. First, the new leadership could implement limited reforms, as in some East
European countries, to reduce the number of centrally-planned targets; it could also
transfer some detailed economic decisions to lower levels.
Second, another means to deal with Soviet economic failures would be to revive the
Andropovian-style emphasis on law, order and discipline, and to generally impose on
people a more hard-working behavior. Third, agriculture could become a sector for
innovation or, at least, real improvement through the encouragement of the private
35
sector and the development ofthe "contract brigades" and "normless teams" recently
introduced on many Soviet farms (the Bulgarian example could be of some relevance
here). Not so long ago, Gorbachev favored this system. Finally, there could be a more
general relaxation of the restrictions on small-scale private enterprises in the services
and craft sectors. The East European example could encourage the Soviet leadership
to move in this direction. Such a change, even the slightest one, could have an effect
on the morale ofthe laborforce and help cut back the effort currently directed towards
illegal private enterprise.
None of these measures would deeply transform the Soviet economy, but they
would reinforce the image ofGorbachev as a practical manager, seeking for change in
the tradition of Yuri Andropov. So everything points to a lengthy transitional period,
during which Gorbachev's efforts will be mainly directed towards building up his
political power, with some practical economic measures aimed at improving the state
of the Soviet economy (a modest improvement of consumption levels is a political
necessity) and a certain amount ofreliance on the benefits offoreign trade. Dramatic
economic reforms are likely to be left to the distant future, when the party apparatus,
and more generally the Soviet establishment, will be more confident about Gor-
bachev's ability to combine modernization and the interests of the system without
threatening the stability of the system as a whole. The present "conservative" atti-
tudes of Mikhail Gorbachev, as regards the whole set of reforms and social problems,
was evidenced by his first mess<>g;:; tc th.:: SC'.'iet pe0ple. Elected on March 11 as
General-Secretary ofthe party, Gorbachev expressed his views the same day and two
days later in his two speeches to the CC·Plenum (March 11) and to the funeral cere-
mony (March 13). The message conveyed by the Soviet press on March 15 (Pravda,
Izvestia, Sovetskaia Rossia, Krasnaia Zvezda) with extensive quotations was unmis-
takable. As Pravda's headlines put it clearly, "much work lies ahead"; and Izvestia
reminded the citizens that "work is the sole means for developing our social wealth."
Labor-discipline, order, effective measures for repressing any violation of disci-
pline-these were the main themes developed by the new General-Secretary. All this
suggests that, as in the first Andropovian period, the need for a dramatic economic
reform will be discussed at length; but as for practical measures, the party will rely
primarily on this attempt to drive society towards more personal efforts.
Political consolidation and economic issues are not the sole questions Mr. Gor-
bachev faces. Of tremendous importance to his power are the imperial issues. The
leadership presently faces a deeply troubled situation at both levels ofits empire, inner
and outer. The question of the inner empire is linked with all major aspects of the
Sovietglobal situation-demography, public health, the economy, priority choices. In
order to understand the issues at stake, one has to keep in mind certain fundamental
facts.
First, the Soviet Union has to deal with a North-South issue inside its own borders.
The USSR-with a population of273.8 million as ofJanuary 1984-has its North, with
developed Slavic, Baltic and other European populations constituting 77 percent of
the total population (1979 census), with an average natural increase in the seventies of
0.56 percent a year. At the same time, the Soviet Union has its South, made up of
people ofTurkish-Moslem origin, located primarily in Central Asia and the Caucasus.
This South represents 22.7 percent of the population (1979 census), with an average
natural increase in the seventies of 2.14 percent, i.e., four times that of the North (in
Central Asia the increase rate is 3.29 percent a year, or 5.4 times that of the North.)
This demographic explosion has occurred in spite of significant economic develop-
ment and educational progress. It coincides with the demographic depression of the
North (where the small growth is due mainly to the population structure and not to the
36
fertility rate which is slipping below the replacement rate). Such an uneven population
development in the USSR has many negative consequences. First, the Soviet popula-
tion as a whole is increasing at a slower pace than expected and needed for economic
purposes. This slowing down in the general population growth is aggravated by evi-
dences of a decaying health situation in the USSR.
As Murray Feshbach demonstrated, the Soviet population is experiencing some
une~ected demographic trends: increased infant mortality, and increased mortality
among males in the prime working and military ages. Surprisingly, male life expectan-
cy declined sharply in the seventies. Alcoholism seems to be largely responsible for
such a turn. And the last research data provided by Feshbach suggest that, by the early
eighties, female alcoholism was also increasing and accounting for mortality in the
female population. All this points to serious health problems in the USSR, affecting
the youth and primarily the population of the North which is exposed to alcoholism,
while Islamic law tends fo prevent the population of the South from becoming
addicted to alcohol. This factor help to reinforce-from the viewpoint of morale-the
South versus the North.
The ethno-demographic balance in the USSR is creating a Malthusian conflict be-
tween food and population, the North being responsible for the bulk of the industrial
and agricultural production of the country. The Soviet Union is also facing the dilem-
ma of adjusting the needs of labor forces for employment. The labor force is concen-
trated mainly in the South, but it is required in the developed North. During the last
decade, the regime proved unable to solve the problem by moving the surplus South-
ern labor force into the labor-deficit areas. Everything was tried to encourage such
moves (threats, material and morale incentives, legal regulations) and everything
failed. The Southern populations claim their right to remain in their birth places and
dema!'d a shiit in economic priorities, to bring industrial investment into their under-
developed areas. The issue of the Siberian rivers project-diverting them towards
Central Russia or Central Asia-evidenced this deep conflict between local and global
Soviet economic choices. So far, the Soviet regime has been more or less able to resist
pressures from the South; but it is questionable how long it can maintain such a
North-oriented policy with an increasingly unbalanced population, with a deficit labor
force in the·North, and with a troubled political situation along the Soviet Islamic
borders, which could have a spill-over effect on Soviet Islamic areas, especially if the
regime continues to turn a deaf ear to their economic demands. The classical conflict
between major priorities-consumption, investment, defense-is increasingly com-
plicated by this second conflict between global and national-regional priorities.
The political effects of this population discrepancy cannot be ignored. First, there
are some prospects for Eurasian apartheid. The Soviet regime is quite concerned
about the possibility of the eventual depopulation in the North by early in the next
century. Such a situation is already creating an explosive trend, in the rising national-
ism of all ethnic groups.
If national tendencies were quite visible in the South in the sixties and in the
seventies, by now this trend is at work in the North, and primarily among the ethnic
Russians. The official majority grouP-the Russian one-is aware of its very ambig-
uous position. Officially, it is the "leading" group, and as such, the privileged one. In
fact, the Russians have an overwhelming feeling of having paid the price for develop-
ing the South, and of having received nothing in return but hate and contempt. An
increased demand for concentrating efforts on the North, for developing some kind of
North or Slavic area with Slavic solidarities, is thus emerging.
The national picture cannot be improved when such diverging trends are at work
(rising Russian and Slavic nationalism versus rising Southern nationalism and some
37
,
kind of Islamic revival), and the new leadership will find difficulties in restoring the
idea of a Soviet community, linked by common goals.
Other explosive problems, partly linked with this divided population, are declining
social mobility, and difficulty in financing the welfare state, especially its social secur-
ity components. The demographic explosion in the South and the demographic de-
pression in the North both lead to an increasing share of consumption in the national
income, a discrepancy in capital levels, and a rise in the price of resources relative to
the price of human input. These in turn impose new constraints on economic growth
and technological advancement, and eventually reduce the standard of living.
These problems occur at a time when the Soviet Union is faced with increased
troubles in its outer empire, and their attendant burden on the economy. Maintaining
Soviet rule in Poland, and more generally in the East-European empire, facing the
costs of military operations in Afghanistan, of military aid to Third World Soviet-
oriented countries (e.g., Angola, Ethopia, South Yemen, Nicaragua, etc.) of support-
ing Soviet-related activities through proxy states-all this represents an increasing
cost for the Soviet system, at a time when it has trouble facing its own needs and
priorities.
Indeed the Soviet leadership is trying to reduce the costs of its outer empire by
different measures (automatic working of the pricing formula in the Comecon coun-
tries. where the prices of Soviet exports-expecially crude oil and petroleum pro-
ducts-were. by the end of the seventies, rising more sharply than prices of Soviet
imports). As regards some client states, Moscow is trying to recover through partial
payments as much as it can for its military and technical services: for example,
Afghanistan has to provide the USSR with natural gas. But, in spite of this effort to
reduce the economic burden for maintaining its grip on partner or friendly countries,
the USSR is bound to support them economically when their situation endangers the
whole system. The present Polish and Rumanian situations point to such an additional
burden for Moscow.
At this juncture, one should raise the question of the benefits Moscow might derive
from such a costly outer empire involvement. Are these increased burdens, competing
with Soviet domestic needs in a period of scarce resources, compensated for by
dramatic advantages? The outer empire is valuable from many points of view.
First. it provides the Soviet regime with a new kind of legitimacy. Having failed its
pretense ofcreating a modern Soviet economy and society ("catch up and surpass the
U.S." is a forgotten goal t), the regime has lost its domestic legitimacy. But by export-
ing revolution. it could claim that it is fulfilling its major historical duty and it could
find in the cost of this duty a justification for maintaining economic and political
restrictions at home. Even ifthe price paid for such a political benefit for the system is
a high one. competing with domestic needs, and even in the present stage with the
military needs which are a condition for the expansion of the Soviet empire, it is not
easy to see how the system could reverse this trend.
The troubled situation prevailing in countries bordering the inner empire-west-
ward (Poland) and southward (lran)-causes the traditional Soviet defensive concern
to feed Soviet aggressive tendencies. The USSR is trying to extend some kind of
bl(ffer wne.
The ambiguous relationship between defensive-concerns and aggressiveness is like-
1y to enhance the latter. in view of the increasingly troubled situation in all sectors of
Soviet domestic life. Indeed, Mikhail Gorbachev may well try to escape the usual
tendency towards solving domestic bottlenecks by developing aggressive postures,
and may turn instead towards a long-term effort aimed at a fundamental reform of the
38
Soviet system itself, to achieve a socfal consensus based on satisfaction and not on a
mix ofintimidation, corruption and cheating. But Khrouchtechev's example points to
the difficulty of such a choice.
A last issue to be looked at is foreign policy. To what extent will Gorbachev be able
or willing to change Soviet foreign policy, in order to focus his efforts on domestic
problems? Should the West expect a new Soviet behavior, due to innovations or
shifting prio,rities?
As reg<frds prospects for a shift in Soviet priorities from foreign policy and military
efforts to economic reform, I have already stressed how dubious such a shift would be
in the short run. Ifwe turn towards Gorbachev's own views, the question to be raised
is the following one: is there some evidence of Gorbachev's views on foreign policy?
His willingness to accept invitations from abroad suggests that Gorbachev does not
intend to leave foreign policy outside of his activities, concentrated as it used to be in
Gromyko's hands during the last few years. It also suggests that foreign policy will
retain a high priority on his agenda.
But apart from these general prospects, and from the new style Gorbachev has
shown when meeting foreign partners-more western and business-like, less tradi-
tionally expressed-it should be admitted that very little is known about Gorbachev's
views on matters offoreign policy. In his rare comments on such issues before coming
to power, Gorbachev used to repeat the general Soviet positions: that the world is
divided into two opposed and struggling systems; that the Soviet Union is favoring
detente and military strategic parity with the U.S.; and that it is the American policy
which is always responsible for the strained international climate.
After his nomination to the General-Secretariat, Gorbachev was more explicit on
many issues, but the conclusions which can be drawn from his March 11 speech and
his numerous meetings with foreign leaders during the funerals are contradictory. On
the one hand he provided the world with "openings," with respect not only to China
but to East-West relations, toQ. By not postponing the Geneva talks on account of
Tchernenko's funeral, or the Gromyko-Dumas meeting in Moscow, by quickly
accepting Western invitations (primarily the one to visit France), Gorbachev clearly
signaled his interest in arms talks and in an improvement in relations with the West. At
the same time, he pmvided his partners with more elaborate and sometimes tougher
messages.
As regards the Western world, his reluctance to commit himself to a summit meet-
ing with President Reagan, his warm attitude towards West Europeans, and his reit-
eration to the West European leaders of Soviet hostility to any space militarization,
could serve notice of a Soviet intention to drive a wedge between the members of the
Western alliance.
The toughest messages have to do with the Eastern bloc and with Afghanistan. By
claiming that Moscow would enforce the "socialist community" and develop all forms
ofcooperation among its members, Gorbachev made it clear that he does not intend to
weaken East European solidarity. Such an insistence on the fraternal links of Com-
munist countries, at a time of deepening differences between Moscow and its partners
about the terms on which the Warsaw Treaty would be renewed, was an unmistakable
notice that the Soviet doctrine was unchanged and unchangeable. As regards Afghan-
istan, Gorbachev spelled out clearly the Soviet position, which is as tough as usual,
and probably even tougher. The search for a "political solution" which would leave
Afghanistan free from outside influence, the notice given to Pakistan that any con-
tinuous interference in the Afghan situation would be dangerous for Pakistan itself,
the stress on the link between Soviet security in Afghanistan and Soviet behavior in
Nicaragua, all point to continuous toughness in this area.
39
Are initial Western expectations about a new era in Soviet foreign policy bound to
be disappointed? Up until now, Mr. Gorbachev has not encouraged them, and has'on
the contrary hinted at a certain amount ofcontinuity in foreign policy, even though the
continuity may be presented in a more modern and practical ideological form. But
Soviet interests seem to be unchanged so far.
To conclude, many domestic factors-the economy, demography, deep social dis-
satisfaction, the collapse ofmoral values-evidence the need for a complete reform of
the Soviet system. As a corollary, a more flexible foreign policy is now needed in order
to orient efforts towards the domestic needs, and to enlist foreign support, in terms of
trade andtechnology transfers. But at the same time, other domestic factors-the time
needed for consolidating Gorbachev's power, the bureaucratic obstruction which in
the past prevented reforms and eventually got rid of Krushchev, the depth of national
opposition and opposed interests-all point to the need to yield to the elements of
power, at home and abroad. And, for such reasons, continued emphasis on military
priorities and a more active and even aggressive foreign policy are to be expected.
Confronted with these opposing trends, all ofthem correlating domestic and foreign
policies, how should the West behave? And can it hope to influence Soviet develop-
ments?
As regards Soviet power-and primarily military power-the West should bear in
mind two major factors characterizing Soviet behavior. First, the USSR has built up
its global power, and has deployed its SS-20s in Europe in a period of strategic parity
with the U.S., and in the condition of detente. The successful strategic negotiations
(SALT I) and the signing ofthe Helsinki'final accord have not deterred Moscow from
changing the balance of forces to its advantage. Second, in the last ten years, the
USSR behaved aggressively in Angola, Mozambique and Afghanistan at moments
when the U.S. was unable to intervene. The political pessimism and tendency to
withdraw from the world scene in the aftermath of the Vietnamese war and of Water-
gate, accounted for the Soviet's risky game in 1975. President Carter's hesitant policy,
and the hostage crisis which focused U.S. attention on Iran, explain the Soviets'
aggressive behavior in Afghanistan at the same time. The lessons to be drawn from
these two facts are:
1. The West should not have any illusions about the positive effects of the arms
control process over Soviet strategic behavior. One should quote here one of the
former U.S. Defense Secretaries, Harold Brown: "When we build, they build. When
we do not build, they build." I am not arguing that arms control agreements are
useless. They are on the contrary a useful part ofthe East-West relationship. But arms
control agreements should not prevent the West-and primarily the U.S.-from main-
taining the military balance. The right policy does not imply a drastic choice: arms
control agreement or large military spending. The right policy should be a combination
of arms control and a continuous military effort in order to maintain the military
balance. It should be borne in mind that the Soviet Union always understands interna-
tional situations in terms of a correlation offorces, and all its efforts are aimed at
shifting the correlation of forces in its direction. Arms control negotiations are for
Moscow part of a policy of getting and maintaining a strategic superiority over the
West. The record of the Soviet strategic efforts in the seventies points to such an
interpretation of parity.
2. Another dilemma has to do with the need to preserve and even develop the
Western alliance system. Its cohesiveness weakens the Soviet position and it is not
surprising that Moscow continuously tries to stir up defiance and arguments among
the NATO members. When it adopts diverging stances in response to Soviet aggres-
sion and when it argues too loudly about relations with the USSR las in the Siberian
40
I
!
'
l
t
I
l
)
natural gas case), the West paves the way for more Soviet initiatives. The Western
alliance can only deter Moscow from trying to enlarge its area ofcontrol or activity by
presenting a common front on certain major problems, all of them related to the
security ofthe Western world. The decision to deploy the Euro-missiles, which was a
major blow to Moscow, left the Soviet leadership without any effective reaction,
because of the level of solidarity in the West.
FQT these two reasons-the need to maintain a permanent military effort, and the
need to maintain a strong alliance-the West needs a healthy economy. Recession
induces the policy-makers to make cuts in defense spending. Recession also increases
the opposition and competition among the alliance partners.
3. The West should keep in mind that the Soviet leadership is used to acting in a
cautious way. Aggression and caution are not to be separated. Each time that Moscow
acts aggressively, it knows that the risks are quite low, or even non-existent (Afghan-
istan is a clear case). When the West asserts its determination to resist, that suffices to
deter Soviet aggressiveness. In 1973 in the Middle East, and 10 years later in Grenada,
the U.S. experienced the positive effects of a clear and determined attitude towards
Moscow.
As regards foreign trade, the West tends to raise the issue in the wrong terms. The
choice is not between embarking on uncontrolled and unconditional trade with the
USSR or suppressing all commercial ties. Our object should be rather to avoid sustain-
ing exaggerated hopes and illusions about the positive effects of trade on the Soviet
political system. Even though getting grain and credits from the West may be comfort-
ing to Moscow, the Soviet system can afford to do without them. The Soviet Union is
not dependent on the foreign imports and can manage never to depend on them. The
Soviet regime cannot be blackmailed on these terms.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
This section begins with summaries ofthe remarks ofa German and ofan American
participant who, together with the authors of the German working paper and the
French background paper, constituted the panel for this discussion.
* * *
In assessing the significance ofthe recent change ofleadership in the Soviet Union,
the German panelist argued that it was more important for the West to consider what it
should do than to wonder what Gorbachev might do, The Soviet Union was in a period
of transition and, hence, not one of strength. It was therefore a favorable time for the
West to take the initiative and act, instead ofreact. The West should capitalize on its
own strengths and exploit the Soviets' weaknesses. Our goals should be: (1) to in-
crease the stability in the power relationship between East and West :a order to
continue to prevent war or the use of force and to contain Soviet expansionism; (2) to
reduce the level of arms on both sides; (3) to increase international cooperation,
including the widening of contacts and exchanges.
In order to accomplish these objectives, there were two prerequisites for the West.
The first was to maintain its military strength. There could be no substantial arms
control agreement or any reasonable political settlement if the Soviet Union was
allowed to believe it could capitalize on its military strength to achieve political ends.
41
The Russians had achieved parity with the West in strategic weapons and superiority
in intermediate- and short-range weapons and in conventional forces. The West's aim
should not be to regain superiority; but inferiority was unacceptable. The West
needed enough military strength to preclude the use offorce by the Soviet Union. This
meant strengthening our conventional forces. It also meant that we could not re-
nounce nuclear weapons or their first use, which were the core of our policy of
deterrence. We could not afford to discredit our strategy of flexible response, which
we would need for at least one more decade. In arms control negotiations, we had to
maintain Alliance cohesion in the face ofSoviet attempts to divide us. Our approach at
the Geneva talks should be characterized by "firmness in principle, patience in timing,
and flexibility in method," with the aim of substantial mutual reductions in strategic
and intermediate weapons.
The second prerequisite was to induce the Soviets to be more cooperative. In this
effort we should use our areas ofstrength: our economic and technical superiority and
the freedom and creativity ofour societies. The Russians knew and feared the capabi-
lities ofthe West in these areas, as evidenced by their reaction to the Strategic Defense
Initiative (SDI). They viewed reaching strategic parity with the U.S. as their main
achievement, and we should not give the impression that we would deprive them ofit.
We should let them know that we preferred cooperation to confrontation, that their
choice was to continue the military power struggle or to cooperate in a way that would
impose political restraint and limit military competition. The former option would
absorb all the resources needed for domestic purposes; the latter would allow eco-
nomic and technological cooperation with the West.
There was no quick fix to the current situation in East-West relations; we were in
for a long struggle of wills. An intellectual and moral challenge faced the West-to
fight the fear, pessimism, and resignation creeping into our societies. These presented
the main danger to the free world's future. If we wanted to preserve our freedom, we
would have to make sacrifices. We had to strive for peace, but remain ready to defend
our freedom. Ifwe stuck to those principles, che speaker concluded, there was reason
for optimism.
* * *
The American panelist viewed the current state of East-West relations in the con-
text of four aspects: personal, geopolitical, strategic, and regional.
Regarding the ascension ofGorbachev, it was true that he brought "new dimensions
of energy and intelligence" to the Soviet leadership. But there was a tendency in the
West to overemphasize the importance ofpersonal changes for the Russian side ofthe
East-West relationship. We should not exaggerate the significance ofGorbachev, nor
should we idealize him, as some Western observers had done. It was important to
understand the nature of the change. Every new Russian leader in recent history had
had less power than his predecessor. The Soviet system had become increasingly
bureaucratized and the role of the leader less decisive. Gorbachev was the first Rus-
sian leader to have been chosen by his predecessors, who saw in him a rejuvenator and
modernizer ofthe Soviet system, not the reformer and accomodator some in the West
wanted to see in him. In this sense, he would have less room than his predecessors to
make decisive changes.
From the geopolitical point of view, the first indications from Gorbachev were not
encouraging. Soon after taking office, he had issued a stern warning to Pakistan not to
support the Afghan resistance and had deployed Soviet forces closer to the Pakistan
border. He had presided with a heavy hand over his first Warsaw Pact meeting,
42
allowing no free discussion or any internal dissent. So the hope for new initiatives in
East-West relations was not great. Still, the .West had to undertake a "comprehensive,
serious, and enduring political dialogue" with the Russians. The U.S. was at fault to
some degree for not having tried to initiate such a dialogue on the fundamental diver-
gence of perceptions on key geopolitical issues. Until these perceptions were nar-
rpwed, we could not expect much progress toward the moderation of relations.
In the.,strategic context, the arms race was a symptom and not the cause of the
current state of U.S.-Soviet relations. Until the geopolitical dimension was con-
tained, not even a successful arms control agreement would alter the essentially
hostile relationship between the two sides. For arms control to succeed, it was neces-
sary that the U.S. be able to negotiate with public support for a long period of time.
SALT I had taken four years to negotiate, SALT II had taken seven years. If we
wished to make progress in aqns control, we had to come to grips with the central
issue in strategic stability in the 1980's and 1990's-the transformation ofthe equation
from one of the mutual vulnerability of the two societies to one of the growing poten-
tial vulnerability of one another's strategic systems to a disarming, preemptive first-
strike. This was a particularly acute danger because the U.S. was not deploying
effective first strike systems in sufficient numbers to pose a credible threat to the
Russians, who were deploying enough such systems to make the power relationship
more precarious. Future arms control negotiations would have to deal with these
systems. We needed the capacity for a trade-off, and here lay the significance of
SDI-in its capability to disrupt a first strike. If we demonstrated to the Soviets our
determination to proceed with SDI, we would have the chance to strike a bargain
which would engage them in the kinds of reductions that would be stabilizing.
Finally, with respect to the regional aspect of East-West relations, Europe re-
mained the central arena of competition between the two spheres. It was a long-term
competition, and, if the military and strategic relations could be stabilized, was pri-
marily political. It behooved tlie West to undertake that competition. If a "more
organically European" Europe was to emerge, there would have to be changes in the
relationship between Western Europe and the U.S. and between Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union. Some movement in this direction was underway already, and
should be encouraged. But there were two problems on the horizon. One was a
growing gap between the European and American perceptions of the nature of the
East-West problem. Ifit were allowed to become much wider, it would paralyze any
effort to have a common policy. The other problem was the oscillations in U.S. public
opinion from excessive optimism to excessive pessimism about relations with the
Soviet Union. These swings-from excessive fascination with detente to excessive
preoccupation with the cold war-were extremely harmful to the U.S. capacity to
manage its relations in a stable fashion. What was needed was a return in the U.S. to a
genuinely bipartisan foreign policy.
* * *
There was general agreement that significant changes in Soviet policy and behavior
could not be expected merely because of new leadership. In terms of ability to bring
about change, said a Finnish speaker, one should not equate the General Secretary of
the Soviet Communist Party with the President of the U.S. There were vested in-
terests in leaving the Soviet system as it was. Any major economic change would
mean reallocation of political power internally. It was far easier for Soviet leadership
to resist change than to initiate it. True, the Russians were preoccupied.with their
43
economic problems. The difficulty they faced was how to restructure their economy,
how to build in incentives, without introducing the market mechanism.
An American agreed that it was difficult to expect much in the way ofbold initiatives
from Gorbachev, who had accomplished little when he had been in charge of Soviet
agriculture. Itwas surely embarrassing for Moscow to see China exportingfood as the
result ofadopting a more market-oriented system. Indeed, in this regard, perhaps we
focused too much on issues between the Soviet Union and the West, to the exclusion
of China, where developments surely were causing the Russians concern. Conceiv-
ably, China's modernization could be a catalyst for reform in the Soviet Union.
Anothe_r American warned that the Chinese leg ofthe U.S.-Soviet-Chinese triangle ·
should not be neglected. We could expect some movement in Sino-Soviet relations in
the coming years. Both sides had incentives to reduce tensions. The Russians were
faced with the "restlessness" ofthe European satellites and problems along both sides
of their southern border. The Chinese wished to devote their resources to economic
modernization. There had already been some eased rhetoric toward China by Gor-
bachev, and some increase in trade and other exchanges. But, from the Chinese point
ofview, Soviet activity in Indochina and Afghanistan remained an obstacle. The West
should not show anxiety, but remain confident that, in the long run, the Chinese would
lean cu ~;:;:: w~~t because of built-in antagonisms to the Russians.
* *
Several speakers commented on the economic liberalization and foreign policy
autonomy that now existed in certain Eastern European countries. An American
noted that Hungary and East Germany had recently had serious differences with the
Soviet Union, especially with respect to policy toward West Germany. It could be
expected that such dissent would continue to occur from time to time as the result of
Russian policy and not any actions by the West. Other participants spoke of an
emerging sense on the part ofboth Western and Eastern European countries that they
"belonged together." But, a German warned, we should not see in these signs a
"fundamental challenge to the existing order, or that the division of Europe has been
overcome." The East-West division and its ideological antagonisms were here to
stay.
A French participant wondered ifthe autonomous trends at work in Eastern Europe
signified that the Soviet Bloc was disintegrating and if the Soviet Union were losing
control over its satellites. Answering her own question, the speaker pointed out that
three patterns were at work in the Soviet Bloc. The first pattern was economic and was
illustrated by Hungary. The Soviet Union accepted Hungary's economic moderniza-
tion because the political system had been kept intact and the classical economic
system could be reverted to immediately. In the Romanian pattern, a certain amount
offoreign policy autonomy was tolerated by the Russians because ofthe Stalinist style
of the political leadership and because the Soviet Union could sometimes use Roma-
nia's independent positions to its benefit, as when Romania became the first East Bloc
country to establish relations with West Germany. Finally, in the political pattern
exemplified by Czechoslovakia and Poland, the Soviet Union was easily able to re-
establish its grip. The disintegration of the Soviet Bloc had been stopped or compen-
sated for by the development ofintegrative processes. The Warsaw Pact itselfwas an
element ofpolitical integration in that it provided the means of educating and training
political and military elites.
A German speaker sought to provide a perspective on his country's special position
in East-West relations. Germany was a divided country and even those who believed
44
reunification was its destiny knew it was at b~st a distant objective, and more likely, an
illusive dream. So the task for West Germans was to focus on the reality of division
and to make it less brutal, to facilitate contacts. It was first necessary to be firmly
anchored in the West-which the Federal Republic was-and to be realistic, to recog-
nize that "it was better to have a full grip on half of Germany than half a grip on the
whole ofGermany." The Germans had to help create an international climate in which
confrontaiio~ was reduced and cooperat;,on enhanced. In this regard, the speaker
continued, most Germans were more comfortable with the Nixon-Kissinger approach
than that ofthe current U.S. administration. The German desire was to keep channels
ofcommunication open and not to use trade as a weapon. Arms control must be given
a chance, and Western arms programs had to take into account Russian concerns. SDI
would ruin the Geneva negotiations because it evoked for the Soviet Union first-strike
scenarios, thus prompting the Russians to deploy even more offensive weapons. It
was in the German national interest not to be part ofa new cold war, nor to participate
in an ideological crusade, nor a trade war.
Taking exception with the views ofhis countryman, another German intervened to
say that, in his view, most Germans were happy with the American administration,
which had created the atmosphere and reality of strong leadership and had restored
credibility and strength as prerequisites ofnegotiation with the Russians. It should be
our own interests, not those of the Soviet Union, that should dictate our policies. We
needed to differentiate between real and so-called Soviet concerns. For example, the
Russians had falsely created the impression that they feared afirst strike from the INF
deployment. As for SDI, without it, the Soviets would not have returned so quickly to
the bargaining table. If handled the right way, SDI could foster agreements on the
political level, if not the arms control level.
A third German speaker felt that a particular problem in his country was that public
opinion focused on arms control as an end in itself and not on the underlying political
issues. It was critical that German leaders explain, especially to youth, the political
substance of the arms control debate. The Russian goal with respect to Germany was
to require "preemptive good behavior." The German question had to be seen not as a
separate issue, but as.part of the East-West situation. No solution was possible that
involved collusion with the Soviet Union at the expense of the West. It was Ger-
many's task to convince the Russians that it was in their own interest to completely
reappraise their policies toward the Soviet Union's European neighbors.
In an American speaker's opinion, we were in for a period of extended negotiation.
Regardless of the incentives, the Russians did not want to add major foreign policy
decisions to the others they already had to make. Foreign policy negotiations would be
of a stalling nature and not substantive. This would be reinforced by the "Western
obsession with arms control as the only subject worth discussing." The West had no
new ideas about arms control that improved the current situation, and the Russians
now tended to use arms control negotiations to veto the most advanced Western
weapons systems. Weapons had become symbolic rather than substantive.
The Russians had three options before them. One was to use their objections to a
weapons system as an obstacle to negotiations and thereby split the alliance. The
second was an "ameliorated status quo." 1".he third was fundamental change, and this
they were reluctant to undertake, as was the West. It was unlikely to be undertaken
without some discussion of the political issu~s dividing the world-which the West
resisted in the name ofdecrying linkage and of settling first the alleged dangers of the
arms race. The most important thing we could convey to the Russians was a sense of
our perception about the evolution of international affairs over the next 15 years, and
45
to attempt to see if we and they could come to some understanding about where we
would want to be at the end of that time. From there, we should work backwards to
specific issues. There were at present no channels in which to do this, and the outlook
for progress in negotiations was not hopeful. With respect to SDI, we had not pre-
sented it or thought it through very well. But it was crucial not to give it upjust because
it might become an obstacle to an agreement. Without it, we would have no concept of
arms control, nor, in the long run, any strategic concept.
In the opinion ofthe American panelist, linkage was fundamental to the conduct of
Soviet-American relations. Whether we formally linked issues or not, the reality ofthe
political interaction between issues in terms of American politics created a situation
which was, in fact, linkage. Thus it was important to deal with the underlying political
issues on a continuing basis, and it was necessary to make a more deliberate effort to
return to some form of bipartisanship, because only in that context could we handle
the question oflinkage. In the absence ofbipartisanship, linkage became polarization
and exploitation of political differences in the area of foreign policy. In recent years,
the trend in the U.S. had been toward differences rather than consensus, toward an
"artificial fanning of differences on the East-West front."
In this regard, another American intervention offered some hope. In a recent, not
well-publicized speech on the subject of the long-term management of U.S.-Soviet
affairs, reported the speaker, Secretary of State Shultz had stated that the U.S.
needed to have a stable and continuing relationship with the Russians. Americans had
to avoid the destabilizing swings of policy that disrupted that relationship, and both
sides had to find a method of discussing their differences.
* * *
46
I
I
l
i
I
I
i
I
III. THE STRATEGIC DEFENSE INITIATIVE
A briefing by a member of the Reagan Administration provided the basis for the
discussion ofSDI. This section begins with an account ofthose remarks.
* * * * *
~_..,. / I.
The American research program into strategic defenses had to be seen in the histor-
ical context of the 1972 ABM Treaty and the Interim Agreement limiting offensive
weapons. It was hoped that, as the result of these agreements, the Russians would
stop short of threatening the American deterrent-especially its land-based forces-
and that this would obviate the need for the U.S. to build the ABM system that it was
then technically capable of constructing. It was expected that a period of stability
would follow. '
In fact, neither the Interim Agreement nor the SALT II agreement in 1979 had
restrained the Soviet offensive build-up to the extent that the U.S. could be confident
its strategic retaliatory capability was secure from attack. The ABM Treaty was not an
agreement between the U.S. and Russia that it was desirable to be vulnerable. Every-
thing the Russians had done since 1972-building up offensive forces, developing
hardened underground facilities, deploying air defenses, and pursuing their own ABM
and strategic defense programs-suggested they were far from content to remain
vulnerable. Clearly they did not accept the proposition that mutual assured destruc-
tion was a basis for long-term stability. By building up offensive weapons that would
degrade the American ability to respond, and defensive weapons that could cope with
what response the U.S. might be able to make, the Russians were determined to
strengthen their position and deprive the U.S. of its ability to deter through the threat
of retaliation.
What precisely were the Russians doing? There was considerable evidence that
they might be verging on a violation of the ABM Treaty by deploying elements of the
same sort of ballistic missile defense that the Americans had planned to construct.
This defense was _based on a combination of large and small phased-array radars and
short- and long-rangelnterceptor missiles. The Soviets had deployed twice the num-
ber of large phased-array radars that the U.S. planned to build prior to 1972, and they
had developed a highly effective radar that, if mobile, would be banned under the
terms ofthe ABM Treaty. (It was considered to be transportable, rather than mobile.)
They had also developed both long- and short-range missiles comparable to what the
U.S. had anticipated building. And they were deploying a new generation of air
defense systems effective against most warheads in the Western arsenal. They had, in
the testing phase, yet another missile, with even more impressive ABM capability.
Before the ABM Treaty, the Russians had deployed the type oflarge, phased-array
radar systems needed by a missile defense in all but one area oftheir national territory.
They now had under construction a radar that would fill out coverage of the Soviet
Union and would support a missile-defense system. A key part ofthe ABM Treaty was
alimitation on such radars, because, while other components ofan ABM system could
be surreptitiously built and stored and rapidly deployed, construction of large radars
took five to seven years and would provide an early warning of a breakout from the
treaty. The treaty stipulated that large radars were only to be constructed on the
periphery of national territory, facing outward. Inland radars that covered national
territory couli:I be used to track missiles above it, while peripheral radars could not
technically be used in a missile defense. The Russians contended that tpeir new radar
47
was for space tracking; yet it was oriented not toward space, but toward the horizon.
Hence, the new radar was a clear violation of the ABM Treaty.
In addition, the Soviet Union had been and was now at work on developing its own
strategic defense technology based on, in the language of the ABM Treaty, "other
physical principles." In particular, they were researching high energy lasers and parti-
cle beams as part of a program far larger than what the Reagan Administration was
seeking.
As to the U.S. program, it was, first ofall, a research program and nothing more. No
decisions had been made about deployment of a strategic defense, nor could they be
made until the research results were in, and determinations could be made about cost,
effectiveness, and sensitivity to countermeasures. Since the signing ofthe ABM Trea-
ty, the U.S. had invested nothing in missile defense. Its capability to pursue such a
program now derived mainly from developments in civil technologies, which put it in a
position to explore whether these advances could be applied to defense. The evolution
oftechnologies, particularly in data processing and in pointing and tracking, promised
the possibility that a missile defense might be developed.
The Soviet program was justification enough for the American research effort. In
the absence ofa comparable U.S. program, we ran the risk ofthe Russians emerging in
sole possession of an advanced and sophisticated strategic defense capability. In
addition, we had no way of knowing whether our efforts to negotiate limits on offen-
sive weapons would succeed. The Soviets had been unreceptive to significant reduc-
tions that would impair their ability for a first strike; it was likely they would further
add to their offensive arsenal. Should that happen, SDI could restore the integrity of
the U.S. retaliatory capability without a parallel build-up of its offensive forces. A
strategic defense in the face of growing Soviet offensive capability would restore the
credibility of the U.S. deterrent. The moral argument against SDI was a false one;
there was no other means to protect the Alliance and deter conflict.
There was a close historical analogy between the SDI debate and the debate that had
taken place in 1946 between Robert Oppenheimer and Edward Teller over whether or
not to develop the atom bomb. History had shown that, ifPresident Truman had sided
with Oppenheimer and not proceeded with development, the Russians would have
wound up in sole possession of nuclear weapons. Conceivably, the same thing could
happen with strategic defense, should the West abandon its research program.
Finally, with respect to European objections to SDI, the question had to be asked:
how much longer would American public opinion accept the proposition that the U.S.
was justified in assuming risks in defending its allies while those allies insisted that the
U.S. not take steps to defend itself?
*
A major part of the discussion of SDI took the form of questions, principally from
European participants, about specific aspects ofthe program. The questions generally
fell into three categories: political, industrial, and strategic, including arms control
aspects.
With respect to the political dimension, several participants wanted to know what
effect uncertainties in the American political process might have on SDI. How likely
was it, in the words of a Frenchman, that SDI would survive the ups and downs of
American political life and become part of a bipartisan defense and foreign policy for
the years to come? A German worried that the political process would have trouble
sustaining SDI over the long period oftime that was required to carry out the research.
48
Might not SDI become a "technological MLF that the U.S. would foist on the Euro-
peans and then sink before they had a chance to jump ship?"
Questions about the industrial aspect focused on what role the U.S. wanted Europe
to play in SDI. Was European participation to occur at the individual, the company, or
the state level? (A French speaker disapproved of American overtures to specific
European companies.) Was it technically feasible to cut out a package within SDI and
hand it overto the Europeans for development? A Belgian wondered how it would be
possible to organize cooperation in carrying out research into such a complex issue
when there existed no framework in which to do it. And the sensitive issue of technol-
ogy transfer was bound to be an obstacle.
In the area of strategic considerations, a Briton remarked that it sounded to him as
though "the U.S. wants to build itself a bomb shelter and is inviting the Europeans to
help." But would there be room in the shelter for Europe? In a similar vein, a Dutch
speaker felt SDI would "isolate Europe from the defense of the U.S." unless it could
provide protection against battlefield nuclear weapons.
By far the greatest area ofconcern was the effect that SDI might have on the Geneva
arms control negotiations. In this regard, a Frenchman wondered if SDI was negoti-
able and whether Europe would have any say in setting the conditions for its nego-
tiability. If the Russians came up with a "dramatic proposal," would that not cause a
serious breach in the Alliance?
An American felt SDI had "catastrophic implications." First, it was not well under-
stood, even by Americans, because it had been "deceptively packaged." President
Reagan had said it would free the West from nuclear deterrence, which he had called
amoral, and render nuclear weapons obsolete. Meanwhile, the Defense Department
had been saying SDI's purpose was to defend weapons rather than populations, and
that it would enhance deterrence. How were the Russians to respond to this? If they
had returned to the bargaining table because of SDI, they surely were not about to
negotiate away their offensive build-up. Either they would build a defense of their
own, or concentrate on countermeasures with existing technology, or undertake an
enormous increase in offensive weapons in order to overwhelm our defense. In short,
nothing useful would be accomplished at Geneva as long as SDI remained non-
negotiable. Indeed, It was likely the talks would fall apart within three months.
A Dutch participant asked why the U.S. had backed away from its offer to share
research on strategic defenses with the Russians. If it would take at least IO years
before a defensive system could be deployed, how could limiting offensive weapons
be made attractive in the interim? Without a sharing of research, there would be
uncertainties that would "ruin" the Geneva negotiations.
It was an International speaker's view that the case for the research phase of SDI
was a good one. What had caused problems for the Alliance had been the pace and
scale of the program, the manner in which it had been launched in 1983, and the fear
that it might cause an impasse, ifit had not already, in Geneva. We could expect the
debate on SDI to go on for a long time. No definitive answers about the desirability of
strategic defense were possible yet. The major worries were: (l) how to reconcile the
maintenance of the credibility of flexible response in a world in which strategic de-
fenses were deployed; (2) how to make deterrence by denial as credible as punitive
deterrence had been for over a generation; and (3) how to insure that whatever
strategic defense system was introduced enhanced rather than degraded stability.
Regarding deterrence, an American argued that what had worked for the past 40
years would not work for the next 40. We needed to reconsider our concept of deter-
rence, taking into account the impact on it of multiplying retaliatory forces on both
49
sides. The situation today was much different from that of the 1950's and 1960's. As
for SDI, the speaker felt the Administration's emphasis on research was "too clever
by half' and very dangerous. We could not segment the program into a research
phase, followed by a phase of negotiation with the Allies, then a phase of negotiation
with the Russians. Such a process would surely kill the program. We needed to have
the courage to declare our commitment to an effective defense and our readiness to
negotiate it along with offensive limitations. To separate the defensive and offensive
negotiations would produce "the nightmare" of endless negotiations with the Euro-
peans and then the Russians.
Another American agreed that the U.S. should be more forthright, first in stating
that SDI was a counter-first-strike system, then in making clear its intention to acquire
such a system, and its capability to have one by the 1990's. That posture would give
the U.S. more credibility to persuade the Russians to engage in genuine weapons
reductions. If there was no progress in arms control, the U.S. would have to deploy a
counter-first-strike defense system within the next decade. Continued Soviet develop-
ment and deployment of defensive systems and ofoffensive systems capable of a first
strike was likely, by the 1990's, to put the West in a precarious situation in which its
missiles would be vulnerable to a Soviet first strike and the effectiveness ofits surviv-
ing missiles (mostly submarine-launched) would be compromised by Soviet defensive
systems. At current rates of development, the Soviet Union would have 8,000 first-
strike-capable warheads by 1990; even deploying at the maximum rate, the U.S.
would have only 2,000. The only alternative to a defensive system would be for the
U.S. to deploy more offensive weapons; SDI would be preferable and more stable.
* * *
Another official ofthe U.S. administration sought to respond to concerns about the
program's effect on arms control negotiations. It was important to realize that, while
the U.S. was moving toward a system that emphasized defense, the Russians were not 1
advocating the doctrine of mutual assured destruction as preferable. They, too, were I
concentrating on defense; they had the only operational ABM and anti-satellite sys-
tems, as well as their own strategic defense research program. What they saw at 1
Geneva was an opportunity to abort the U.S. strategic defense program at the outset. j
As to the negotiability of SDI, it was unlikely that the Russians would put on the l
table any dramatic offer constituting deep reductions in offensive nuclear capability.
1
·
They were happy with the present strategic balance.Nor were they willing to abandon ,
their own strategic defense program. The U.S. position was that it "envisions a coop- I
erative transition with the Soviets toward a more defense-oriented posture." It was I
willing to negotiate, but not in the sense of preemptive concessions. I
The American spokesman addressed some of the specific questions about SDI I
raised by participants in the discussion. Regarding the poltical dimension, there was I
broad support for the research phase for the next few years. It was difficult to predict
what might be the case in the development phase, which would in any case be under- I
taken by a future administration. He expressed confidence that, as more became I
known about the Soviet program and the ambitions ofthe U.S. program, it would get I
support up to the development phase.
With respect to the industrial issue, it was possible there were some elements which l
could be better done in Europe than in the U.S. But the program was diffuse even in I
the U.S., and was not really a single project. Domestic political considerations would 1
effect the level of European participation, but every effort would be made to Jet f
contracts to low bidders. There would have to be special arrangements covering
50
technology transfer, and these, in addition to other security issues, would have to be
worked out on a government-to-government basis.
As for the capabilities of the system, 80 percent effectiveness would reduce to 20
percent the number of warheads the Soviet Union could deliver against the U.S.
retaliatory arsenal-equivalent to the status quo in 1972. And the research was aiming
at a layered defense with reliabilty greater than 80 percent. As to the concern of some
Europea_ns 4:hat SDI would not defend Europe, the speaker pointed out that some of
the most promising approaches in interception involved the boost phase, meaning that
all missiles could be intercepted, not just ICBM's. Other systems and technologies
aimed at defense against tactical weapons were in fact less complex than those dealing
with strategic weapons, so that defense against short- and intermediate-range
weapons might emerge first.
Addressing the arms control dimension, the speaker said that the research phase of
SDI was not negotiable, that the Russians understood this and planned to continue
· their own research, and that research was not constrained by the ABM Treaty. It was
the Administration's intent to abide by the treaty and consult with the Soviets before
deploying a system based on "other physical principles." To follow the suggestion that
the U.S. ought to declare its intention to deploy a counter-first-strike defensive sys-
tem would require the U.S. to withdraw from the ABM Treaty, which would have
political costs and well as benefits. It would also mean relinquishing the treaty without
the certain knowledge that the defensive system was workable.
To the concern that the Russians might deploy more offensive weapons to over-
whelm the U.S. defense, the speaker replied that the U.S. would not deploy a system
that was vulnerable. At present, the leverage in terms of cost was on the side of
defensive systems, but if this ceased to be the case, the U.S. would not deploy a
non-cost-effective system. As to countermeasures, extensive research was being
done, and it was unlikely that the Soviets had measures effective against the sort of
defensive system the U.S. would deploy.
Finally, the speaker agreed that it was possible to emphasize research to the extent
that it was separated from deployment by a line that was impossible to cross. But the
U.S. was faced with a dilemma. It did not know enough about the possible success of
SDI to run the politi~alrisks ofdeclaring now that it planned to deploy it. It was hard to
effectively negotiate a system that did not yet exist and to anticipate all the freedoms
that would be needed under the ABM treaty to proceed. And it was true that the
emphasis on research was partly in response to the political problem of getting a
majority in Congress to support deployment.
* * *
51
IV. HOW SHOULD THE WEST DEAL WITH DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
* * * *
"The Debt Problem"
Working Paper Prepared by The Rt. Hon. Lord Lever ofManchester,
Former Cabinet Minister and Financial Secretary, Former Member ofParliament
Current accounts deficits are a normal and productive feature in the evolution of
developing countries. Past experience indicates that a sound system for financing
these deficits include:
1. A greater Governmental role than has been previously accepted. Private banks
and finance cannot adjudge the1broad aggregates of funds to be provided, nor their
apportionment between the countries concerned; nor can they insist upon adequate
responses by the debtor countries.
2. A role for the private lenders and investors including the banking systems ofthe
West. The budgetary mechanisms of Government are inadequate to provide the
amounts required, and it is desirable to involve the private banks and financial con-
cerns ofboth the borrowing and the lending countries to secure an improved allocation
of resources within the borrowing countries themselves and that the private sector
receives an adequate share of the resources made available.
3. Arrangements to achieve reasonable continuity in the flow offunds not liable to
suffer abrupt changes from feast to famine. Such changes create crises and make
solvency dependent on the exaction of premature trading Sl!rpluses from the debtor
countries before their development is sufficiently advanced. They prejudice growth
and employment in the debtor countries and impose unrealistic burdens ofadjustment
on the Western countries themselves to accomodate the export surpluses required.
In early stages of development it is unrealistic and indeed undesirable that the
debtors attempt to service the debt in real terms, i.e., by trade surpluses. There must,
therefore, be relia]Jle provisions made for the re-finance of debt during that period.
Past lendingwas base-ooh the false assumption that such re-finance would be available
without an appropriate supporting and supervisory role of the public authorities.
The present dangers are:
1. Great uncertainty of service of past debt. This leaves the key banks of the West
involved with a chronic balance sheet fragility.
2. Stability is dependent on a premature and unsustainable trading surplus from the
debtors.
3. The role ofpublic authorities is inadequately systematised and is geared to prom-
oting the anomalous trading surplus of the debtors.
4. The present arrangements do not contribute sufficiently to the improvement of
the economies and internal finances of the debtors. In some respects they contribute
to a dislocating inflation and injury to the private sectors of those countries.
AN OUTLINE FOR ACTION
Past debt-an equitable and efficient sharing ofresponsibility.
Ifwe are to preserve the full and healthy functioning of the private banking system,
the banks must not be exposed to the danger of an abrupt increase in "non-
performing" debt. Reliable interest service will require a flow of new finance to the
debtors. For some years ahead this can only be achieved if supportive guarantees by
public authorities are made available to the debtors.
53
A necessary part of these arrangements would be that the banks themselves made
substantial provisions out ofprofits over a lengthy period against these debts. As these
debts would be continuously written down the volume ofguaranteed finance required
to service the interest payments on them would be continuously diminishing.
The debtors' contribution to the resolution ofpast debt must be the development of
more austere policies directed to the strengthening of their economies. The responses
required are not the indiscriminate cutting of imports nor the attempts to develop a
sufficient trading surplus. And the mandate of the IMF and other public authorities
should be adjusted accordingly. This would also make clear that the central long-term
purpos.es of the Western authorities are identical with the legitimate interests of the
debtors countries.
The costs to the public authorities of these guarantees will depend on the longer
term prospects and evolution ofthe debtor countries. Whatever these costs may be, if
they are not borne by the public authorities they would otherwise fall most disruptive-
ly on the private banking system and hence on the economies of the Western coun-
tries.
At present we are relying for debt service partly on the trading surpluses of the
debtors, partly on the funds of the IMF and partly on involuntary re-lending by the
banks. For future flows of funds we are relying on unrealistic assumptions ofan early
and sufficient flow of voluntary lending.
FUTURE FUNDS
Outline decisions will be required on:
1. The amount of such funds.
2. How they should be apportioned.
3. The responses required from the borrowers.
4. The mechanics to achieve such transfers.
The best means for ensuring sound and sustainable arrangements in respect ofpast
debt and future lending is by the extension of the role of the export credit guarantee
agencies. It is not coherent on the one hand to guarantee trade debts and on the other
to make no provision for ensuring that the countries concerned will have available the
necessary foreign currency. The action of these agencies should be made dependent
upon advice from the IMF who in turn would need to be satisfied that the lending was
justified.
In the past, the West's recognition of the important global interests involved in
these issues has been vague and generalized. As a result, these interests have been
supported mainly by a small and vulnerable section of the West's resources, namely,
the private banking system. The proven inadequacy ofpre-crisis arrangements cannot
be remedied by purely ad hoc emergency arrangements. Of course there has to be
case-by-case differentiation between the needs ofthe different countries and a willing-
ness to act in emergency. But an outline strategy is required to give coherence and
sustainability to these actions.
QUESTIONS FOR CONSIDERATION
1. How vulnerable are the present arrangements to new shocks, e.g., correction of
the U.S. trade deficit or temporary recession in world trade?
2. Will voluntary lending be resumed on a sufficient scale and within a reasonable
time without some form of insurance?
3. Are present arrangements conducive to the healthy economic, financial and
political development of the debtor countries?
54
4. Do present arrangements ieave the leading banks of the West in a safe and
satisfactory situation conducive to their full and healthy functioning?
*- *
*
"Comments on the 'Debt Problem"'
Working Paper Prepared by Edwin H. Yeo !JI.
Managing Director, Morgan, Stanley & Co.; Former Undersecretary ofthe Treasury
The phrase the "debt problem" has come to conceal more than it reveals. It is in
such common use that an 1effort to define it almost seems condescending. In this
country viewers of television are treated to learned descriptions of the money the
"third world" owes, to whom it is owed, and why it is highly improbable that it will be
paid back. "Solutions" have also become worn with usage. They fall into three general
categories. One involves efforts to adjust debtor economies and stretch out-fund-
debt service schedules. Characterized as the case-by-case approach, these programs
are designed to increase external earning capacity, set the stage for renewed growth,
and ameliorate debt service burdens.
Another general approach envisages large transfers of resources from creditor
countries or, in its broader iteration, "rich countries." Such transfers can be effected
by legislated means or by more elliptical measures including SDR allocations, expan-
sion of soft loan schemes, and in its most subtle, and some would say most disin-
genous, cloak, capitalization of interest.
This introduces us to the third general approach to the debt problem-forgiveness,
abrogation, evaporation-the disappearance of the debts. In some proposals just a
little disappearance is called for-in others total absolution. In some approaches the
authors imagine a debtor cartel approaching the creditors on a soverign nation to
soverign nation basis and announcing that as a group they will not pay some portion or
all oftheir obligations. Other variations involve creditor banks grouping together and
concluding that after all the heavily indebted countries can't pay; the banks then
execute a unilateral partial write-down. One is prompted to suggest the site for such a
meeting-heaven, but before dismissing such a scheme as preposterous one must
consider if the massive Mexican rescheduling in which $67.8 billion of commercial
bank loans to public and private borrowers were funded out for a decade was not a
partial forgiveness in an economic sense whilst maintaining financial probity.
This brief catalogue of general approaches is incomplete and does not do justice to
the considerable work that has been done. But it does seem sufficient to make the
point-that we missed the point.
The year 1975 is a good place to start. Economic recovery was well underway in
America and starting in Europe and Asia. Oil was at $11.50 a barrel; Saudi Arabia was
producing 7 million barrels per day. Put another way, that country's proforma oil
cashflow on an annual basis was $28 billion. Of that amount, Saudi Arabia spent $4
billion on goods and services purchased from the rest of the world. The difference of
$24 billion was added to Saudi Arabian monetary reserves.
The Saudi Arabia case is one of the more extreme, but there were others in approx-
imately the same position. The increase in oil prices represented a redistribution of
income in favor of oil producing countries. At that time, many of these countries had
low absorption rates, and therefore became the proxy savers for the world.
55
Oil importing developed countries could have accepted the transfers of income. In
the event, however, they tried to avoid it with varying degrees of success. Internally,
this meant a standard menu of what were thought to be stimulative policies; in many
cases it meant increasing external indebtedness to cover current account deficits.
Some nondeveloped countries, including Eastern bloc nations, followed this course
and at the same time embarked on a course of borrowing to finance investment and
additional consumption. This process was punctuated briefly in late 1976 by the Mex-
ican financial crisis but by mid-1977 was back in full swing. In 1979 OPEC executed
another price increase which among other things, served to insure the continuance of
the proxy saving role assumed by many members of that group. These savings were
largely recycled by intermediaries-the banks. The vehicle was the dollar, with some
interruption caused by mistrust of the economic policies pursued by the U.S. for part
of this period. There were a variety of flaws:
• The banks and related financial markets were not equipped to handle the prodigious
amounts involved;
• To the degree funds were borrowed to finance consumption, funds available for
world capital formation were reduced, and all else equal, economic growth suffered;
• Funds borrowed to finance consumption meant that the borrowing countries faced
increased debt service requirements with no attendant augmentation of their exter-
nal earning capacity-financial problems were implicit in the process.
• Funds were borrowed to finance the removal of interrial capital. In some cases the.
use of proceeds didn't involve consumption or investment but simply served to
liquify holders of domestic capital and thereby permit its removal; and
• The system of soverign credits lacked checks and balances that insured extension of
credit for activities that had a high probability of generating cash flow sufficient to
meet debt services. Put another way, sovereign credit lending tends to facilitate or,
at the very least, mask the misallocation ofcapital because there is no measure of
profit or loss on which to base the extension of credit.
The enormous savings accumulated by the proxy savers were, in the event, handled
in a manner that resulted in the misallocation ofa portion ofworld savings and thereby
insured that financial problems would result. The timing and severity of these prob-
lems hinged on the prospects for inflation. In a general sense, accelerating rates of
inflation tended to obfuscate financial strains, and of course, it could ]?e argued,
ultimately caused them to be more severe.
Certainly by mid-1979 expectations of accelerating inflation in all but a few coun-
tries was the norm. The recycling process had continued apace. For example, Saudi
Arabia's external financial assets increased well over $100 billion from the end of 1974
to mid-1979. Other proxy savers had in varying degrees similar experiences, although
in some cases absorption rates increased more rapidly than had been thought possible.
As the world entered the decade of the 1980s, it was clear that in some cases con-
tinuance in the role of proxy savers was contingent on another significant increase in
the price of oil, but then that was almost a certainty.
It was equally clear that capital importing nations in South America, Eastern
Europe and Asia had developed debt service ratios reminiscent of the 1920s. In many
cases the high debt service to external earnings capacity ratios were matched by a high
ratio of short-term, unfunded debt to owned reserves and access to incremental,
unconditional short-term credit.
56
- - -- ----··"-~--~ ... -~"""----"~ ..... _,,_- .. ="'"~~----".:.·~~-;__o:._:.::_;:::>;..~7 ~
Less clear, but of pivotal importance, was a change in attitude in the U.S. and
elsewhere about the acceptability of accelerating rates of inflation. People, particular-
ly the middle class in the U.S., perceived themselves as losers in the inflationary
process and this formed a broad base of support for a change in U.S. policy-mone-
tary policy was redirected and restoration of price equilibrium became the objective.
However, 9~e to the legacy ofa trail ofbroken promises by U.S. politicians, expecta-
tions were'locked on the prospects for continued inflation. The result was high interest
rates.
By 1981-82 the combination of high debt service levels-a function of the level of
debt and high interest rates-and a recession-induced weakening of external earning
capacity served to unveil what was soon to be known as the debt problem. Mexico was
first, others followed. Most would say Mexican "debt problems" became visible with
the near financial collapse in the late summer of 1982. But many Mexican residents
were more prescient. Capital outflows-movement of funds out of the country by
Mexican nationals-accelerated in 1980 and 1981.
This performance was matched by residents in many other countries. The proxy
saving role of OPEC withered as a result of its inability to raise prices, a cyclical
slowdown in energy consumption, and increased internal absorption capacity. The
resulting dimunition of the flow of funds into the dollar from these proxy savers was
offset by an accelerated flow of funds out of heavily indebted countries into the
"haven" currencies, particularly the dollar.
Increased flows of funds into the dollar from developed countries in Europe and
Japan occurred roughly in the same period. The reasons for this phenomenon are the
subject of heated discussion. They fall into four groups:
• evidence of vigorous economic recovery in the U.S.;
• high U.S. interest rates occasioned by, among other things, a large fiscal deficit;
• social, political, and economic problems in other countries; and
• an insistence on the part of some countries of their need to operate with large
structural current a~count surpluses which makes them capital exporters.
While there is great debate as to the causes ofcapital inflows, there is no debate as to
their existence. It is equally clear that the U.S. has been unable to recycle, in the
manner of the 1970s, that portion of the inflows not used. The appreciation of the
dollar and the resultant economic merchandise trade deficits have become monu-
ments to the inability to recycle.
Initially things were not so clear. A cyclical swing in the U.S. merchandise trade
account was to be expected, in fact hoped for. It was the mechanism by which cyclical
recovery originating in the U.S. was transmitted to other economies. Without such a
swing, these heavily indebted economies, that had taken steps to curb domestic con-
sumption by individuals and government and release resources for export, had no
hope of increasing their external earning capacity and thereby stepping back from the
brink offinancial collapse. They desperately needed the income effects of an expand-
ing world economy to create the basis for export-led recoveries in their economies.
This in turn could be expected to dampen, if not end, the tendency of capital to move
out, thereby easing one source of capital inflow into the dollar and enabling countries
to retain capital which could be used to add an investment dimension to their export-
led recoveries.
The U.S., it was expected, would be joined by other developed countries in provid-
ing the economic expansion that the heavily indebted countries needed to underpin
57
their efforts to augment their external earning capacity. It was reasonable to expect
the U.S. to contribute to this process by a reduction in budget expenditures thereby
releasing resources for investment type activity and contributing to a lessening of
financial tensions both internal and external. The result it was hoped would be a
quickening of economic expansion in other countries, and an induced slower rate of
growth in the U.S., oriented more towards investment and less dependent on con-
sumption.
It is clear that in the past three years there have been successes and failures. The
successes include:
• the vigorous recovery of the U.S. economy;
• determined steps on the part of many heavily indebted countries to adjust their
economies and a resultant gain in external earning capacity;
• a series of mini-refinancings, and one maxi-refinancing (Mexico) which served to
reduce financial tensions; and
• containment offinancial strains associated with an unanticipated slowdown in rates
of inflation in key economies.
Failures would include:
• an inability thus far ofthe U.S. to reduce Federal expenditures and thereby contrib-
ute to the second phase of adjustment;
• disappointing rates of growth in other developed countries;
• an inability to curb the tendency on the part ofsome developed countries to run large
current account surpluses, which not only tends to thwart the efforts of the heavily
indebted countries to increase their external earning capacity, but results in large
capital exports by the surplus countries which go into the dollar, thereby exacerbat-
ing the recycling problem;
• the inability to restore the capacity for capital recycling; and time.
It is the last shortcoming which is the most threatening. Prompt results in each ofthe
areas mentioned above cannot be expected, but the need for action has existed for
some time, and in that sense we are in the process ofconsuming time in which action is
possible and relevant.
Continued heavy capital inflows into the dollar coupled with an inability to recycle
results in:
• a strong dollar;
• large U.S. merchandise trade deficit;
• growth of U.S. domestic demand exceeding the growth in income;
• unusually large creation of U.S. domestic debt to finance the difference between
growth in demand for goods and services and growth in incomes;
• diminution of income growth centered in businesses that compete in international
markets;
• attendant creation of financial strains;
58
• recession;
or
• inflation, then severe recession; and
• protectionism.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
In his opening remarks, the Bhtish author placed heavy emphasis on two points he
had made in his paper: that it was a misguided policy for developing countries to
service their debt through trade surpluses, and that refinancing of current debt and
provision of new credit could not adequately be accomplished without "supportive
government intervention."
Running continuous trade surpluses in order to repay debt was harmful to the
long-term growth of developing countries, which required a "positive transfer of
resources" from developed countries for an extended period of time. These trade
surpluses at the same time required developed countries to run corresponding trade
deficits which in turn necessitated difficult structural adjustments on their parts.
Further, it was not economically or politically sustainable to expect developing coun-
tries to devote their resources to the service of past debt; repudiation of debt was a
more likely outcome.
Government involvement in international lending was necessary for the banks' own
protection. Private banks could not support the time scale required in the lending, nor
could they deal alone with the results of such inevitable occurrences as recessions,
changes in interest rates, and exchange rate fluctuations. They were not equipped to
provide the surveillaoc.e necessary to optimize the use of the credit being extended,
nor to require the appropriate policy responses from debtor nations. Governments of
the developed countries had virtually coerced private banks to lend up until 1981, and
it was now necessary for them to play a part in solving the debt problem. An "act of
innovative generosity" akin to the Marshall Plan was in order. Failure ofgovernments
to act would leave the economic and political stability ofthe West "balanced on a knife
edge."
* * *
Introducing his working paper, the American author argued that the debt problem
had to be seen in terms of the "disequilibria in the pattern of world trading and
economic acitivity." At the core of these disequilibria was the inability of the U.S. to
recycle capital inflows in a financial sense. These inflows were being recycled through
the U.S. 's current account, which had caused a dramatic appreciation of the dollar's
value in relation to other currencies.
It could be argued, continued the speaker, that the developing countries were doing
a better job then the developed countries in adjusting to the disequilibria. The de-
59
veloped countries seemed unable to deal with current account surpluses, and the U.S.
had failed in the past eighteen months to correct its current account deficit. Indeed,
the U.S. was headed on a potentially dangerous course. The current expansion was
characterized by the highest ratio ofincrements in debt to increments in real economic
activity of any recorded expansion. Exchange rates were putting great pressure on
prices, and profit margins, especially in the manufacturing sector, were being
squeezed. This was a course that ultimately could lead to recession.
What was required of the U.S. now was to take steps to reduce its current account
deficit and to get other developed countries to act to curb their structural snrpluses,
thereby alleviating capital inflows into the U.S. and taking pressure off the dollar.
* * *
An International participant agreed with the American author that the debt problem
was "just one of a number of interrelated economic issues" where action by the
developed countries was required. And he supported the observation of the British
author that one cause of the current debt problem was that there had been too much
borrowing for non-productive purposes. Indeed, in many of the debtor nations, the
growth in external debt had exceeded the growth in foreign exchange earnings. The
key to solving the economic problems of the developing countries was an adjustment
of their economic policies. Progress had been made in this direction; the developed
countries, the banks, and the multilateral agencies had moved away from "momentary
crisis management" to dealing with the problems on a deliberate case-by-case basis.
Both working papers, the speaker continued, were overly pessimistic about the
voluntary resumption ofprivate bank lending. There was a "reasonable prospect" that
debt service ratios would be reduced, creditworthiness restored, and more rapid
growth resumed ifthree prerequisites were met. First, the developing countries had to
continue policy reforms aimed at increasing efficient allocation of resources and aug-
menting productive capacity. Second, there had to be sustained non-inflationary
growth in the developed countries. Third, the developing countries had to be assured
access to markets in the developed countries. Under these conditions, the banks
would start rolling over debt on a voluntary basis.
An American participant largely concurred with this analysis. He recalled that, at a
Bilderberg Meeting two years before, he had said that the debt problem could be
handled by a combination of IMF-monitored economic reform measures undertaken
by the major debtor countries, continuation of the U.S. economic recovery, and
extension of debt maturities and provision of new front-end money by the banks. All
of these things had taken place, and, in addition, a large U.S. trade deficit had de-
veloped, interest rates had held steady, and capital outflows from the LDC's had
declined somewhat. The debt picture was, then, considerably brighter. But it re-
mained for the developing countries, the official agencies, and the commercial banks
to work together to re-establish growth.
The speaker went on to prognosticate that voluntary lending to major developing
countries would resume, official agencies would provide funds at a steady rate of
about $25 billion per year, and the export earnings ofthe LDC's would continue to rise
and fall in correlation with growth rates of the OECD countries, especially the'U.S.
Banks would continue to work with the adjusting LDC's and the official agencies, but
they would, at the same time, continue to build up reserves and equity capital to meet
the losses that could be expected from some of the smaller developing countries.
There was also some hope that the LDC's would open their borders to attract outside
investors as partners and not just creditors. Finally, the speaker foresaw no debt
repudiation. The system, he said, would "hold and work together."
60
A German was similarly optimistic that progress was being made in alleviating the
debt crisis. The key, he argued, was in restoring the creditworthiness of the debtor
nations. The role ofthe banks in this process had three phases. First, the banks had to
provide new money to enable the debtors to pay interest and, in some cases, principal.
In doing so, the banks were financing the debt service itself, a necessity to avoid
writing offthe loans. Second, the banks had to stretch out loan maturities, and, where
possible, lower interest rates. The third phase would be the restored creditworthiness
of the LDC's, and hence their renewed access to the international financial markets.
Contrary to the popular misconception, this did not mean that debtor countries had
first to repay their debts in order to be granted new credit. What it did mean was
restoring a sound relation between the financial burden of the developing countries
and their economic possibilities, which would put them in a position to go to the credit
markets once again. ,
The restoration ofthe LDC's creditworthiness required the cooperation ofthe IMF,
the World Bank, the respective governments, and the private banks. The IMF role
was to elaborate programs for economic recovery and, along with the World Bank, to
provide the necessary funds to implement reform measures. The governments of the
creditor countries had to be ready to provide export credit guarantees and develop-
ment aid. The debtor countries had to put their houses in order; this meant, in particu-
lar, stopping the outflow of capital. And the private banks had to negotiate the re-
scheduling of old debt and the provision of new credit to those countries successfully
working their way back onto their feet.
A Dutch speaker pointed out that at the recent meeting ofthe Interim Committee of
the IMF, there had been an "encouraging degree of consensus" among the members
present on a program of coordinated action by both the developed and the debtor
countries. The LDC's had to undertake adjustment of their policies with IMF help,
reduce military expenditure, and curb capital outflows. The developed countries had
to adopt policies that would lead to less protectionism, lower interest rates, and more
growth in order to allow LDC's to increase exports. The banks had to implement
multi-year rescheduling, provided the LDC's undertook proper adjustment policies.
The Interim Committee also called for increased surveillance by the IMF and World
Bank ofthe economkpolicies ofall member countries, and for stronger coordination
between the IMF and World Bank. The speaker concluded that he too was optimistic
that voluntary bank lending would resume based on this program.
* * *
While there was general agreement that the LDC's had to take steps to put their
economic houses in order, a number of speakers expressed concern that austerity
measures could lead to domestic political problems for the leaders of developing
countries. An American cited the example of former Sudanese President Nimeiri, in
whose downfall economic factors had played an important part. A Turkish participant
worried that pressure on LDC's to reform economies would lead to recession and
unemployment, and thence to violence and destabilization. This was, agreed another
American, the "Achilles' heel" of the problem: what was right economically could
become intolerable politically.
But other speakers took a brighter view of trends in the developing world. A Cana-
dian reported finding, in his travels to developing countries, a more positive attitude
toward their business communities and a new desire to attract foreign investment.
This was reflected in the dismantling of many restrictions, liberalization of imports,
and privatization of some state enterprises. The time was ripe, the speaker continued,
61
for direct investment in the LDC's by multinational companies and the transfer of
technology and of management skills. Another Canadian agreed that there was a new
openness. With the passing of the "independence generation of leaders," there were
new opportunities in the developing countries.
An International participant pointed out that many of the countries that had gotten
into trouble in the early eighties, when the economic climate had become noninflation-
ary and growth had slowed, had market economies but did not allow them to function.
Some of these countries appeared to have learned their lesson. Interventionism was
going out of fashion; instead there was a new flexibility-something the developed
countries, on the other hand, had not showed much of. Rather, they had increased
trade restrictions, especially against successful economies. Such restrictions had to be
eliminated, in order to "make credible the West's general concept of economic
policy".
Indeed, the issue of protectionism concerned many speakers. An Italian saw it as
"rampant," and feared it would be difficult to overcome, given the wide disparity in
labor costs between the developed and developing countries. A Canadian warned that
continuing protectionism was a "guarantee of financial disaster." It was a time of
opportunity for the West to gain new markets, but that opportunity would be squan-
dered if we followed the Soviet example of offering limited markets and forcing de-
veloping countries into barter, counter trade, and sub-optimal regional trading
arrangements.
As important as acting against protectionism, argued a Greek speaker, was the need
for the West to follow policies that would lead to a lowering of the internationa).
interest rate structure. This required; in particular, "energetic action" on the part of
the U.S. to correct its budget deficit.
An American acknowledged the failures of his country that had adversely affected
the developing countries-"slow economic growth over the past two decades, a poor
savings rate, inconsistencies in the tax laws, and a dismal budget performance." But,
he continued, the U.S. was not alone. U.S. Government debt as a share of GNP was
less than that of the other major OECD countries, and the American contribution to
"free world welfare," in the form of military and aid spending, was far higher.
On the subject ofofficial government assistance, an Irish speaker felt it was regret-
table that the level ofaid as a share ofGNP in developed countries had "gotten stuck"
since the last recession. It was important, he added, to recognize the differences
between debtor nations in terms ofGNP per capita and their ability to help themselves
and to achieve growth. Speakers from Switzerland and the Netherlands agreed, point-
ing particularly to the countries of sub-Saharan Africa as special problems where aid
was vital. The Irish and Swiss speakers felt that aid to these countries needed to be
directed to basic infrastructure and agriculture, and that it had not, in the past, been
very efficiently applied. In certain African countries, added the Irish participant, the
debt levels were very high, but the absolute sums were relatively small. There, the
cost to the developed countries ofcancelling debt or replacing it with government aid
would be minimal.
* * *
The session concluded with brief remarks by the two authors. The British author
acknowledged that, although the lending to developing countries that had given rise to
the current debt crisis was "clumsily done," it was better to have done it than not to
have. But now it was important that the debtor countries not be left the victims of
events beyond their control. Merely restoring their creditworthiness was not enough;
62
!
I
,
!
I
I
I
I
government support of and intervention in future lending was crucial to avoid mis-
direction of funds and to assure the right policy responses from the debtors.
The American author acknowledged that economic austerity could be a very bitter
pill. Bolivia, where the GNP had declined almost ten percent in each of the past two
years, was a good example. But Mexico, on the other hand, had grown faster in the
previous year than in the heyday of the late 1970s and early 1980s. It was wrong to
assume that opening up economies, privatizing industries and balancing budgets were
mutually exclusive with growth; rather, they were the very foundation of growth.
* *
*
63
V. CURRENT EVENTS
The topic discussed in the Current Events session was: The Current Status of the
Budget in Congress and the European Perspective on that Situation. The subject was
introduced by two American legislators, who reported on developments in the U.S.
Congress, and by a Dutch minister, who commented on.the situation from the Euro-
pean poin(ojview. Also discussed in this session was the issue of tax reform in the
U.S. A report by another U.S. legislator on this issue was given earlier in the Confer-
ence, but is reported in this section. Also included in this section, because of their
relevance to the topic under discussion, are remarks about the U.S. defense budget
made in the first session ofthe conference.
* * *
Addressing the issue oftax reform, an American legislator reported that there were
four tax reform proposals before Congress: a Democratic plan, a Republican plan, and
two Administration plans. Each plan embodied the same general goal: to cut tax rates
dramatically and to eliminate many of the "tax expenditures" in the code.
The first rationale for tax reform was economic. It was based upon the realization
that the U.S. could attain full employment only ifit competed effectively in a growing
world economy. This required, on the international front, a stable trading and finan-
cial system, and, domestically, an efficient allocation of resources. The economic
basis of tax reform was that the market was the most efficient allocator of resources,
and it was necessary to remove the tax code as a barrier between the investor and
ultimate investment, so that capital would flow to those areas of the market that had
real value and would create jobs and wealth and enhance the international compete-
tive position of the U.S. With current effective tax rates ranging from minus five
percent to plus 44 percent, capital was not being rationally allocated. Tax reform was
widely supported by American business because it would lead to a more stable econ-
omy. By making saving more attractive than borrowing, the price of credit could be
attacked from both the supply and the demand side, resulting in lower interest rates.
There was also -a c;yltural rationale behind tax reform. In 1984, there had been
263 ,000 tax returns in some stage of audit or litigation by the IRS. Ten years earlier,
the number had been only 15,000. In addition, eight million Americans required pro-
fessional assistance in preparing their tax returns last year; tax strategizing and tax
return preparation had become a big industry. And the value of all tax expenditures
had grown from $37 billion in 1967 to $370 billion today. So preoccupied were Amer-
icans with avoiding taxation that there was a real danger that a whole generation was
growing up to feel it had no responsibility to support the legitimate functions of
government-a serious development in view of the system of voluntary compliance
upon which tax collection was based. The underground economy in the U.S. was
estimated to be the seventh largest economy in the world. In short, the cultural
rationale for tax reform was that millions ofAmericans correctly perceived that equal
incomes did not, under the current system, pay equal taxes.
Finally, there was a historical rationale which was based on how a legislator inter-
preted his function as laid out by the Constitution. Was it to balance the narrow
interests and try to keep as many people happy as possible? Or was it to perceive the
general interest and formulate policy that served it? It should correctly be the latter.
As to the prospects for tax reform in 1985, it was certainly in the interest of both
political parties, though many legislators did not yet realize that. Their constituents
suffered from "loophole illusion," the belief that they were better off with loopholes
65
than with lower tax rates. Tax reform was viewed by many legislators as a defensive
political issue because of the need to explain to various interest groups why their
loopholes were being taken away. But tax reform was, in fact, an offensive issue, and
legislators could win by arguing for lower rates and a fairer system. It presented an
opportunity for genuine bipartisan cooperation. Tax reform would not increase the
budget deficit or the tax burden on lower and middle income people. It would give the
lowest possible tax rates to the greatest number ofpeople, produce greater incentive
for work, savings, and investment, and it would tax profits at the lowest possible rate.
* * *
While tax reform dealt with the method of taxation, fundamental to the budget
debate was the amount of taxation, said the American legislator who introduced that
issue. How much the government should tax had always been a matter ofcontroversy.
Theoretically, it should collect enough to provide for the common defense and the
general welfare, but what was enough was a matter of subjective judgment. There
wa,s, however, one objective test of the adequacy of revenue-the occurrence of a
deficit.
The U.S. budget was at present in the red more than $200 billion annually. The
national debt had doubled in the last four years to almost $2 trillion, and the interest
burden had grown by 89 percent, making it the largest and fastest growing government
spending program. This year interest would be approximately $135 billion. Since 1981,
revenues from the individual income tax had risen only four percent, while the corpo-
rate tax had decreased by $4 billion. Spending cuts of $90 billion in discretionary
funding and $77 billion in entitlements, as well as reductions in numerous social
programs, had been made. Yet there was still a growing deficit.
The question, then, was not should taxes go up, but would they? President Reagan's
opposition to a tax increase had prevailed in the recent Senate debate. But some ofhis
advisors privately admitted that, if the Senate version of the budget were adopted, it
would reveal a need for more revenue and that would have to be dealt with. Yet there
was considerable public and Congressional opposition to higher taxes. To implement
a tax increase would take more than the "grudging assent" of the President. His
vigorous leadership and advocacy would be needed to pursuade the Congress and the
country. It was highly unlikely that these would be forthcoming from the President, or
that Congress would shoulder the burden. In the Senate, there were not now enough
votes to pass a tax bill, and, if there were, the President would veto it.
* * *
According to another the Member of Congress, no tax increase measure would be
passed in the House this year either. But there was a good possibility that meaningful
budget cuts would be approved, in spite oftwo factors that might inhibit action. These
were the very high degree of partisanship in the House, which was an obstacle to
building a coalition, and the absence of strong leadership arising from the announced
retirement of the Speaker and the probable retirement of the Minority Leader.
But other factors favored action on the budget. One was that liberal Congressmen
were serious about deficit reduction because they knew that unchecked growth in the
deficit would play into the hands ofthose in the Administration who wanted to shrink
government's role still further. So the liberals were willing to allow some cutbacks and
eliminations in order to save other social programs. Congressmen were also con-
cerned about their political survival. They realized that when today's high school
graduates entered the work force in four years, they would be paying more than half
their federal income taxes to service the national debt, and not for any programs from
66
which they would directly benefit. And finally, there was the private fear that, if
nothing were done, the economy would fall apart and Congress would pay the price at
the polls in 1986.
That a consensus on the budget based on public opinion was gradually building was
indicated by the declarations of interest groups that they would go along with cuts if
they were all treated alike. This argued for an across-the~board freeze, which would
yield a $40 !5ilfion reduction. The goal in the House was a deficit reduction next year of
$50 billion through spending cuts alone. Defense spending would be frozen at this
year's level; the big question was whether there would be a freeze in Social Security
cost of living adjustments. Some programs would be eliminated and others reduced.
The ultimate goal was to get the deficit to less than two percent of GNP by 1988. ln
order to do that, revenues would have to be raised, but that would not happen this
year. It was possible a second phase would include a tax increase in the form of an
energy tax, plus an excise tax and perhaps some form of minimum tax, not for new
programs but strictly for deficit reduction. Yet much depended on whether the Presi-
dent chose to get involved. Ifthere was a genuine spending reduction and the revenue
component was not a genuine tax increase, such a second phase might get his support
and, hence, that of the Senate leadership.
* * *
In viewing the U.S. budget deficit from the European perspective, said the Dutch
panelist, one had to acknowledge that, as a percentage of GNP, it was less than the
average of European countries' deficits, and it was still financeable. But its rapid
growth, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of GNP, posed a real danger if no
action was taken to stop it.
The rapidly rising burden of the government's interest payments adversely affected
every American citizen. The deficit absorbed a high percentage of available domestic
savings, which, in the U.S., were already low, compared to Europe. Direct private
investment also placed a demand on savings, so the result was either a crowding out of
the private sector or the attracting of a large amount ofimported capital. Either way,
real interest rates were high.
As far as the rest o:fthe world was concerned, the absorption of large amounts of
foreign capital was undesirable if allowed to continue. A highly developed, mature
economy should be a capital exporter, particularly to countries in need. Flows from
developed countries should not be going to the U.S., but to the LDCs; nor should
capital flow to the U.S. from the LDCs themselves. The high dollar resulting from
these capital inflows had some benefits for Europe, but was bad in the long run if the
result was protectionism. There was also the risk of a "hard landing" for the dollar if
steps were not taken to reduce its level gradually. And the high dollar led to high
repayment obligations for debtor nations whose loans were denominated in dollars.
High U.S. interest rates were largely a result ofthe deficit, and only to a small extent
due to monetary policy. They had a major adverse impact on rates in many other
countries, especially Europe, where they were an obstacle to recovery. Even more
worrying was the impact on the LDCs, especially the highly indebted middle income
ones. There was no way to solve the debt problem for many ofthese countries as long
as the dollar remained high.
The U.S. had to pay more attention to the external, international effects of its
domestic financial and economic policies, because the dollar remained the principal
currency of the international monetary system.
* * *
67
In the minds of most of those who participated in the discussion about the U.S.
budget and tax reform issues, the two were closely linked. Several Europeans queried
why the U.S. did not enact certain tax measures to help reduce the budget deficit. A
Briton pointed out that a gasoline tax at the level imposed in most European countries,
if phased in over five years, would yield between $130 and $150 billion in additional
revenue. And, because of the falling price of oil, it would not increase prices at the
pump. Both American panelists responded that a gasoline tax was extremely unpopu-
lar politically and therefore unlikely to be imposed, although, according to one, an
import fee on imported crude oil and petroleum products of $5 to $10 a barrel was
possible. Responding to a Frenchman's suggestion ofa value-added tax, both legisla-
tors agreed that it, too, was not feasible. One explained that the state governments
feared it would compete with their sales and excise taxes.
An Italian observed that one reason, beyond the federal deficit, that interest rates
remained high in the U.S. was that the tax system subsidized borrowing by allowing
interest to be deducted. This was, agreed an American, one of those incentives that
had become abused and caused distortions. It was, however, unlikely to be changed
for political reasons, though its impact would be reduced if the top tax bracket was
lowered. Both American legislators felt that the deductibilty of interest payments
would be curtailed, though not eliminated.
A Canadian warned that experience in his country had shown that "tax simplifica-
tion was not that simple." Incentives had been built into the system for a reason-to
help achieve broad social and economic purposes. The consensus for tax simplifica-
tion would evaporate when special interest groups realized that the incentives which
benefited them faced elimination. Furthermore, if the philosophy of using tax incen-
tives to achieve certain objectives was being abandoned in favor ofdirect government
action to achieve those objectives, the role of government would thus be enlarged.
Government would be injected even more into the economy, with more gove:-:lment
spending to replace the elminated tax expenditures.
This view was shared by one of the American legislators. Many social programs-
low-income housing, for example-had already been phased out, and, theoretically,
the private sector would take up the slack. But if the tax incentives for the private
sector were removed, the economic incentive would disappear. Thus, in budget cut-
ting and tax reform, there was the potential for a "mixing ofmotives." The likely result
was that tax reform wo11!d be used to raise some revenues, and that simplification
would not be all !~1<lt simple.
* * *
Regarding the dangers of the deficit to the U.S. itself, a German feared that the day
might come when the U.S. would find itselfin the same position as Brazil or Argentina
today-unable to continue paying its debt. This notion was not too far-fetched for one
American participant, who warned that, with the deficit at five percent of GNP and
national debt heading toward $2 trillion, the U.S. was "living on borrowed money and
borrowed time." The deficit had given rise to a number of serious domestic problems.
The mix between monetary and fiscal policy had been destabilized, and monetary
policy was prevented from playing a more stimulative role in the economy. This would
be a particular danger in another recession. In addition, there was great pressure on
credit markets. And the trade deficit brought about by the high dollar was having a
"devastating effect" on American industry, which was already competetively weak in
terms of wage rates. Finally, debt creation in the U.S. was growing faster than eco-
nomic activity. This had been manageable in the inflationary 1970's, but, in a defla-
68
tionary world, it became a "crushing burden." Debt service problems in the U.S. were
serious, especially in certain sectors, like agriculture. ·
The hour, concluded the speaker, was late. The combination of problems could
cause another recession in the U.S., with "disastrous consequences" for the rest ofthe
world. Already the U.S. economy was showing signs of slowing up. A new recession
would put ~eat strain on the world debt structure and financial system. The margin for
error had been reduced and the manoeuvering room curtailed; it was becoming in-
creasingly difficult to execute a "soft landing."
Another American was particularly concerned about the deficit's effect on trade
policy, and the rise of protectionist sentiment in the U.S. In 1984, the merchandise
trade deficit had reached $123 billion. Without significant changes, it would grow to
$200 billion by 1990. The unprecedented level of imports had led to the loss of two
million jobs; four million might be lost by the end of the decade. The effects of trade
deficits extended beyond the traditional smokestack industries to the high technology
sphere, where surpluses were declining. The result was that businessmen and legisla-
tors were talking seriously about protectionist measures.
Both American legislators acknowledged that political pressure for protectionism
was mounting, in particular for specific textile protection and for an across-the-board
import surcharge. But, in the view ofone ofthem, as long as the President adhered to a
free-trade policy, his veto of protectionist legislation could be sustained.
A number of speakers expressed support for a new round of trade negotiations.
According to a Swede, Third World resistance to a new round was diminishing as it
became clear that it was needed to stem protectionism, increase the discipline and
predictabilty of the trading system, and provide some liberalization. Failure to move
ahead vv·ith new negotiations risked increased bilateralism and protectionism.
* * *
Addressing one particular effect of the U.S. deficit on Europe, an Austrian argued
that one of Europe's main problems was that it was no longer competitive in many
traditional industries, which were being kept alive only to savejobs. Exports had been
thriving due only to...the strong dollar, which was covering up problems and weak-
nesses in European industry. Europe needed to pursue a policy of economic growth,
concentrating on new technologies and gradually getting out of industries in which it
was not competitive. This required investment on a large scale-an approach that was
impeded by the U.S. deficit, because high interest rates increased the cost of invest-
ment or channelled it away from plant and equipment into financial assets. In addition,
the volatility of international financial markets caused uncertainty in domestic capital
markets. Domestic private savings were flowing into U.S. havens. Thus the U.S.
deficit directly and indirectly added to the costs of the necessary restructuring and
adjustments in European industry.
But a German warned against blaming the U.S. for all of Europe's problems.
Weren't Europeans expecting the U.S. to do things that they were incapable of doing
or unwilling to do themselves? Responding to this, a Dutch speaker agreed that
Europe deserved much of the blame for its own problems and needed to take certain
actions. But the truth was that deficits in European countries did not have the worl-
dwide impact of the U.S. deficit. Europeans were justified in criticizing certain
aspects of the U.S. economy-like the budget-but it was true they had to take
measures to correct their own wrongdoings.
* * *
69
An American offered an assessment of the impact on the defense budget of the
recent spending reduction proposals, including the freeze recently approved by the
Senate. Defense, in the speaker's view, was not ')ust another social program to take
its share of cuts." In the ten years up to 1983, real defense spending had increased by
six percent, while spending on social programs had gone up 160 percent. In the 1950s
and 1960s defense spending had been about IO percent ofGNP and halfthe budget. By
those standards, it was not today taking an excessive portion of national income.
There were two places to make cuts in the defense budget. One was in readiness,
which meant steaming time, flying time, training, ammunition and the like; cuts here
would show up in immediate dollars. The other area was in the investment portion,
which was already underfunded, in the speaker's opinion. Cuts here traditionally
came about by agreement between Congress and the Defense Department to stretch
out programs rather than eliminate them. The usual result was less efficiency and no
real saving. The speaker worried that the message we were sending to the Soviet
Union about our determination to be strong was not convincing. The President wanted
six percent real growth in defense spending, but apparently not if we had to raise
revenue to pay for it. And what were the European allies to make of the spending
freeze? Would they feel they were off the hook on burden sharing?
Also concerned about trading-off defense spending and social spending, another
American argued that defense spending had to follow its own criteria-"either you
have enough or you don't." It was necessary to have a strategic concept that defined
the adequacy ofdefense and to know what were the gains and the risks ofmaking cuts.
"A mindless mechanical reduction" was not the "antidote to a mindless mechanical
increase."
But several speakers felt there was tremendous waste in U.S. defense spending. A
Briton suggested that there would be less waste if the defense budget was open to
international competition. It was a Canadian's view that there was excessive duplica-
tion in many programs, largely resulting from political considerations. Choices had to
be made.
One of the Americans on the panel argued that military strength was impossible
without economic security, which in turn depended on deficit reduction. Military
spending was 30 percent ofthe budget, entitlements 42 percent. Debt service took up
14 percent, leaving only another 14 percent in other programs. Clearly, the cuts would
have to come in the two big items. Public opinion demanded that they both be cut, or
neither. One of the problems facing the U.S. was that the support of public opinion
was needed to sustain a foreign policy and a defense policy. Public opinion in the U.S.
was unclear about what the foreign policy was, except to be strong. What was needed
was a redefinition of U.S. foreign policy and of how it was to be defended. One
approach was to reduce the U.S. deficit by cutting defense spending, with Europe and
Japan picking up the slack.
Another American interjected that, even with a freeze in the U.S. defense budget,
Europe should not consider itselfoffthe hook on burden sharing. The rapid increase in
defense expenditures in the first years of the Reagan Administration would, even with
the freeze, produce an increase ofconsiderably more than three percent compounded.
In a final intervention on the defense question, a Dutch speaker saw a direct connec-
tion between reduction ofthe U.S. deficit and Europe's sharing ofthe defense burden.
70
The defense build-up ofthe Reagan Administration had contribute.cl toward the budget
deficit, which, in turn, had reduced Europe's capacity to take a greater share of
defense. By cutting military spending and reducing the deficit, the U.S. would allow
Europe to shoulder more of the burden of its own defense.
* * *
A Canadiah wondered ifthe passage ofspending reduction measures and some form
ofrevenue enhancement yielding a $75 billion deficit reduction would start the U.S.
"on a benign cycle of deficit reduction, including balancing the budget, encouraging
interest rate reduction, normalizing currency levels, and repatriating jobs." This was
not necessarily the case, responded one of the U.S. legislators. There was no strong
leadership from eitherparty that called for a balanced budget within a certain period of
time. ,
Another Canadian asked what were the values and goals behind tax reform and
budget cutting. The answer from the other American panelist was that, with regard to
tax reform, the basic goal was a reduction in taxes for individuals, to be paid for by
business, with no change in overall revenues. With regard to budget cuts, it appeared
that the Administration's view was that government should pay for defense and retire-
ment security and very little else. The value system in Congress was somewhat
"hazier" because political circumstances prevented the setting of priorities. An
across-the-board freeze had the greatest public support, exempting programs for the
truly needy and education andjob training. The response ofthe European panelist was
that parliaments and cabinets were unable to agree on expenditure cuts. It was hard to
come up with criteria from the economic point of view, and very subjective from the
political point of view. Said one of the American panelists, there was no overall
philosophical plan or blueprint-just "general considerations of equity." Decisions
would be made largely on a case-by-case basis.
* *
*
71
VI. OPERATING THE ALLIANCE
* * * * *
Working Paper Prepared by Etienne Davignon,
Former Member, Commission ofthe European Communities
A lot has been written, more even has been said, in relation to the endemic state of
"malaise" prevailing at some time or other in the Atlantic Alliance. Fidelity to NATO,
reaffirmiJ.ti0n of its indispensable nature, but concern over its health seems to be a
near-permanent theme.
The analysis usually shows that the cause of today's difficulties are to be found in
yesterday's mistakes attributed mainly-depending on the nationality of the author-
either to the American or European partner.
Without in any sense questioning the validity of this approach, I would like to
suggest that priority should be given to anticipating the coming tensions and suggest
the means to overcome them. It might well be, that the efficiency and trustworthiness
of NATO will depend tomorrow, to an increasing extent, on the capacity of the
Europeans to put their act together, and so become less dependent on the necessary
leadership of the U.S.
This might also bring an answer to the disconsolate remark one of my American
friends once made: "lfwe take a resolute lead, we are told offfor being bullies; ifwe sit
back and wait, our complacency and unreliability are immediately stigmatized".
In this context, four elements are worth looking at:
1. Enlargement of the Community. On the 1st of January 1986 the Community will
welcome Spain and Portugal. The facts and figures being known, I would like to point
out the following: •
- Spanish and Portuguese motivations were essentially political and not economic
and so give the second enlargement, in comparison with the first, a quite different
character.
- Management and decision-making inside the Community, which have been un-
satisfactory with nine and then ten member states, will become grotesque if no
improvements are sought and agreed.
- Eleven out of the sixteen NATO countries will be members of the EEC, increas-
ing the pressure, but also improving the conditions, for the coming of age of a
more balanced alliance.
- The center of gravity of the Community will be moving South, modifying the
traditional equilibrium inside the Community and improving the probability of
far-reaching reshaping of the common agricultural policy.
2. Economic problems are the major political headaches for the European govern-
ments. It is no longer possible to make a distinction between the so-called "technical"
problems and the "political" issues. Political leaders are being judged, more than
anything else, on their performance in relation to unemployment and success toward
economic recovery. Ten thousand jobs have to be created daily just to keep the
number of unemployed from increasing. This fact and its political implications explain
why the following consequences can be drawn:
- Seeking short-term quick-fix measures takes precedence over strategic thinking.
73
- The political leaders, because of this, have little time available for any other
preoccupation. This is particularly true for the smaller European states, which
have thus become less involved and active in European and international affairs
than 15 years ago. Reticence to be involved has become a characteristic ofpublic
opinion in the Netherlands, Norway, Denmark and Belgium.
These two elements increase the regional character of present European thinking.
3. Innovation and "high technology." In the wake of U.S. successes, innovation
and "high technology" have become a priority for thought-or at least speech-
making-in Europe. Public opinion, although worried over the possible ')ob-killing"
effects, would presently like to believe that innovation and technology are a vehicle
for "catching up" with Japan and the U.S. and a motor for increasing economic
growth.
This psychological trend on the one hand, and the objective requirements (increase
of R&D, an economic environment more friendly to business, elimination of the
compartmentalisation which obstructs the emergence of a Community home market)
on the other hand, may turn this topic into a major factor of European integration.
Taken in conjunction with comparative U.S. superiority in this area, this issue
could become a very delicate topic of U.S.-European relations.
4. Trust and self-confidence. President Reagan, the "great communicator," has
demonstrated the importance ofcreating trust and self-confidence. "Eurosclerosis" is
presently an imaginary threat, but "Europessimism" is still, unfortunately, a real
mood. To be overcome, it requires a reinforcement of the European identity. A
step-by-step approach will not be successful ifit is not linked to a more clearly defined
political concept.
The European leaders can no longer avoid a debate over the real ambitions of the
Community, the issues can no longer be ignored. If the U.S. takes this quest towards
reinforced unity seriously, it will grant it credibility and momentum even before the
practical results are attained.
* * *
Progress towards an increased European identity demands, in my view, specific,
qualitative improvements translatable into measurable practical steps in the following
areas:
A. Defense. The political cohesion of the Community has been increasingly lost as
the budgetary rows endlessly dominated the available time in the meetings ofHeads of
Government and Foreign Ministers. The much-talked-of strengthening of the Euro-
pean pillar of the Alliance has not merely not happened; such strength as the pillar has
already achieved is being eroded.
Atlanticists who were cool on Europe might argue that this did not matter if it
coincided with a prospect of Washington's resuming its old effortless captaincy and
this being again freely accepted throughout the West. "Effortless" in some senses the
leadership of the White House may currently be, but it certainly creates at least as
much conflict and suspicion in most of the other fifteen members of NATO as at any
other time.
The dangerous dichotomy in European feeling vis-a-vis the U.S. remains. We are
torn between a fear that they will desert us and an apprehension that they want us as,
for them, a relatively safe nuclear battleground.
Henry Kissinger has rightly pointed out that, if only for reasons related to the
passage of time, with the passage of every year, the acceptance of dissuasion, mainly
based on the possible death of tens of million of people, becomes more fragile.
74
Against this background, the debate over SDI has started. It is presently marked by
great confusion: American objectives and tactics remain unclear: Europeans faced
with a clear presidential commitment, but an unprecise proposal, find .it difficult to
reconcile their contradictions and produce a coordinated response.
Common sense should suggest that we should favour a concept which aims to
reduce the vulnerability of the U.S. and its allies, thus increasing the credibility of
nuclea:r'deterrents, but other questions relating to:
- the arms control talks,
- the ABM treaty,
- intermediate ballistic missiles,
- technological feasibilit)I,
- the attitude of Congress
remain unanswered.
Beyond these preoccupations, a fundamental uncertainty remains: Taking into
account the dimension of the problem, is the U.S. ready for a real debate in the
framework of NATO, accepting consequently to share with its partners the final
decisions over substance and tactics?
Does the U.S. administration accept that to defeat the neutralists and the pacifists-
be they sincere or not-it will be necessary for Europe to stop being a "follower" and
so assume more responsibilities?
The challenge for the Europeans to coordinate their position is a difficult one to pick
up; it becomes a utopian task, ifthe U.S. considers the attempt with suspicion!
SDI brings an element of novelty into the strategic debate: the advantage will
outweigh the risk if the opportunity is seized to develop-and the auspices are not
good-the transatlantic dialogue; if not, the tensions will increase and with them the
attempt by the USSR to decouple the U.S. from Europe.
B. The technological challenge. We are entering an era of accelerated change
brought about.by technological breakthroughs in the way information is developed,
stored, processedarid transferred. The way in which states cope with this new chal-
lenge will affect the international environment.
The necessity for Europe to perform well is all the greater because the U.S. is
leading the way and moreover is comfortable with change; Japan is close behind and
committed to succeed.
The Community has to put its house in order. Building Europe and picking up the
technological challenge are related matters. Scientifically, the Community is not be-
hind, but in developing technology and manufacturing a gap has emerged. Without an
improved Community, a large home market will not exist and a concerted approach to
technological development will be unmanageable.
The size of the market is essential, and I must say the Economist summed up well in
November the message I was, for years, trying to get across to governments: "
"Young, innovative European firms labour under crippling burdens that their Amer-
ican and Japanese counterparts do not have. One-the uncommon market-is well
known, though the extent of the damage it does, is not. Testing and certification
requirements, differing standards, border delays and restraints on trade in services all
take their toll on trade between EEC countries. These obstacles add as much as 20 per
cent to the cost ofgoods in intracommunity trade. And the effects ofEurope's market
fragmentation are getting worse all the time: as development costs rise it becomes
harder to recoup investment in a single national market."
75
The necessity to reward and stimulate innovation is the second requirement. During
the fifties and sixties, we believed we could promote simultaneously security and
innovation. The reality is different: the legislation introduced, but to a varying extent,
in every Western European country, made industry and thus society less able to adjust
to changing times and market demands. The economic crisis and the accelerated
technological change have increased the penalty we are paying for having persisted
too long with this dream. The trend is now being reversed, but whether it is being
implemented fast enough remains to be seen.
Beyond these basic goals, the development of technology must also be stimulated,
so that two factors are taken into account:
- The need to master the technologies which will strategically shape the future.
- The necessity to match the advantages American enterprises enjoy through the
military and space programs, and the Japanese through MITI led programs.
In this relation another look at SDI and the question of technological transfer is
useful. SDI implies an acceleration in technological research and the rapid imple-
mentation ofnew techniques. From a European point ofview, this raises at least three
questions:
a) Will it be a unilateral program?
b) How will it effect technological transfer?
c) What could be a European response?
a) A research program is very difficuit to sha:-e, tn1k5s duplication, with a full
exchange of data, or a division of tasks, is organized in the framework of a joint
program. In the present state ofaffairs, the information available points towards some
subcontracting arrangements in relation to an American program. Maybe more is not
possible because of the unique character of the program and its military and legal
constraints (ABM provisions and classification of data.)
b) To reach any sort ofmeaningful partnership, the technological transfer questions
have to be addressed. This has to be achieved against a background of uncertainty:
- Conflicting opinions inside the U.S. administrations as to how to deal with sensi-
tive, dual-purpose (military and civil) technology,
- Limit~tions set by the provisions of the ABM treaty,
- Absence of a legally binding framework.
c) The European choir has been even more out of tune than usual. Because of the
present situation in the Community, without a European community initiative the
improved environment for technological change will not be brought about. How can
then an individual European state believe it could become, all by itself, a real partner
for the U.S. in an enterprise of this magnitude?
The lessons ofpast attempts in arms procurement on the so-called "two-way street"
have shown that there is no real partnership or sharing ifthere is not a relative balance
between the parties involved.
C. Economic and monetary questions. It is not my purpose here to analyze how the
Community should pursue the building of Europe in these essential fields. Helmut
Schmidt has last week, in a powerful article, summed up his present thinking and made
a number of specific suggestions.
I would like to single out two questions where an increased Community contribu-
tion could help because vital interests of the Atlantic partners are involved.
76
I
I
!'
:1
During the past year or so, there has been a strong recovery in the U.S. and the
countries of the Pacific Basin have retained their very good relative performance. But
in Europe any recovery has been at best very hesitant, making no impact on unem-
ployment levels which are higher than for a generation past. And the developing
countries have suffered heavily from low commodity prices and high interest rates,
which-in combination have made debt service consume a criplingly high proportion of
their export earnings.
A substantial slowdown in the U.S. economy could well kill the hesitant European
recovery almost before it had started, certainly before it has made any real impact on
employment levels. We could be plunged into a new period of recession with unem-
ployment going to still higher levels than those which prevail today, and with many
countries in the Third World being pushed over the edge of bankruptcy. I believe that
in order to avoid this dangerous but possible scenario we need concerted action in
Europe.
An important distinction must be drawn between the U.S. deficit and the budgetary
deficits of the other industrialized countries. The OECD Economic Outlook issued at
the end of 1983 demonstrated that for the major 7 industrialized nations excluding the
U.S., inflation was eroding the stock ofpublic debt more quickly than current borrow-
ing was adding to it. There is no purely financial constraint on more dynamic policies
in some states of Europe.
More than half the growth in world trade last year took the form ofincreased exports
to the U.S. It can immediately be seen how quickly and how widely a slowdown in the
U.S. will be communicated around the world with further deleterious effects on
;;:-0,vth and unemployment.
This makes it vital that all the industrialized countries should not embark on further
generalised deflation, but that those in a financial pctsition to do so should adopt a
more expansionary stance to offset the effects ofan almost inevitably falling American
growth. Since it is difficult for individual countries to expand alone without running
into balance of payments, exchange rate, and hence inflationary difficulties, these are
the strongest.reasons for coordinated action to expand the European economies
together at the rate necessary at least to maintain the present unspectacular growth
performance of the world economy taken as a whole. Action of this kind could be
concerted at the European level.
This would be a major contribution to a real dialogue with the U.S. and Japan. The
recent summit should not discourage us. When the homework has not been done, no
decisions can be taken.
Next and last monetary stability. Let me here bring my support to the ideas that Roy
Jenkins and J. Delors have been voicing. These are met with a degree of skepticism,
but no alternatives have been offered, except in terms of procedures. We have no
ideas, so let's have conferences.
Concerted action will not succeed unless exchange rates are given a reasonable
stability. Ifthey are allowed to fluctuate wildly and often irrationally, they become the
enemy ofworld trade and ofinternational investment. They also stimulate protection-
ist forces in those countries whose currencies are forced too high. But we should not
be utopian. The economic performance of countries inevitably varies in terms of
growth in productivity and comparative inflation. We cannot therefore just proclaim a
new regime offixed exchange rates and expect it to stick. The simple re-establishment
of the Bretton Woods system of fixed rates, great though were the benefits which
flowed from that system, is not a practical option today.
77
Yet there is mounting disillusion with free-floating currencies. Experience of these
has not been that they adjust gradually and smoothly, keeping payments in balance.
On the contrary, exchange rates have lurched wildly from one extreme to another-in
the U.S./British case from a pound/dollar rate of $1.60 to $2.40 and back down to
below $1.20 over the past eight years. And not only have they been unstable, but they
have shown a capacity to stay well out ofline-in terms ofrelative inflation, competi-
tiveness, and balance of payments-for long periods.
The markets themselves cannot and do not ensure that currencies adjust to reality
so as to keep foreign payments in balance and employment reasonably full. What is
required is a system of exchange rates which broadly maintains the competitive posi-
tion of one economy against another and avoids the short-term fluctuations which are
damaging to trade and devastating to investment decisions.
I believe that substantial progress could be made on a trilateral basis between the
U.S., Japan and the members of the European Monetary System, which should ever-
more obviously include Britain. This is certainly in the British interest. It is probably
in the general European interest too, not so much because of the importance of
sterling-the DM is now more important-but because of the predominance of Lon-
don as a financial centre. Each bloc would define a "target zone" for its currency
within which the value would be free to vary. This should, in present circumstances,
be wider than the old Bretton Woods margins. Perhaps the six per cent margins which
the Italian lira has within the EMS would be reasonable. From time to time the central
rates would be shifted upwards and downwards according to medium-term changes in
relative competitiveness which would embrace inflation differentials. Monetary poli-
cy would be used to keep the rates within the zones. They should not be permitted to
go outside in response to speculative movements or short-term factors. Adequate
swap agreements, which are not difficult to secure, can iron out disruptive short-term
waves, although they cannot-nor should they-obviate the need for responding to a
long-term swell of the ocean.
The new tripod would form the basis of a new, stable, but not rigid international
monetary system. It would be possible and desirable for other countries strongly
dependent on one or another of the blocs to tie their currencies to the dollar, yen or
European ECU. To take European examples, the Austrian schilling and the Swedish
krone would obviously move in general step with the ECU.
Achieving results in the three fields I havejust dealt with will require time, imagina-
tion and perseverance. In a world where short-term considerations are paramount,
where scoring debating points prevails over dealing with substance, where essential
elements of foreign policy are no longer supported by a near consensus of the main
political parties, is such a goal beyond our grasp? Is our ambition out of step with our
possibilities?
The U.S. holds the key to the answer. By calling for a policy, it sets the objectives;
by trusting its partners and encouraging their integration, it gives them an increased
importance; by favoring multilateral procedures over bilateral arrangements, it en-
sures a balanced approach.
The Community has unfortunately not yet reached the stage where it can propose
with credibility; it can still respond to the challenge of an ally calling for more part-
nership. Let us deal with substance and not procedures, and here, I believe the
banking and entrepreneurial sectors must make their voices heard.
* *
*
78
Working Paper Prepared by Brent Scowcroft,
Vice Chairman, Kissinger Associates,
Former Member ofPresident's General Adviso1y Committee on Arms Control
Despite such tactical successes as the INF deployment, the alliance is not operating
well. While the miracle may be the fact that it is operating at all, that is small comfort if
the performance is inadequate to the challenge..
It can be argued that NATO has never been adequate to the challenge. The alliance
has always relied on a decreasingly credible threat of nuclear escalation to compen-
sate for its failure to deploy military forces adequate in themselves to cope with a
Warsaw Pact assault.
What is new is growing divergence over fundamental issues: the nature ofthe Soviet
threat and how to deal with i,t. It is true that the Soviets do not at present appear poised
to undertake the military conquest of Western Europe. European and American
perceptions of the ultimate threat, however, seem farther apart than ever before, with
some few voices in Europe equating the two superpowers as threats to the peace.
Appraisals in Europe and the U.S. over the significance and the appropriate western
response to developments such as Afghanistan and Poland have reflected this diver-
gence.
In the U.S., under the burden of huge budget deficits and consequent pressure on
the defense budget, there have been increasing calls for greater burden-sharing and
charges that the U.S. seems more concerned about European defense than do the
Europeans.
The list of irritants is a long one, some perennial, some more recent, and the
economic pressures stemming from the process of economic transformation of the
advanced industrial societies exacerbates the issues and narrows the vision of the
leaderships. Yet all is not negative. NATO has managed successfully a very difficult
deployment ofINF. While the price of that deployment within the Alliance may have
been high, it has succeeded in forcing a major change in strategy by the Soviet Union.
Failing to stop INF deployment by terminating arms control negotiations in 1983 and
by its subsequen.t blustering and belligerent diplomacy, the Soviet Union has been
compelled to return to the bargaining table and assume a less threatening posture.
The Soviet Union does not wish us well, however, and growing economic difficul-
ties at home and continuing and perhaps increasing instabilities in Eastern Europe
could make the future more rather than less dangerous. In addition, a new and more
vigorous leadership gives initial indications ofbeing able to exploit the tensions within
NATO with much greater skill and subtlety than its predecessors.
What is to be done? Unfortunately, there is no single simple solution which will
sweep away the problems encumbering the Alliance. Proposals currently springing up
for radical shifts in the current structure and relationships risk unleashing forces
which are little understood and whose consequences are unpredictable. However
vexing the current situation, modest changes within the current general framework
are to be preferred to bold departures which would discard the general structure which
has worked, not well but adequately, for over 35 years.
Whatever the current disparity of views, most can agree that strength does not
invite aggression. The Alliance has always sought to prevent, not to fight, war. The
only secure prevention, however, is the ability to fight successfully. While that goal is
likely to remain an impossible dream, even those who deprecate the threat are likely to
agree that some approximation of a military balance is likely to prove an element of
stability in the face ofpossible political volatility, especially in Eastern Europe. Those
79
outside even such a modest consensus probably cannot be placated within the
framework of a North Atlantic Alliance, but the Alliance should attempt to operate in
such a way as not significantly to increase the numbers of fundamental detractors.
One ofthe frequently cited causes ofproblems within the Alliance is the dominance
of the U.S. It is argued that the consequence of this is abdication ofresponsibility by
the European members and simultaneously European chafing at an American lead-
ership in whom confidence is frequently less than optimal. Several leadership and
structural modifications could be helpful in themselves and could also be useful in
alleviating this problem to the extent it exists.
One ofthe developments to be encouraged in this regard is the growth ofa European
collective approach, as, for example, in the revitalization of the WEU. European
unity in military procurement, R&D and even strategic concepts could do much to
provide an effective counterbalance to the U.S. and to remove any current sense of
impotence or inferiority. It would greatly reduce current problems of standardization
and interoperability, for example, with respect to which the U.S. is a heavy offender.
If extended to include the development of a European Nuclear Force, it would be
possible even to contemplate a European SACEUR. A move ofthat magnitude, while
significantly shifting responsibility at the heart of the Alliance, would, of course,
necessitate the prior resolution of other problems and could only be considered in a
U.S.-Europeanenvironment where it could in no way be construed as U.S. withdraw-
al or abandonment.
On the political side, a new, dynamic Secretary-General opens the possibility for
upgrading the status of the Permreps. Were the Permreps to be at the policy-making
level of their respective foreign ministries, dialogue and consultation could assume a
character which would considerably enhance the cohesion ofthe Alliance. The Coun-
cil is the one place the Alliance members are in constant contact, and that should be
utilized to the fullest to enhance cooperation and reduce suspicion or misunderstand-
ing'. Since extra-NATO developments can vitally affect the Alliance, rules ~!;c-...lu be
changed to facilitate as well discussion of extra-NATO events and !o permit planning
and action on them by "coalitions of the willing."
Dealing with extra-NATO problems leads b;:;:;;:i,:!ly into the area of burden-sharing.
The U.S., in general, is best able~::; ;::::~t::::11d to threats to the Alliance in areas outside
A11i'111c:;e 1:::c...:;:;,~<:t1ies (e.t,., Gulf oil). However, U.S. forces available for such contin-
gencies are, for the most part, committed to NATO. The European members should
improve their manpower mobilization capability in order to reduce the ground force
reinforcement burden now carried by the U.S. There are several reasons for this aside
from pure burden-~haring considerations. It would reduce Soviet incentives to take
advantage in Europe of U.S. involvement elsewhere, or to feint in order to tie down
U.S. forces in other areas in the event it did contemplate military pressure or aggres-
sion against Western Europe.
But, perhaps most important, modifying reinforcement responsibilities would re-
duce an enormous burden on port and airfield facilities at a time ofmaximum peril and
confusion for the Alliance. If one makes the reasonable assumption that a Soviet
calculated, deliberate assault on western Europe is a least likely contingency, any
European conflict would more probably arise from some unexpected event or crisis.
Under such circumstances, time for a deliberate force buildup may not exist, and
attempting to reinforce while under Soviet attack on ports and airfields would be a
formidable task indeed.
Further, enhanced European ground mobilization capability would add consider-
ably to the overall strength of the Alliance in view of the fact that U.S. forces now
80
earmarked could, in perhaps most circumstances, also be available. It is true that
manpower is an increasingly scarce commodity, but pools of trained manpower do
exist and could, with adequate preparation, be augmented and mobilized. The U.S.
could presumably assist in defraying the costs of additional unit sets of equipment.
Lastly, a modification of this type would do a great deal toward resolving the
burden-sharing issue. Without some move, this being one which would enhance
NA'fO' military capability, some unfortunate Congressional action cannot be ruled
out.
Emerging technology (ET) js increasingly referred to as the means by which NATO
can offset Warsaw Pact conventional military advantages. That it will not do. Howev-
er, technology, coupled with innovative tactics, may in some cases be able to offset
some Soviet strengths which NATO will never otherwise match (e.g., tanks), or to
deal with Soviet advances jn weapons, strategy or tactics. A random few examples
will illustrate.
ET is often cited as a means of intercepting and disrupting Warsaw Pact second
echelon forces, preventing their reinforcement ofthe battlefield. That may or may not
be an advantageous use ofmilitary resources. It certainly is not ifNATO forces are not
already able to contain an attack by Soviet first echelon forces. I am not aware of any
general presumption that that is the case. Even ifit were, substantial additional analy-
sis would be required to demonstrate that second echelon interdiction was the optimal
use of additional resources.
Technology may be ofmore obvious benefit in coping with the Soviet development
of the Operational Maneuver Group (OMG). The fluid character of the battlefield
which results from this organization and tactics would put a premium on C
3
I. Future
ability to know precise location of friendly units, enemy units (under some circum-
stances) and flexible distributed systems for communication have the potential to
provide significant differential advantage to NATO units.
Another potentially valuable technology is SDI related. Soviet missile develop-
ments (SS-20, 21, 22) seem designed to implement a strategy of attack on, among
other targets, NATO tactical airfields. The tactic appears to be to initiate hostilities
with attacks-designed to crater airfield runways, preventing aircraft takeoff. This
would provide several hours time during which those aircraft would be very vulner-
able to destruction on the ground by Warsaw Pact aircraft.
One ofthe few, and perhaps the only, means ofcoping with such an attack would be
through the development of an ATBM capability. Such a development could take
place as an adjunct ofSDI, a development which has a further advantage of not being
·prohibited by the ABM treaty (the Soviets may, in fact, be in the process ofdeveloping
such a capability themselves). One ofthe most vital fruits ofSDI research could be the
development of an effective capability to intercept tactical ballistic missiles. That, in
itself, would be reason enough for European support of SDI research.
SDI itself, other than ATBM capability, is perhaps less likely to have a clearly
defined impact on the Alliance. The mutual deployment of SDI by East and West
could mark the virtual end of extended deterrence, mandating the improvement of
NATO conventional capability (assuming it had not already taken place). There is no
reason to believe, however, that achievement of SDI capability by the U.S. would
increase its reluctance to come to the defense of Western Europe. Quite the contrary
result is a more likely consequence. While funding of SDI R&D and development
could compete with funds for the improvement ofNATO defenses, competition on the
frontiers of technology-should the Soviets eschew a cooperative approach to SDI
development-is likely in the abstract to differentiaJly be to the advantage ofthe West.
81
Given apparent political attitudes within the Alliance on SDI, however, the potential
of the Soviet Union to exploit it to the detriment of the Alliance can become a painful
reality far in advance of any military returns to the West. In the near term, political
controversy over SDI and burden-sharing are likely to pose the greatest peril to the
cohesiveness of the Alliance.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
The topic was introduced by a panel consisting ofthe authors ofthe working papers
and a French participant, whose remarks begin this section.
* * *
The Alliance was, in the opinion of the French panelist, "doing quite well," and
perhaps one way to keep it that way was to leave it alone. In any event, the attitude of
"doom and desolation" that so often prevailed in discussions about the state of the
Alliance was very much exaggerated.
Relations between Europe and the U.S. were in a period of exceptional harmony.
Public opinion polls on both sides ofthe Atlantic indicated a high degree ofsupport for
the Alliance. The deployment of intermediate-range missiles on European soil-one
of the Alliance's most important and difficult decisions-was being carried out with
very little opposition. In areas outside the Alliance, there were few conflicts. Amer-
ican and European policies concerning Southeast Asia, Africa, Afghanistan, and even
the Middle East were essentially the same. (In the Middle East we seemed to have no
policy, but at least we were in agreement.) Central America, in the speaker's view,
was really a domestic U.S. issue, about which most Europeans "couldn't care less."
While the traditional problems in the Alliance had not disappeared, neither had they
gotten worse. There were differences between American and European attitudes
toward the Soviet Union, but these tended to be practical rather than philosophical.
Being geographically so close to the East Bloc, Europeans, West Germans in particu-
lar, were "allergic" to East-West crises. Europeans were reluctant to link out-of-area
conflicts with the Russians to East-West relations in Europe; they tended to believe
that cooperation in trade and other areas was more useful in influencing Soviet be-
havior than pressure and compulsion. Most Americans had the opposite view. The
problem of American unilateralism-the lack of appropriate consultation-was also
still there, but it had always been overcome in the past with good will. Perhaps the only
problem that had gotten somewhat worse was the issue of burden sharing.
New problems had arisen, but they had so far not proven destructive to the
Alliance. Nevertheless, they were serious and deserved our attention. One was the
strategic problem. Nuclear parity between the U.S. and the Soviet Union had
weakened the credibility of the American nuclear protection of Europe. This in-
creased the importance of developing a strong conventional defense, but here there
was uncertainty about what new technologies could achieve and who would pay for
them. The strategic problem had also brought forth a new wave ofanti-nuclear feeling
and pacificism. It was important to note that this was by no means confined to Europe,
but existed among certain groups in the U.S. as well. Indeed, most Europeans
accepted that nuclear weapons would be essential for their defense for a long time to
come.
82
The other new problem was economic. The depressed state of the European econ-
omy and the widening gap between it and the U.S. economy could become one of the
Alliance's most serious long-range problems. Unless checked, unemployment would
eventually erode the social and political consensus in Europe. And economic prob-
lems would lead to changes in Europe's share of world trade. There was a danger that
we were heading to a situation in the pattern of U.S.-European trade in which "the
geography of security no longer coincided with the geography of economic develop-
ment." This was potentially a very divisive issue.
The problems facing the Alliance did not call for sudden, dramatic changes, but
rather for thoughtful, long-range action. On the issue of security, we did not need
experiments, but rather meaningful proposals for the adjustments necessary to meet
the increased Russian threat. We needed, in particular, a common concept concerning
our long-range objectives in East-West relations. Detente had been one such concept.
It had failed, and had never been replaced. The absence of such a shared, long-range
view could lead to differences. And finally, we needed increased European participa-
tion, without which then~ would be no answers to the nagging questions of burden
sharing and a greater European influence in Alliance decision making.
* * *
The American author, while agreeing that there was much in the Alliance to be
heartened about, was concerned about new dangers on the horizon which might
threaten the Alliance far more than the "family squabbles" of the past.
One danger was the growing divergence between the U.S. and Europe about the
nature of the Soviet threat. It had been unanimity about the basic character of that
threat that had led to the creation of the Alliance and kept it going. If Europe either
perceived U.S. paranoia as an equal threat to its security, or lost confidence in the will
and ability of the U.S. to defend the Alliance, then we had a fundamental problem.
What should we do about the Soviet threat? We were operating on the basis of a
strategic concept formulated more than 30 years before-to defend Europe "on the
cheap" by u~ing nuclear weapons rather than conventional forces. Time, circum-
stances, and weilpons developments were making it increasingly difficult to have
confidence in that concept. Regarding arms control, the U.S. had lost considerable
faith in it as a vehicle for restoring a strategic balance. Europe, on the other hand, still
believed that arms control had a contribution to make.
It was true that crises outside of the NATO area had not occurred recently. But
here, too, was a source for dissension between the U.S. and Europe. The U.S. consid-
ered itself to be "manning the fronts of the free world against threats wherever they
might be." European criticism of this role was a problem. It was the American view
that NATO could more easily be defeated in the Straits of Hormuz than on the North
German plain. Recognizing that and dealing with the burden it implied was as impor-
tant as the defense of the NATO territory itself.
All of these issues were coming to the fore at a time when attitudes within the
Alliance were evolving. It had been observed that Europe was more concerned about
economic issues than political ones and that a new sense of "Europeanism" had
emerged. In the U.S., the generation of Atlanticists whose primary focus was on
Europe, was passing. A generation of more Pacific-oriented policy makers, many
from the Western U.S., was gaining prominence, and with them, the notion that U.S.
strategy should be less tied to defending the European continent.
* * *
83
The principal problems facing the Alliance were, in the view of the Belgian author,
economic ones. It was ironic because the Alliance had been created for political and
military reasons. Tensions over economic issues were effecting the other areas of the
Alliance. It was essential that the trend toward a stronger economy in Europe not be
jeopardized by actions of the U.S. or by problems in the U.S.-European relationship.
Were we doing enough to put our economies on a path toward growth? Without
growth, we would have to share a diminishing cake, and we were having enough
trouble sharing the cake we had now. Protectionism, even more than defense, could
become a divisive issue.
Technology was seen in Europe as the one thing that would help restore growth and
make Europe once again competitive with the U.S. and Japan. This was a strong
integrating political factor in Europe. Real cooperation between American and Euro-
pean firms was crucial. We needed a new framework to deal with future questions of
sensitive technology. The mechanisms we had today would not be sufficient to deal
with the rapid pace of technological development in the future. Unless we dealt with
this problem, we could not have meaningful cooperation and European participation.
If, for example, SDI was seen as improving and advancing the technological expertise
of American companies through a program not available in Europe because of tech-
nology transfer questions, the effect would be very divisive. The issues were too
complex for governments to deal with alone. American and European firms needed to
join together to assist governments in working out ways to deal with questions of
sensitive technology.
Currently, the smaller European countries were becoming increasingly content to
remain under the NATO umbrella but not to participate. This was bad for the integra-
tion process within Europe and bad for the balance between Europe and the U.S.
Without economic growth and a greater European role in NATO, we could expect this
trend to continue. It was vital for the U.S. to maintain a balanced, interested rela-
tionship with Europe and not to look skeptically at European attitudes toward de-
fense. Finally, there had to be in our defense strategy an element ofnegotiation, as we
had in the two-track decision, defining what our objective in dealing with the Soviet
Union was. We should bear in mind that Soviet prestige was at an all-time low in
Europe.
* * *
As an Italian participant put it, we could POt expect to deal effectively with the
Russians as long as we had problems within the Alliance, especially between the U.S.·
and Europe. We had to cl~veiop greater cohesion and a shared strategic concept. A
revitaliz::iti,..~ -::f ~urope's military, political, and economic role was basic to estab-
iishing a sound partnership with the U.S. The European Allies needed to take steps to
strengthen their union, consolidate their economies, and develop a public consensus
on defense issues. They had to assume increasing responsibility for the defense of
Europe in order to support the U.S. capability to face threats elsewhere. It was crucial
to convey to the Russians that they could not rely on divisions within the West.
An American agreed that the stresses and strains within NATO had to be dealt with,
because Gorbachev could be expected to focus on these long-term vulnerabilities.
Gorbachev posed a real threat; he was young, smart, tough, and patient, and he was
likely to be around longer than any current Western leader.
In this context, one particular concern voiced by several speakers was that the
political aspect ofthe Alliance was insufficiently emphasized. IfNATO lacked politic-
al strength, said a Canadian, it could not be strong militarily. We needed to discuss at
84
summits the objectives and general purposes of the Alliance. This was particularly
true with respect to European youth, pointed out a Norwegian. There was a growing
indifference on the part ofyoung people in Europe toward the Alliance, a tendency to
take it for granted, which could lead ultimately to a loss of support. That the Alliance
had an important political dimension had been obscured by the emphasis on the
military aspect of the public debate on INF. Western leaders had to project more
consi~ently and clearly that the Alliance was primarily political and was the most
promising vehicle to achieve a resumption of a constructive East-West dialogue.
* * *
Another sensitive issue was the tendency, observed by a Canadian speaker, for
there to be two classes ofcountries in NATO, or, more specifically, an "underclass" of
less powerful, sometimes less developed, members of the Alliance. A Portuguese
participant characterized his country as having no particular problems with respect to
East-West relations. Although it had a large communist party, there was little anti-
NATO or anti-American feeling. There was, however, a desire to play a greater role
within the Alliance and for the country's strategic importance to be recognized. In-
deed, with its experience and relationships in Southern Africa and Latin America,
Portugal had special expertise that should be utilized by the Alliance. And it was
geographically close to potential troubie spots in North Africa.
A Spaniard, too, warned against taking smaller NATO countries for granted. Span-
ish membership in the Alliance would be put to a referendum next year, and recent
polls indicated that a significant majority of Spaniards supported withdrawal. This
would be a serious crisis for NATO. But another Spanish speaker, while agreeing that
current opinion was running against the Alliance, felt that this was due in large part to
events in Latin America and President Reagan's recent visit to Spain. It was to be
hoped that the favorable conclusion of the Common Market negotiations as well as a
renegotiation of the bilateral agreement with the U.S. would shift public sentiment in
favor of staying in the Alliance.
Turkey was another NATO member-that felt neglected, according to two partici-
pants from thaJ country. One warned that Turkey's role as a staunch ally should not be
taken for granted:"'Itwas assumed Turkey had nowhere else to go, but this might not
always be the case. The other speaker pointed to his country's sensitive geographical
location, next to two members of the Warsaw Pact and to two of the most unstable
countries in the volatile Middle East. This flank of NATO needed strengthening.
It was an Italian participant's view that the Alliance would have to become more
concerned with its southern flank, the Mediterranean region. It was this area that was
becoming the most important in terms ofpotential conflict. A Briton observed that this
might be particularly true for NATO if Greece were to become destabilized, as it
showed some indication of doing. But a Greek responded that there was little chance
of this happening, and that the strong anti-NATO sentiments in Greece arose from
Western backing of the now-defunct military dictatorship and handling of the Cyprus
situation.
With respect to conflicts outside ofNATO territory, an International participant felt
that these arose from economic and political developments as well as from Soviet
influence. The Russian position in many parts of the world was not strong, but that
would not always be the case, so it behooved the Alliance to pay·some attention. By
supporting various regional organizations and intiatives, we could increase stability
and reduce Soviet incentives to induce Allied, and especially American, overexten-
sion ofcommitments. We needed to give advice, intelligence, political support, access
85
to technology, and training of experts, as well as back up our support with a convinc-
ing rapid-deployment capability for handling major threats.
* * *
From the military point ofview, the Alliance had made encouraging progress in the
last year, reported an International speaker. The continued deployment of Cruise and
Pershing missiles on schedule was providing the Russians with an incentive to negoti-
ate seriously and was sending them the signal that they did not have a veto over our
security arrangements. Other heartening developments included provision of in-
creased funding to construct new facilities, approval of new planning guidelines re-
garding attack of follow-on forces, harmonization of rapid deployment plans, and
completion ofan airborne early warning system. Studies would soon be completed on
reduction oftheater nuclear weapons without decreasing deterrence, and on the direc-
tion of conventional forces for the coming decade.
NATO's mission in Europe was to deter overt aggression, and, more important, to
deter intimidation and coercion by Soviet military might. The strategy of moving to
572 intermediate weapons if there were no breakthrough in Europe was correct, as
was achieving a conventional capacity sufficient to frustrate a conventional attack
without early use of nuclear weapons. It was essential to have enough conventional
forces so that the political leaders could make a deliberate decision regarding the use
of nuclear weapons. Certain new weapons systems were needed to achieve this con-
ventional capacity. One ofthe problems ofSDI was that it diverted too much attention
from the enhancement ofnon-strategic nuclear weapons and ofconventional forces. If
we were to be alive to enjoy the frui(s of SDI, we had to take other steps in the
meantime.
The need to bolster Europe's conventional defense was particularly compelling to a
speaker from Lichtenstein. It was his view that SDI offered the U.S. a possibility of
protection from the only kind of attack to which it was vulnerable. But Europe was
also vulnerable to a conventional war, which was a more realistic threat. It was
unlikely a Soviet leader would launch a nuclear attack against Europe in view of the
U.S. retaliatory capacity and the prospect of nuclear winter. The latter had reduced
the possibility that nuclear weapons would be used and, at the same time, diminished
the credibility of nuclear deterrence in the strategic defense of Europe. Far more
important than doing SDI research, Europe should concentrate its efforts on making
conventional war impossible.
A German agreed that there had been too much attention paid to SDI when other
things needed doing. Conflicting statements about SDI had created a great deal of
confusion, especially in Germany. We needed doctrinal clarity in defining the import-
ance of SDI in the public debate. Conflicts over SDI could lead to American impa-
tience and, hence, unilateralism. SDI was basically an American-Soviet issue over
which Europe had little leverage. An American agreed that SDI presented a difficult
problem for the Alliance because the U.S. did not require bases for it in Europe, as
with INF. Yet Europe wanted some technological spin-offfrom SDI research. There
would have to be a great deal of consultation on the issue, and the U.S. had to avoid
giving the impression either that was unwilling to compromise at all, or that it would
make a deal with the Russians over the heads ofthe Europeans, or not in the European
interest.
Regarding the arms control aspect of SDI, the American speaker continued, the
Russians could be expected to exert great efforts to block SDI, and, therefore, there
would be little progress in Geneva in the next year or two. A Dutch participant who
86
viewed the two-track decision as a failed strategy because the result had, in his view,
not made Europe more stable, felt that SDI would fail as a strategy, too, because it
raised the level of Soviet fear. NATO's objective, he argued, should be to reduce the
level ofSoviet fear, and this meant gradual abandonment ofthe strategy ofdeterrence.
One possibility that worried another American was that the Russians could exploit
SDI at the negotiations. Ifthey offerred to make meaningful cuts in offensive weapons
in exchange for abandonment by the U.S. of SDI, then the Alliance would have a
serious crisis on its hands.
But that possibility seemed remote to the French author, who viewed SDI as an
opportunity for a major cooperative effort in scientific development between the U.S.
and Europe. Ifnot seized, it would substantially damage U.S.-European cooperation.
* *
*
CLOSING REMARKS
At the conclusion of the final session, Mr. Giovanni Agnelli thanked all those who
had contributed to the success ofthis thirty-third Bilderberg Meeting. In particular. he
mentioned the American members of the Steering Committee and the Advisory
Group; Mr. Charles Muller, who organized the conference; the Bilderberg staff. espe-
cially Mrs. Anne Hoogendoorn, who was retiring this year after ten years of service;
the management of Arrowwood and its owner, Citicorp, here represented by
Mr. Hans Angermueller; the authors, panelists and moderators; and the interpreters.
Mr. Agnelli observed that relations among the countries of the Atlantic Alliance
were generally healthy, and that the Bilderberg Meetings had played a part in making
them so.
87
