._
~
,i
-;:;
'"
r
i
'$_
~
'
I
I
J
a
I
~
,
,
,
'>
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
WIESBADEN
CONFERENCE
25-27 March 1966
t:d
......
t-<
t:I
t::rJ
0
~
?:I
0
t:d
"'
H
t::rJ
'f
z
M
?:I
"'
1-:tj
r.n
0
....,
~
M
t::d
~
::»
~
>
t::rJ
..,('")
t)
t::rJ
;:r'
M
I~
'g,
z
M
O'l
0
zM
J
l
1
t
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JosEPH E. JOHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
JOHANNES MEYNEN
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ARNOLD T. LAMPING
ABs, HERMANN J.
AGNELLI, GwvANNI
ARON, RAYMOND
BALL, GEORGE w.
BASSETTI, PIERO
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BELL, DAVIDE.
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BERG, FRITZ
BIRGI, M. NuRI
BIRRENBACH, KuRT
Bowm, RoBERT R.
BROSIO, MANLIO
BRZEZINSKI, ZBIGNIEW
BucHAN, THE HoN. ALASTAIR
CADIEUX, MARCEL
CAMU, LOUIS
*
* *
GERMANY
ITALY
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
ITALY
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
GERMANY
TURKEY
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
CANADA
BELGIUM
3
...
COHEN, SIR ANDREW UNITED KINGDOM ROLL, SIR ERIC UNITED KINGDOM
COLLADO, EMILIO G. UNITED STATES SCHMID, CARLO GERMANY
CooL, AUGUSTE P. BELGIUM SCHMIDT, HELMUT GERMANY
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES SCHWARZ, URS SWITZERLAND
DUNTON, A. DAVIDSON CANADA SNOY ET D'0PPUERS, BARON BELGIUM
ERHARD, LUDWIG GERMANY SPOFFORD, CHARLES M. UNITED STATES
ERLER, FRITZ GERMANY STOLTENBERG, GERHARD GERMANY
ESPIRITO SANTO SILVA, MANUEL R. PORTUGAL STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
FARIBAULT, MARCEL CANADA TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
FRANKEL, MAX UNITED STATES THORODDSEN, GUNNAR leELAND
GEoRGEs-P1coT, jACQ,UES FRANCE TINBERGEN, jAN NETHERLANDS
GILPATRIC, ROSWELL L. UNITED STATES TUTHILL, jOHN W. UNITED STATES
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s. ·CANADA WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
HARRIS, FRED R. UNITED STATES WHEELER, SIR CHARLES UNITED KINGDOM
HAUGE, GABRIEL UNITED STATES WINTERS, ROBERT H. CANADA
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO GERMANY
HOEGH, LEIF NORWAY WooDs, GEORGE D. INTERNATIONAL
HOLIFIELD, CHET UNITED STATES WYNDHAM WHITE, ERIC INTERNATIONAL
JONES, THOMAS v. UNITED STATES ZIJLSTRA, JELLE NETHERLANDS
KLEINWORT, CYRIL UNITED KINGDOM
KNUDTZON, HARALD DENMARK
I
IN ATTENDANCE:
KRAG, JENS 0. DENMARK CHIUSANO, VITTORINO ITALY
LANGE, HALVARD NORWAY RoY, BERTIE LE NETHERLANDS
LECANUET,jEAN FRANCE VERNEDE, EDWIN NETHERLANDS
LuNs, JosEPH M. A. H. NETHERLANDS WALDTHAUSEN, MICHAEL VON GERMANY
MALFATTI, FRANCO M. ITALY
MASON, EDWARD s. UNITED STATES
McCLOY, joHN J. UNITED STATES
McCORMACK, JAMES UNITED STATES
McGHEE, GEORGE C. UNITED STATES
MERKLE, HANS GERMANY
MORSE, F. BRADFORD UNITED STATES
MURPHY, ROBERT D. UNITED STATES
NYKOPP, ]OHAN FINLAND
O'NEILL, Sm CoN UNITED KINGDOM
PEDINI, MARIO ITALY
PETERSON, RUDOLPH A. UNITED STATES
PoRnscH, HuGo AUSTRIA
REUTHER, WALTER P. UNITED STATES
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
4 I 5
.._
INTRODUCTION
The fifteenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Hotel "Nassauer Hof"
in Wiesbaden (Germany) on 25, 26 and 27 March 1966 under the chairman-
ship of H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 81 participants representing the United States, Canada, fifteen
Western European countries as well as various international organizations,
and drawn from leaders in the field of politics (governments and parliaments),
business, journalism, public service (national and international), the liberal
professions, trade unions and employers' organizations.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization they might belong to. In order to enable partici-
pants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were confi-
dential with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. Should NATO be reorganized and if so how?
II. The future of world economic relations especially between industrial
and developing countries.
7
..
I. SHOULD NATO BE REORGANIZED AND IF SO HOW?
After recalling the Bilderberg rules of procedure, His Royal Highness
opened the Meeting. Expressing regret that no spokesman for the Gaullist
point of view would be present on the first day, he suggested that an effort
nevertheless be made to establish what differences of opinion existed among
participants on the Agenda items and to see what could be clone to remedy
the situation. (As it turned out, no Frenchman who could be regarded as a
spokesmanfor the French governmental view was able to attend the conference
at all.)
* * *
The groundwork for discussion of this item on the agenda consisted of a
paper prepared by an American participant which was distributed before
the meeting.
The author of this paper began by stating that the question of how the At-
lantic Alliance should be organized could only be answered in terms of (1)
its purpose; and (2) the relations among its members. Both were affected by
the world situation and its appraisal.
From the start, the Alliance had combined two aims. The primary pur-
pose in 1949 was to meet the direct Soviet threat to Europe by a regional de-
fense assuring the United States guarantee. But the Alliance also reflected a
wider purpose:
a) to construct firm bonds of many kinds between the United States and
Europe;
b) to build a strong, unified Europe by gradual stages;
c) to counter the Communist threat and work toward a stable world order.
Not all members shared all these aims at all times or gave them the same
priority. Yet over the ensuing years, they had been major guideposts for Atlan-
tic policy and the progress achieved had been a decisive factor in transforming
the situation in Western Europe, the Atlantic area, and the Communist world.
This process of rapid change had inevitably affected the relations of the
allies among themselves and their attitudes toward the Alliance and its func-
tions. One consequence had been a growing debate on how to adjust the Alli-
ance to new conditions and a steady stream of proposals for reform.
9
I.
'
,
The rapporteur said he had singled out a few key issues:
r. The changed conditions now facing the Alliance;
II. How these had affected the need for joint action and the relations of
the allies;
m. Selected proposals for improving Alliance operations.
I, THE CHANGED CONDITIONS NOW FACING THE ALLIANCE
1. Soviet threat to Europe
The Soviet military threat was largely discounted in Europe despite the
steady growth in Soviet military power. Underlying this sense of security was
· the confidence that a nuclear balance, to which NATO contributed, had
created a reliable equilibrium.
Also encouraging Soviet restraint were its serious domestic problems and
the weakening of Communist cohesion.
The U.S.S.R. had been seeking to adapt its strategy and tactics to these
complexities. In general, its policy toward the Atlantic world had been to
cultivate an atmosphere of lower tension while making no concessions of
substance and exploiting disruptive tendencies among the Europeans and
between Europe and the United States. In the less developed regions, its aim
was to expand its influence and erode their ties with the Atlantic nations.
2. The widening challenges of international affairs
Over the last decade, technology, decolonization and many other factors
had made international affairs truly global.
The relations of the West with the Soviet bloc had taken on a new dimen-
sion. The ferment in Eastern Europe and the Soviet situation offered the At-
lantic allies greater scope for an affirmative policy to encourage this evolution.
The pressure of Communist China posed a separate threat for the West
and raised difficult questions of how to organize a framework for security
in the Far East and to improve the capacity to resist disruption and subver-
sion.
3. Relations among NA TO members
Trans-Atlantic. A decade of growth and prosperity unmatched in its history
had now restored European self-confidence but had not reduced the disparity
in actual power between the European allies and the United States which
was a source of trans-Atlantic tension.
Intra-European. Within Europe, the larger States, while sharing a desire for
a greater influence in world affairs, diverged in their concepts of Europe and
IO
of Atlantic relations and their priorities. The nuclear issue had also introduced
disparities among them.
II. HOW FAR IS CONCERTED ATLANTIC ACTION NECESSARY AND FEASIBLE?
These changes had created a radically new setting for the Atlantic Alliance.
The effort to contain the U.S.S.R. (and China) could be seen as only the nega-
tive side of a larger challenge. Its positive aspect was the building of a viable
world order to accommodate both the advanced and the less developed regions.
In this process, the Atlantic nations could influence the outcome greatly,
perhaps decisively. The crucial questions were: how far and by what means
should they attempt to pursue joint policies? How should they organize rela-
tions among themselves?
On these issues the allies were far from unanimous.
Their differing reactions naturally produced very different assessments of
the future of the Alliance. In one view the major tasks facing the Atlantic
nations demanded wider concerted efforts. The most extreme counterview
asserted (1) that the basic interests of Europe and the United States now
diverged too far to justify joint action; and (2) that close Atlantic ties were
bound to submerge the European allies under an unacceptable U.S. hegemony.
1. Specific interests
Securiry. The original foundation for the Alliance remained solidly intact:
Europe's security was a vital interest of the United States and ultimately
depended on United States nuclear power. Both Europe and the United
States were primarily concerned to create an effective deterrent which would
prevent any hostilities.
Detente. Any genuine detente depended on resolving the critical issues in
Central Europe. This the U.S.S.R. had so far refused even to consider; and
the experience of twenty years hardly suggested that the process would be
hastened by a United States-European split. On the contrary, constructive
change was most likely to result from maintaining the cohesion of the Alliance
while concerting to foster the more hopeful Soviet trends. Only intimate and
continuous joint policy-making would enable the Atlantic nations to combine
both courses and to guard against cleavages and distrust among themselves.
Economic. The economic needs of both the advanced countries and the less
developed world seemed to call for more joint action rather than less. With
their economies steadily becoming more closely linked, the Atlantic nations
must concert monetary and economic policies, and trade policies as well, for
their own prosperity and well-being. And the measures essential to promote
I I
I
I"'
I
I
I
growth and stability in Latin America, Africa and Asia all required combined
efforts by the advanced Atlantic countries (and Japan).
Peace keeping. The problems of subversion, disorder and local war in the less-
developed areas and Far East were not always seen in the same light by the
United States and its allies. The cause was less a conflict of interests than
differences about priorities and what should be done, and questioning of
unilateral United States action.
The rapporteur added that the necessity for joint action would not make it
easy to achieve. The problems themselves were complicated and offered much
room for differences in approach and in judgement. The central issues required
the interested nations to co-ordinate both major purposes and many specific
actions and decisions on varied topics.
2. Roles and influence
Shared interests might not result in effective co-operation for pursuing
them if the allies differed deeply about their respective roles and relative
influence in the Alliance.
The imbalance in resources and influence between the United States and
the several European members posed this problem sharply. It often produced
resentment and frustration. It had to be frankly faced that separate states of
Europe could hardly be full partners of the United States and that the degree
ofinfluence was bound to be closely related to the respective contributions.
Some NATO members, while recognizing their interests outside NATO,
were reluctant to become involved where action was so largely in the hands
of the United States which often felt compelled to act on its own.
Such tensions arose as much among the European allies as across the Atlan-
tic. The nuclear issue, for example, partly reflected a European demand for a
greater voice on these life-and-death matters, but the non-nuclear allies also
objected to the inequality inherent in the British and French national forces.
The interaction of Atlantic and European structures was therefore inesca-
pable. In the long run, a viable Alliance was intimately bound up with how
Europe organized itself but Europe would in fact attain effective unity only
if its members were willing to forego efforts for primacy or domination and
to accept basic equality among themselves.
Only the Europeans could decide that issue. But the interaction with the
Alliance suggested one criterion for Atlantic action: the Alliance structure
should be designed not to interpose obstacles to the emergence of a European
political entity. Concretely, this meant that the handling of Alliance prob-
lems should not create or perpetuate inequalities among the European mem-
bers which would impede such a European entity.
!2
,\,
,·1.
3. Guidelines for action
An ideal structure for the Alliance would (a) provide effective means for
devising joint policies on the common tasks, and (b) satisfy the desires of var-
ious members as to their roles and influence.
There was no prospect of developing such definitive solutions under exist-
ing conditions. While Europe's structure was unsettled, the Alliance could
not adjust its organization or procedures to satisfy fully either the needs for
joint action or the aspirations of some of the European members, or to over-
come the existing disparity in power between the European allies and the
United States.
The only alternative was to proceed on a partial and interim basis and the
rapporteur emphasized that even for this the Alliance would have to resolve
two questions:
a) Should the Alliance limit changes to those which would be approved
by all members, including the most hesitant or obstructive? Or should those
who agreed on measures to strenghten NATO institutions or integration go
forward over the objection of one or more who might oppose such action?
b) Given the differences in long-term outlook, would members who recog-
nized the need for joint action be willing to proceed with intermediate measures
which left open future outcomes? If so, some Alliance institutions and prac-
tices could be improved without pre-judging the ultimate structures which
might be adopted for working together in Europe and the Atlantic area as
and when the conditions become propitious.
To the extent that the Atlantic nations did concert their actions-political,
military, and economic-they would, of course, make use of various institu-
tions and agencies besides NATO-such.as OECD, the European Community,
the International Bank, the Monetary Fund, etc.
III. SPECIFIC MEASURES FOR REFORM
The rapporteur said that the various suggestions for modifying NATO
organization or procedures he proposed to outline had generally been limited
to measures which could be acted on in the near future.
A. INTEGRATED SYSTEM OF DEFENSE
Even if the Alliance widened its scope, its first task would continue to be to
contain and deter the threat from the massive Soviet military capability. On
this the members seemed fully in accord. But they differed on what was
needed to achieve it.
13
r. Should NA TO dismantle its integrated system of defense and the Alliance continue
merely as a guarantee?
Most of the NATO aliies rejected this position. They considered that inte-
grated commands, strategy, and planning were still necessary in order to
maintain an effective deterrent against the Soviet threat. While that threat
seemed :relatively quiescent now, it might not remain so if the NATO sys-
tem were pulled apart.
2. Should NA TO create an integrated strategic planning staff?
There had been various proposals, said the rapporteur, that NATO should
have a focal point for defense planning where (i) political and military aspects
could be integrated, and (ii) members of the Alliance could assert their views.
This could take the form of a NATO staff, headed by a man of high stand-
ing and ability, to perform for the Alliance functions analogous to those of a
national ministry of defense. The small staff would be composed of profession-
al officers and civilians qualified to analyze strategy, forces, weapons systems,
resources, etc.
This "NATO Defense Minister" could work directly with foreign and
defense ministries in developing strategy, forces, logistics, etc. By acting as a
spokesman for the common interest, he should help bridge the existing gap
between European members and the United States.
More specifically his functions could include: (a) recommending to the
Ministerial Council, in the light of expert advice from NATO commanders,
defense staffs of NATO members, and his own staff, strategy and force goals
for the Alliance, (b) negotiating with national governments to carry out these
programmes, as approved by the Ministerial Council, and (c) performing
other functions regarding logistics, weapons systems, etc., related to the
defense planning of the Alliance.
The existing NATO military structure could then be revised (a) to abolish
the Standing Group or designate its members as military advisors to the
NATO defense minister, making its staff the nucleus of the defense planning
staff; and (b) attaching members of the Military Committee to the Council
permanent delegations as military advisors to the Permanent Representatives.
3. Should NA TO create a larger integrated groundforce?
It had been suggested that the Alliance might usefully build up an integrat-
ed force which could be available for special tasks and could serve as a mobile
reserve to re-enforce the centre. It would be of special value (a) as NATO
strategy comes to place more stress on ability to deter and resist limited threats
14
',4
,'•!_.
below general war, and (b) if NATO members accept greater obligations
for peacekeeping outside the NATO area.
This might be done by starting from scratch or by developing the existing
ACE (Allied Command Europe) mobile ground force, which was now largely
a token allied force. Such a force would be under a single commander and
integrated as far down as feasible. It should have a single logistic and signal
system and every effort should be made to standardize its equipment. It might
ultimately need to be three or four divisions in order to play the suggested
role.
The creation of such a force might test the feasibility of wider integration
of NATO ground forces, with unified logistics and standard equipment.
B. IMPROVED METHODS FOR CONCERTING POLICY AND ACTION
I. A variety of measures had been suggested to improve the concerting of
action among the allies:
a). Foreign ministers or their deputies might meet every two months for
more intimate exchanges on specific topics;
b) Policy-making officials and experts from capitals should meet at regular
intervals to develop courses ofjoint action and to prepare topics for ministe-
rial discussion;
c) To tie the Permanent Representatives more closely into policy-making,
they should regularly return to capitals for consultation;
d) A group of three to five senior advisors, who would be independent of
governments, should be appointed as a standing group to appraise the situa-
tion of the Alliance and from time to time make reports and proposals, which
would go on the agenda of the Council;
e) The Alliance might appoint a minister for political affairs who would
be charged solely with promoting political consultation among the members.
2. Underlying these proposals were three principles based on experience
with NATO and other agencies:
a) Those consulting should as often as feasible be officials directly involved
in policy-making in their governments. They should be more expert and better
able to inject any joint conclusions into the policy-making at home;
b) The number consulting should be kept small and should be restricted
to those who were prepared to act. Normally this would include the larger
members with others added for specific matters;
c) Finding common ground and devising joint policies was often facilitated
by having a disinterested person or group who could serve as spokesman for
the common interest.
15
3. Existing NATO procedures did not sufficiently reflect these principles.
The Permanent Council was suitable for exchange of information, but poor-
ly adapted to joint policy-making on complex or sensitive issues.
The Permanent Representatives could not be intimately informed on many
of the problems and might not be in a position to influence policy-making
in their government. A meeting of all fifteen members ofNATO would certain-
ly be too diffuse,
4. NATO had, of course, used restricted meetings informally and ad hoc,
but a program which formalized and expanded this practice would be a
break with NATO custom which could raise serious objections from some
members. To make the practice more acceptable, such groups (a) could in-
clude the NATO Secretary General or a rotating member to protect the in-
terests of those not attending, and (b) could keep the Council informed of
any major decisions.
5. Certain fields might require more than even the expanded consultation
discussed above. Thus, the issues involving Central Europe and the Soviet
Union-German unity, arms control, commercial relations, etc.-could severe-
ly strain Atlantic solidarity. The ability to conduct a flexible policy and take
initiatives would depend on the mutual confidence of the key NATO coun-
tries and especially of the Federal Republic. That might require continuous
participation in developing such policies and proposals.
One solution for this type of issue would be a restricted working group
(perhaps in Washington) similar to the Ambassadorial group which worked
on Berlin.
6. Over time, the practical effect of these various measures might ulti-
mately be to divide the NATO members into two classes: (a) those who nor-
mally concerted on a wide range ofpolicies, which would surely come to include
the members with the resources and interest to play an active role; and (b)
those other members who did not but who would continue to benefit from the
protection of the Alliance.
In essence, such a development would distinguish two functions of the
Alliance: (a) as a regional security system; and (b) as an instrument for con-
ducting a concerted foreign policy.
C. HOW SHOULD THE ALLIANCE HANDLE NUCLEAR SHARING?
1. For a variety of reasons, the issues relating to control of nuclear weapons
had become critical for the solidarity of the Alliance:
a) The strategic and tactical nuclear weapons which supported NATO
strategy were primarily under United States control, directly or through
double key systems;
16
vi·
I'
b) British and French claims for special status or greater influence based
on their national nuclear forces had been a divisive factor within the Alliance;
c) The extreme dangers from any accidental use, plus the doctrine of
flexible response, had increased the United States insistence on the need for
centralized control of such weapons;
d) Concern about the possible consequences of the spread of nuclear weap-
ons had steadily grown;
e) In the discussions about a possible treaty on non-proliferation, the Sov-
iets had insisted on terms which would bar any kind of collective force or
similar nuclear sharing system in which the Federal Republic would partici-
pate.
2. The result of these various factors was to create serious strains within
the Alliance as between the European allies and the United States and be-
tween nuclear and non-nuclear European allies.
3. In recent years, efforts had been made to broaden the knowledge and
understanding of nuclear planning and related matters by various measures
such as appointing a special SHAPE deputy for nuclear matters, by desig-
nating NATO liaison officers at SAC headquarters, and by creating the Spe-
cial Committee, but the issue has not yet been adequately resolved.
4. In essence, a solution should meet the following criteria:
a) It should curtail the spread of nuclear weapons in national hands and,
if possible, absorb one or both of the existing national forces;
b) It should give the European members of NATO a greater voice in nu-
clear strategy, guidelines, planning and use, and related matters such as arms
control; ,
c) It should satisfy the legitimate desire of the non-nuclear powers for
relative equality among the European NATO members;
d) It should be capable of developing or adjusting as the political situation
in Europe evolved, so that a political Europe, if and when it emerges, could
assume a more equal role as a partner of the United States.
5. The main alternatives which had been proposed for nuclear sharing
were:
a) A Special Committee, with participation in planning, etc. for all nuclear
forces available to NATO defense without any sharing of ownership or control
over use;
b) A collective Atlantic force which would be jointly owned, managed
and controlled and might or might not absorb one of the existing national
forces and whose board could also participate in planning for all NATO
nuclear forces;
c) A Control Committee, which would control the use of some segments
17
of existing nuclear forces (to remain under present ownership, manning, and
management), and which could also participate in planning for all NATO
nuclear forces;
d) A European force, which would be jointly owned, operated and con-
trolled by a European authority, but "co-ordinated" with United States
forces and planning.
6. No proposed solution would fully satisfy all the above criteria under
existing conditions. Hence any choiee must be based on comparing benefits
and disadvantages of various alternatives. In doing so, the allies would also
have to consider the relation of any solution to efforts for' a non-proliferation
treaty. In particular, it would be essential to weigh the value of Soviet agree-
ment to such a treaty in comparison with its impact on Atlantic cohesion,
especially if its effect were to freeze existing inequalities.
IV. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the rapporteur suggested that the Atlantic nations could
contribute to the building of a viable world order (r) by organizing their
own relations as a stable component of such an order, and (2) by utilizing
their resources and influence to encourage orderly development of bases for
stability and co-operation, and to deter and prevent disruptive actions and
coerced change. '
Both processes would require patient efforts· over a long period and the
Atlantic nations would have to hammer out a common framework which
would give direction to their activities.
Measures such as those outlined could assist the Atlantic nations to improve
their cohesion and capacity for joint action during this pivotal stage of tran-
sition. Hopefully, they could also nourish the attitudes which would advance
both European unity and Atlantic partnership.
*
* *
In placing his paper before the meeting, the rapporteur emphasized that it
had been written before the recent French action. France's position, however,
was already known and the basic purpose of the paper-to determine the
adjustments which should be made to the NATO structure-was not affected
by the latest developments of French policy.
The rapporteur went on to say that while France's intended withdrawal
from NATO would undoubtedly create a variety of problems, it did have a
positive aspect in as far as it would now be possible to take action previously
inhibited by doubts as to the French position.
There had been profound changes in the over-all situation since 1949, but
18
the basic fact still remained that joint interests were at stake. Joint action,
however, was confronted by two obstacles: ·
1) The disparity between the United States and Europe which others
beside France were no longer prepared to accept as necessarily desirable;
2) The inherent difficulty ofdeciding how to deal with a number ofproblems
when the wide range of members involved made any consensus difficult.
The solution undoubtedly lay in European unity enabling Europe to speak
with one voice, and such unity would have to be based on equality and com-
mon rules and institutions: a procedure which would take years.
Meanwhile, the practical problem was to decide what partial steps might
be taken to give European members more say and to devise common policy.
The rapporteur suggested that there were three fundamental points which
the conference might consider:
1) Was it possible to establish a situation in which those allies wishing to
take a wider type of action could do so without offending or being hindered
by others?
2) How was the position of Germany affected? NATO's goal had always
been to avoid rivalries by bringing Germany back into the European family.
This in turn involved the question of nuclear sharing where a solution must
be found that did not discriminate against Germany.
3) It was essential to avoid any irreparable cleavage with France. The
other allies should go forward without France but on the assumption that
France would eventually return.
All these aspects were subsequently dealt with by various speakers, although
not always in the same order nor with the same emphasis as suggested by the
rapporteur.
*
* *
In considering the problems confronting the Atlantic Alliance, there was
no tendency to concentrate exclusively on the French announcement. None-
theless, most of the speakers incorporated this element in their interventions.
However, they stressed that, while NATO would undoubtedly be profoundly
affected, yet there could be no doubt as to the importance of maintaining
the Organization.
A German participant opened the discussion by stating the general attitude
in his country towards the various aspects of the first item of the Agenda. He
stressed his country's special position in relation to the French action: Germa-
ny was particularly exposed in Europe and the Federal Republic was at pres-
ent challenged by France, her closest friend.
He felt that it might be possible to reach some sort of compromise where-
by France could continue to be associated with NATO but the essential struc-
tural elements could not be called into question.
rg
This speaker laid particular stress on the need to leave the door open for
an eventual French return and this aspect was subsequently emphasized by
a British speaker and by a great many other participants.
In describing the crisis provoked by the French government's attitude,
another German speaker drew a parallel with the earlier difficulties confront-
ing the European Community. He pointed out that just as the solidarity be-
tween the Five had enabled a major crisis to be averted and the framework
of the Community to be preserved, so the survival of NATO would depend
on the unity of the fourteen remaining members.
Both German speakers felt that the principle of integration should be main-
tained at all costs, and while this might be a costlier process in the absence
of France it was vital to ensure credibility.
In analysing the reasons underlying the French action, an American parti-
cipant remarked that President de Gaulle's basis assumption was that there
was no longer any Soviet threat to justify the organization. This same consi-
deration and subsequent comments on the fundamental issue of East-West
relations revealed broad agreement that there was less and less apprehension
in the West of outright Soviet aggression. At the same time, various speakers
emphasized that, in so far as a detente had occurred, this could largely be
attributed to the existence of an united Western Alliance. As one of the parti-
cipants with special knowledge of NATO-questions put it, the fact that there
had been a slackening of tension in. itself demonstrated the necessity of main-
taining NATO in order to prevent a recurr~nce of that danger; he warned
that the Soviet threat should not be lightly dismissed.
The same point was made by other speakers. An Austrian participant noted
that the Soviet Union was confronted with serious problems and that there
was a growing demand among the satellites for greater independence and
even a pronounced desire among West European communist parties for more
autonomy. All these developments, he said, were largely fostered by the pre-
sence of a strong alliance in the West and he added that NATO had helped
to halt Russian efforts to take over Berlin and to force the withdrawal from
Cuba, thus widening the Sino-Soviet rift.
A United States speaker agreed that changes for the better had occurred
in Eastern Europe but stressed that serious troubles might still take place.
There was a vital need to assess what was really going on in the East.
Another American speaker remarked that the issue was not any more the
Soviet threat but the emerging of a new East-West relationship in Europe.
He contended that the NATO powers were now confronted with an urgent
necessity to try and formulate a realistic conception of that changed relation-
ship by addressing to the Eastern-European states a multilateral economic effort.
20
A Danish speaker expressed his conviction that a definite settlement of the
Oder-Neisse problem would contribute considerably to stabilizing East-West
relations, but a third American contended that any dialogue aimed at an even
greater relaxation of tension would inevitably require expanded machinery.
The belief expressed earlier by an American participant that President de
Gaulle discounted the Soviet threat was queried by a French speaker who
suggested that the latest French move was not dictated by the conviction that
United States protection was useless or inadequate but, on the contrary, by
a belief that it was so great that any French contribution had now become
superfluous. This participant believed, moreover, that the gravity ofthe French
withdrawal was perhaps more political than military, a view which was sub-
sequently supported by a British speaker.
Another Frenchman had previously drawn a distinction between President
de Gaulle's explicit reasons and those which were implicit. Under the former
heading he listed the assertion that France had to avoid too close a link with the
United States so as to keep clear of any involvement in a worsening Asian
situation; the claim that the detente with the USSR would be encouraged by
a loosening ofAtlantic ties and the view that there was a contradiction between
the sovereignty of States and military integration. He questioned the validity
of these postulates.
The implicit reason behind the latest development was General de Gaulle's
belief that he could initiate a sort of positive neutralism and come to stand
as the champion of an "anti-bloc" concept, as an apostle of the dissociation
policy. ·
Meantime, it was hard to see what advantages France could hope to derive
from her virtual isolation within the Western framework. What advantage
could she obtain from the loss of the radar network? What advantage was it
to be deprived of tactical nuclear weapons? What advantage was it to lose
the central European Command?
Turning from purely military considerations, there was a real danger that
continuation of French nationalistic policies would create a dynamic current
which would encourage Germany to imitate France in this respect.
This latter aspect was raised by a number of other participants. It was
described by a Belgian participant as a threat which could destroy Europe
while American, German and Netherlands interventions alluded to the fact
that nationalism generated nationalism. Nevertheless, another American took
the view that nationalism need not be a danger so long as the United States
controlled the military power.
The previous United States speaker also foresaw, as a related danger, the
possibility that a feeling might develop in the United States that NATO com-
21
•
I '' ~ '~ ,
plexities and difficulties were excessive and, in conjunction with a feeling
that Europeans had rejected America, this could lead to a sort of "polarism"
even though isolationism, as such, was no longer conceivable in the United
States.
At the same time, he felt that General de Gaulle had forced us to face up
to problems and to that extent his action was positive. This view was shared
by two other Americans who claimed respectively that the President had
done NATO a favour by providing it with an opportunity to "go on the
offensive" in a positive sense. One of them supported the conviction of another
American that, with the period of uncertainty ended, NATO could now
proceed with its "unfinished business". A participant with special knowledge
of NATO matters considered that the 14 would now have more leeway to
achieve a better organization.
A French participant who had already spoken suggested that there was a
subtler positive aspect to the French decision. He argued that General de
Gaulle was looming as a symbol of opposition to power blocs and this could
hardly be agreeable to the Soviet Union which must fear that the General's
example of independence might be followed by the satellites.
These various interpretations impelled a United Kingdom speaker to
observe that he had been struck by the general equanimity in the face of
General de Gaulle's decision. This was encouraging since it was essential to
retain confidence in the Alliance's future but NATO had in fact suffered a
serious blow and the full consequences were not yet apparent. In the circum-
stances, we were perhaps displaying too much "sang-froid".
Necessary and unwelcome decisions would be required. The French move
might indeed offer an opportunity to the 14 but it also offered an opportunity
to the Soviet Union which could not but register it with satisfaction just as
we had been encouraged by the Sino-Soviet split.
This conviction, however, was qualified by an American participant who
insisted that the French withdrawal would not encourage the Soviet Union
to look on NATO as a military pushover.
Another consequence of the latest development was singled out by a Net-
herlands speaker who noted that there seemed to be less and less mutual
confidence combined with a breakdown in diplomatic usage. France had
adopted "diplomacy by statement" and her actions would have been less
disturbing had she employed different methods. There might even be reper-
cussions in the Common Market where confidence had been likewise impaired.
He went on to say that the French move had increased the importance of
Germany and this fact would have to be taken into account in any future
planning. A similar opinion was voiced by an American speaker who stressed
22
that it was vital not to treat Germany as inferior.
On the question of what counteraction should be taken, most of the speakers
stressed that, while NATO would undoubtedly be affected, yet there could
be no doubt as to the importance of maintaining the Organization. The Ger-
man participant who had opened the discussion contended that the best ans-
wer to President de Gaulle's policy was a reform of NATO to make allowance
for changed conditions, a greater voice for Europe, even more unification and
better co-ordination of policy. In this connection an American speaker made
the point that virtually all countries belonged to some or other "bloc" when
it came to defending and coordinating policies in the United Nations, the
only exception being the NATO countries which never acted collectively. A
French speaker who had critically analysed General de Gaulle's motives as-
serted that the reply to nationalism lay in more and more integration, a view
shared by many other speakers. America should nonetheless recognize, he
added, that there was a desire in France which was potential elsewhere for
NATO to be a meeting-place for all and not merely an American-dominated
body.
He also made the point that there was a need to enlighten public opinion
concerning the fact that NATO guaranteed automatic United States inter-
vention in the event of attack and two American speakers also referred to
the need to ensure that the public was adequately informed on this aspect.
Another United States participant underlined that it was not the United
States Government's duty to try to dissuade France; membership was purely
voluntary and America should be careful not to take up a "proprietary" at-
titude. In any case, said a fellow-American, the United States was determined
to proceed with the collective approach.
*
* *
Various speakers commented on the point made by the author of the back-
ground paper to the effect that one of the obstacles to joint action lay in the
continuing disparity between the United States and Europe in power and
influence.
Nonetheless, expressing the viewpoint of a neutral country, a speaker said
that the smaller nations should adapt themselves psychologically to the fact
that they were smaller. European potential had grown but it was still a poten-
tial and Europe was not in fact any stronger militarily than in the past.
This latter contention was taken up by a British participant who agreed
that, relatively, Europe had not become significantly stronger so that Wash-
ington remained the effective power centre and a Norwegian and a Nether-
lands participant concurred in this. At the same time, a French participant
23
I
emphasized that, while United States preponderance was incontestable, yet
the situation had changed in so far as there was a new awareness in Europe
of the continent's economic recovery.
On the subject of partnership between the United States and Europe, an
Italian speaker felt that Europe should certainly have a greater degree of
influence but, like an American participant, he felt that Europe had also to
assume a full share of responsibility.
*
* *
Discussion of the disparities between Europe and America involved refer-
ence to the problem of nuclear sharing which was described by the author
of the background paper as being intimately bound up with the problem of
reintegrating Germany on an equal footing and by a Turkish speaker and
others as being connected with the problem of military integration.
The German participant who had opened the discussion said that his
country accepted the United States veto as a "fact of life" and insisted that
nobody in Germany wanted nuclear weapons-nor did anyone favour proli-
feration. At the same time, Germany felt that the non-nuclear powers should
be associated with every step of decision-making and he considered that a
sound framework might be provided by a common Atlantic weapons system
with both a United States and a European veto. The latter, he said in answer
to a question from the Chairman, might perhaps be based on a weighted vote
formula.
Acceptance of United States preponderance was likewise voiced by a
Norwegian speaker who, however, suggested that the McNamara Special
Committee might provide the answer-an opinion subsequently echoed by a
Turkish speaker and by an American participant.
This view was contested by a United Kingdom representative who pointed
out that the Special Committee was purely exploratory while the German
speaker doubted if it would "give us sufficient weight". The collective wea-
pons system, on the other hand, could absorb national nuclear forces and
make for real European equality. (Two United Kingdom speakers question-
ed later on in the discussion whether the two small national forces of France
and Great Britain could in fact be absorbed.) The German participant went
on to reiterate that his country had never sought sovereign rights in nuclear
weapons but was basically interested in the decision-making process, targeting,
intelligence, etc.
Another German speaker already mentioned said that participation in a
collective nuclear organization with possession of hardware but with the deci-
sion-making power and veto in the hands of the United States President re-
24
!'~
presented only a second-best solution. It was certainly better to have a user's
say in respect of the whole United States potential rather than a grip on part
of it. Europeans should take part in all peacetime decisions and in prepara-
tions for the United States President's decision which would therefore be
based not only on American papers but on papers jointly prepared by the
European countries. Such an approach would make the transfer of actual
nuclear hardware less urgent.
The question ofa collective nuclear force was also mentioned by a Canadian
participant who advanced the view that, while it might be militarily negli-
gible, it could provide a highly useful bargaining counter in respect of disar-
mament negotiations. For the author of the background paper, however, it
was essential to "give Europeans a stake" through the provision of nuclear
hardware, all the more so since two members already had such hardware
and were accordingly able to claim a special status: a collective force offered
the best solution and United Kingdom participation in such a force would
be of considerable assistance in discouraging proliferation.
Another means of preventing proliferation, according to one United States
view, was for America to offer guarantees and rewards for voluntary aban-
donment of nuclear weapons although a fellow American warned that it
would be useless to slacken off aid in this field to countries who would like to
have it since we would have to reverse ourselves as soon as someone else step-
ped in to fill the gap. At the same time, NATO might propose a multilateral
agreement to the Soviet Union for the withholding of aid, an initiative which
could give renewed political life to the Organization.
Emphasizing the fact that the problem of nuclear sharing was not a ques-
tion of national pride but of making the Alliance as efficient as possible, a
Turkish participant said that what mattered was not who got the power but
when the power was used and to what extent. We had to be certain that it
would be used as soon as necessary and to the necessary degree. If the problem
were depoliticized it would be easier to solve.
A Netherlands speaker expressed criticism of the Mac Mahon Act, pointing
out that it was also used to deny the Allies assistance in developing nuclear
propulsion of warships. A United States participant retorted that the release
of technical information not only involved a risk of revealment but, if given
to favoured nations, would introduce a divisive element.
The answer was that the Netherlands was not seeking information other
than what was already known to the Soviet Union in any case but that a
quid pro quo might reasonably be expected in view of the highly classified
data which several European countries, including the Netherlands, had al-
ready communicated to the United States.
25
This brought the reply that the United States in turn had supplied the
Allies with a great deal of technical information but that America was anxious
to avoid nuclear proliferation and was concerned with the threat of espionage.
The same American had previously asked whether European countries in
fact agreed as to what type of nuclear sharing they wanted. There could,
he said, be no change made in existing United States laws on the basis of
general remarks about nuclear sharing. There was a lack of European con-
sensus on the procedure required. If Europeans did offer concrete suggestions,
said another American speaker, they would be sympathetically received by
Congressional Committees. This speaker, however, postulated that the titles
to nuclear material and the veto should remain in American hands.
In this connection the expert on NATO questions, already mentioned, said
that Europe was demanding that the United States provide leadership while
the United States was asking Europe to put forward proposals. This vicious
circle had to be broken and he wondered whether it would not be possible
to submit legislation to Congress whereby the United States could supply
nuclear weapons and know-how to an Atlantic or European force on condi-
tion that the United States was a partner with a right ofveto and hence direct-
ly involved in planning and decision-making. This would neither increase
the American commitment nor encourage proliferation but might well spur
Europeans to reach agreement between themselves.
*
* *
Various speakers alluded to the question of NATO's geographical area of
responsibility, mentioned at an earlier stage by the Chairman. Opinions in
this respect ranged from that of a Swiss speaker who envisaged the possibility
of a world-wide guarantee system covering the NATO, CENTO and SEATO
areas to that of the great number of participants who warned against over-
loading NATO with responsibilities when it already had enough problems
in its present framework.
This latter approach was exemplified by a United Kingdom participant
who, commenting on the suggestion by an American that NATO might have
a peace-keeping role to play outside Europe, described the idea as tempting
but impractical. There would, he insisted, be a marked resistance in the devel-
oping countries to any proposal that NATO should act as "policeman" and,
in any case, even if it were politically desirable, the necessary force structure
did not exist.
Echoing the Swiss participant previously mentioned, a Portuguese speaker
urged that NATO members should not overlook the importance of the Ibe-
rian peninsula to the defense of the West. He also pointed out that NATO's
26
,,
'·
..
success in Europe had impelled potential enemies to encourage disturbances
elsewhere and recommended that members of the Organization should there-
fore try to acquire a better understanding of each other's problems in regions
outside Europe.
*
* *
Directly tied in with the discussion of problems outside Europe was an ac-
count of the present situation in Vietnam provided by a United States partic-
ipant who had already, at an earlier stage, summarized the policy viz-a-viz
the Alliance followed by the United States since World War II.
He began by observing that while many Americans might feel that there
were some doubts as to the wisdom of the original involvement in South East
Asia, yet the fact was we were facing a situation and not a theory. The Senate
Committee debates had shown no alternative to the present approach.
Although the South Viet-Namese were suffering the bulk of the casualties
and although desertions still formed a problem, the speaker said that there
had been a definite improvement in South Viet-Namese morale.
The allies in Asia were providing support on an increasing basis and this
was coming mostly from Korea and Australia although the Philippines were
also planning to make a contribution. There would soon be 50.000 allied
soldiers in the field while NATO aid in the form of medical supplies and
technical assistance was also increasing.
At the same time, the speaker said that the strength of the Viet-Cong
was likewise increasing and there was evidence of the presence of more and
more regular army units, a fact which seemed to provide a conclusive answer
to the question of whether the action in Viet-Nam constituted an armed
attack as understood in the SEATO Treaty.
Viet-Cong infiltration of men and supplies had been stepped up on a round-
the-clock basis during the bombing pause and the present Viet-Cong capacity
amounted to 1,500 trained men infiltrating each month.
The United States had made substantial strides by providing two elements-
mobility and fire power. It now had, for example, 1,600 helicopters in Viet-
Nam. Similarly, modified B52's with a heavier bomb load would soon be in
action.
United States strategy called for the infliction of heavier losses on the
Viet-Cong than could be offset by infiltration or new recruitment. So far
only part of the United States forces had been committed to action and much
larger forces would be used in the weeks to come, but even with the present
forces, the rate of attrition on the Viet-Cong was very high. If, for instance,
the results obtained over recent months could be maintained, Viet-Cong
losses would approach 200,000 men per year.
27
In reference to the Bs2 attacks which had been so successful in striking at
points previously inviolate, the speaker said that villagers did not seem to
resent these attacks deeply, so long as advance warning was given and every
effort was made, in fact, to give such warning.
Conversely, there had been a decline in Viet-Cong morale because of the
need imposed by the Bs2's to keep on the move. In general, there was a
loss of confidence among the Viet-Cong, a recognition of United States supe-
riority, and this was demonstrated by the rise in defections. Such individual
defections might well develop into unit defections.
There was also evidence of a breakdown in the Viet-Cong infrastructure.
In the early days, the Viet-Cong undoubtedly had a considerable measure
of appeal in the rural areas: they promised lower taxes and a redistribution of
the land and meanwhile liquidated individuals associated with corruption
and harsh treatment. Now, however, confiscatory taxes were being imposed
and backed with brutal measures and there was no longer very much evidence
of a sense of allegiance to the Viet-Cong. It was known that the increasing
alienation of the Viet-Cong and the people was greatly worrying Hanoi.
Having outlined the military position, the participant went on to emphasize
that the United States thoroughly recognized the need to avoid provocation.
Bombing attacks in the north, for example, were highly selective and care
was taken to avoid the bombing of dams, etc. Similarly, there had been no
mining, bombing or blockading of Haiphong harbour.
So far the Chinese had sent no combat troops but were building up their
economic and military aid. The Viet-Cong, in fact, was increasingly dependent
on Chinese supplies. The Soviet Union likewise seemed to be increasing its
assistance although this took the form of economic aid and defensive weapons.
Every effort was being made to keep communications open and get nego-
tiations under way. Support had been given to the various initiatives taken
by world leaders but there had been no sign of a response from Hanoi. If
anything, indeed, there had been a hardening of the line in Hanoi and other
Communist centres and a persistent demand that the National Liberation
Front be recognized as the sole representative of South Viet-Nam.
The United States aspired to transfer the struggle from the military to the
political arena and would continue to explore every possibility of negotiation.
The speaker said that the first necessity, as things were, was to establish
security and then to rebuild the broken society within the secured area,
notably through education, land reform and health services.
The South Viet-Namese Government had made a number of efforts in the
right direction. Government expenditure, including the salaries paid to
members of the government, had been reduced, contact was being made with
28
~
i'
religious and regional groups; a new land reform plan had been drawn up;
new municipal elections were to take place, a refugee aid programme had been
initiated and plans had been announced for a gradual return to constitutional
government.
The United States was nonetheless concerned over a number of factors.
These included the possibility of Chinese intervention in an active form and
an escalation of the war against the will of the United States. Similarly, the
fragility of the South Viet-Namese political situation, and specifically the
present government's differences with the Buddhists, was a cause of pertur-
bation. Inflationary pressures and distribution bottlenecks were other factors
which had to be taken into account.
*
* *
In reply to a question from a French participant, the speaker said that
concern was indeed felt in Hanoi over the existence of elements which were
doubtful of final victory. At the moment, as he had said, the Hanoi position
seemed to be hardening although this could be precisely because there were
some who wanted to soften it. Broadly speaking, however, there was no
indication of a serious diminution of Hanoi's will to fight. In a further reply
to the same French participant, the American speaker said that the Soviet
Union was in a position of some ambivalence. Some months ago there were
indications that the Soviet Union was anxious to help bring about a settlement
but this had led to criticism from Hanoi and the Soviet Union was now con-
cerned above all to prove its devotion to the socialist state.
Nonetheless, Russia was apprehensive of escalation and it was significant
that, although it felt obliged to make gestures of support to Hanoi in order
to maintain its position in the Communist world, the weapons it was providing
were essentially defensive.
The South Viet-Namese Government might well find itself in a vulnerable
position should a settlement be reached without sufficient guarantees. If
Hanoi's demand for an immediate coalition government with a Liberation
Front majority were to be accepted, this would inevitably lead to a take-over.
Finally, in answer to the same questioner, the American speaker said he
was convinced that the people of the United States were ready to do whatever
was required of them. There might be some impatience over the fact that
terrain was unsuited to sophisticated weapons and this might lead to pressures
to step up attacks. Such pressures, however, would be resisted.
The Viet-Cong might find the rate of attrition intolerable and might also
find that they could no longer fall back on guerilla warfare since the United
States forces were now in a position to hunt them out. In any case, guerilla
29
•
warfare would mean lower United States casualties and hence would decrease
pressure in the United States to build up the war.
A German participant asked how the Soviet Union could be expected to
react, should escalation be forced on the United States. The reply was that no
escalation was in fact expected although, of course, it could happen. Should
a Sino-United States conflict develop, the mutual defense treaty between the
Soviet Union and China would undoubtedly constitute an element of pressure
but Soviet ambivalence would still persist, especially in view of its uneasiness
over China's future nuclear role. The most that could be said. was that the
Soviet Union would probably like to keep out but whether it could do so
or not was an open question. Arising from this point, an Austrianparticipant
asked whether China was showing restraint in its support ofHanoi and whether
North Viet-Nam was carrying on the war entirely of its own free will.
To this the reply was that China was displaying restraint and that it was
important to distinguish between what that country said and what it actually
did. In any event, the will to fight nndoubtedly existed in Hanoi independently
of Chinese urging although the Chinese did feel they had an interest in
keeping the war going so as to weary the United States and induce it to quit
Asia. The question was raised by a Belgian participant as to whether the
same readiness to continue the war existed in South Viet-Nam. The American
speaker revealed, in this connection, that highly scientific probes confirmed
an extremely strong anti-Communist and anti-Viet-Cong sentiment in South
Viet-Nam. Morale had enormously improved over the last year; there was
no sign of resentment against the presence of American troops nor on account
of the progressive build up of American troops.
On this issue, another American present expressed the view that the will
to fight among the South Viet-Namese depended largely on whether they
could see improvements taking place and could feel confident that progress
would continue to be made. If an increasingly large area could be pacified
and if progressive measures could be introduced in the stabilized area, then
there would be a widespread conviction that a solution was on the way. If
not, the problem would become more and more serious.
On the subject of the flow of refugees into South Viet-Nam, a German
participant asked whether such refugees were seeking to escape the Viet-Cong
or United States air attacks. He went on to ask whether the United States
would ever agree to negotiate solely with Hanoi, excluding Saigon, in view of
the fact that Premier Ky had said he would never sit at the same table as
the Viet-Cong.
The American speaker replied that there was unquestionably a mixed
motivation among the refugees but that the general disposition was to get
away from Communist domination.
30
"
t
On the second point, the speaker said that the real question was whether
Hanoi wanted to negotiate at all. In any case, the United States would never
accept the National Liberation Front as the sole representative of South
Viet-Nam although it would be ready to discuss with Hanoi how NLF views
might be represented.
The other American participant who had spoken earlier took up the question
of the refugees and agreed that there was a mixed motivation. He stressed that
all refugees considered themselves temporarily displaced and not as a permanent
addition to the population of the South.
*
* *
After this digression, the discussion returned to the agenda.
In spite of the virtual unanimity of the participants as to the overriding
importance of maintaining NATO as the logical structure for giving real
cohesion to the Atlantic Alliance and in spite of the conviction, as a Danish
participant put it, that the Organization was a vital element in the inter-
national balance of power, opinions varied as to its precise function.
An American who described himself as an agnostic in the Church of NATO
suggested that the Organization was defined more by the sense of mission
which it provided than by its everyday work. It had probably furnished the
basis for a European ethic but had not succeeded in settling our problems and
we should realize that alliances did not necessarily prevent wars any more
than they caused them. The element of deterrence lay in the nuclear power
of the United States and not in NATO's military power on the ground.
All countries had their political ambitions which were national and con-
flicting and, in this respect, the present French Government was no exception.
Nationalism was not necessarily a menace and integration, while useful, was
not the depositary of our safety: it was dangerous but the other countries did
not act differently. The speaker felt that the Alliance and its institutions might
well be kept as they were and that members should continue to discuss world
politics insofar as this aspect was not covered by the Alliance.
Along similar lines, an international participant observed that NATO had
not proved effective in bringing about a viable approach to some of the
wider problems and he questioned whether it in fact represented the appro-
priate mechanism for doing so, a view subsequently echoed by a Canadian
participant who said that there was a certain tendency on occasion to expect
too much of the Organization and to regard it as a broader instrument than
was originally intended.
Against this, an American speaker, taking up an additional topic suggested
in the course of the discussions by the Chairman, argued that NATO's future
31
was tied in with the free world's plans for what it should do with all its wealth.
Its future, in other words, depended on a new sense ofhistoric purpose leading
to affirmative principles. It was essential to commit enormous economic
resources to lessen the gap between the "haves" and the "have-nots" and at
the same time to launch a peace offensive-which could well be clone uni-
laterally. (This aspect of NATO's activities was extensively dealt with in
next day's discussions on item II of the Agenda.) ·
Another American remarked that NATO should 'not be either isolationist
or merely military in nature, but still another United States speaker took a
sharply opposing approach and recorded his conviction that NATO was, in
fact, a strictly military organization. It would be "overloading the donkey"
to try and burden it with "broader problems". Military security was still the
major concern.
Support for this interpretation was forthcoming in a Canadian intervention.
NATO was not the proper instrument for dealing with broader objectives;
its purpose was still to deter and to maintain the apparatus for modern war
and any effort to extend its functions would make "the best the enemy of the
good" and harm the Organization's real aims.
A German participant likewise dwelt on the fact that NATO's primary
role was a military one and, specifically, felt that any approach to the East
should be made through some other instrument, a view which was in accord-
ance with the observation by the participant with great experience of NATO
problems who said that there was no need to invent political jobs for NATO
since it still had its military task to attend to.
* * *
A great range of attitudes was revealed in connection with the problem of
what practical structural measures should be taken in view of the difficulties
which NATO was facing as a result of recent developments.
The key issue in the view of most speakers remained the maintenance of
the principle of integration which had been fundamentally shaken by General
de Gaulle. An American speaker recalled that the lack of a combined command
had been disastrous in both world wars: almost all military authorities regarded
it as essential and the United States felt that it was absolutely necessary that
the elaborate logistical and staff arrangements should be made in advance.
This view was backed by a Turkish speaker, by the French analyst of General
de Gaulle's motives and by a German commentator who described integration
as essential to the preservation ofcredibility. He went on to say that integration
also served to exercise a control over his country and this was a contribution
to the security of both East and West, but that such control could not be re-
stricted to Germany.
32
~
I
A Danish participant related the integrated command structure to the
overall situation in that it represented an important stabilizing element and
any reforms, he felt, would have to be devised in such a way that they would
not lessen that stabilizing influence.
For three American speakers, an essential consideration was the need
to ensure that public opinion was informed as to what integration meant in
practice. It should be driven home, for example, that SACEUR had no control
over military forces in peacetime but was solely concerned with planning,
staff functions, command procedur.es, logistics, etc.
A similar range of views was expressed in connection with the question
as to what forms ofreorganizatiori it would be desirable to introduce in NATO.
The expert on NATO matters, already mentioned, suggested that any form
of structural reorganization at this time of crisis was perhaps untimely and
could conceivably cause undue shocks to the overall structure, but most
speakers inclined to agree with a Danish participant that there was "no
doubt that NATO was going to be reorganized".
The German speaker who began the discussion laid down as a basic require-
ment a greater degree of policy coordination in regard to crisis management,
possibly on a regional level, and this was supported by a subsequent British
speaker who further argued that it would be unwise to look too far ahead
in view of the many uncertainties involved, suggesting ten years as a reasonable
period. A Norwegian participant approved. this timetable, which, he felt,
would leave room for the gradual emergence of European unity. Meantime,
we should concentrate on improving institutions and methods of consultation.
This was the core problem and it had not so far been dealt with. The aim should
be to improve not so much the form as the practice of consultatiori so that
America would be able to act in full knowledge of allied views.
Referring to the proposal in the background paper that NATO members
might be divided into two classes-those who normally concerted on a wide
range of policies and those who did not do so although they continued to
benefit from the protection of the Alliance-a Turkish participant considered
that to institutionalize inevitable differences could only be harmful in its
effects. In this he was supported by a British speaker who likewise expressed
doubts as to the wisdom of creating "in-groups" and insisted that any ma-
chinery would have to embrace the whole Alliance.
*
* *
In summing up the discussion of the first item on the Agenda, His Royal
Highness said that the strongest impression he had received was that an
absolute consensus existed as to the necessity of maintaining NATO as an
33
•1!!
i
,,,1
'I
I
:'!i
'.11
.: i
I
I
I
j
alliance and a fairly complete consensus on the need for maintaining it as an
organization. He felt that this conclusion, while perhaps not sensational, was
nonetheless of considerable importance because of the great tensions and
temptations which could lead us to slacken our efforts.
It had been agreed, the Prince continued, that the Soviet posture had
changed in the sense that nobody any longer expected overt military aggression
by the Soviet Union but everybody likewise agreed that a new expansionist
Soviet policy might well be provoked by the development of a power vacuum
in Europe-and this was bound to occur if we were to abolish military inte-
gration in Europe.
There had been agreement on the gravity of the French government's
action and no illusion as to the scope and time-table of such action; but,
while thoroughly appreciating the political and military importance of French
partnership and the need to do everything possible to prevent further aliena-
tion of France, there was an equally strong desire to maintain and strenghten
NATO in spite of the French action. It was noteworthy, he added, that this
viewpoint had been endorsed by the French participants in the Meeting.
No solution had been forthcoming on the question of whether the present
situation should be utilized as an occasion to adapt and adjust, to improve
and strenghten the Alliance, or whether we should be grateful if we could
merely absorb the shock of the French withdrawal from NATO without undue
harm to the Organization and leave more fundamental changes for a later
period. It was his understanding that the latter view was held by the participant
especially familiar with NATO matters.
This apart, there had been no consensus as to how any changes should
be brought about and His Royal Highness singled out three fields which he
felt had not been adequately discussed.
The first concerned the very important question of whether we should
aim at a structure whereby those members interested in stronger common
policies and greater integration could go ahead even if other members were
primarily interested in the purely security aspects of the Alliance. There was
a fairly substantial body of opinion which held that NATO was essentially
a security pact and that we should be grateful if we could preserve it as such;
another body of opinion rejected the notion of "restricted groups" within
NATO. Among those who not only wanted the Alliance maintained but
also strengthened, however, there was a feeling that this could only be achieved
if, without harm to the Alliance, some members were free to do things which
the others felt unable to accept.
The second field he had in mind was that of nuclear sharing. Nobody
disputed that the enormous discrepancy in power between the United States
34
~
~
i
and its European allies had necessarily to be reflected in the way the Alliance
was run, but there was a strong European desire for a greater say in the
nuclear field and especially in the phases preceding actual employment of
nuclear weapons. It was to be regretted that there had been so few concrete
and practical proposals advanced.
Finally, no substantial contribution had been made to the question of
whether NATO's task was solely to ensure the security of the North Atlantic
area or whether the time had come to concentrate more on adopting a common
posture viz-a-viz the outside world.
His Royal Highness terminated by saying that he would not wish his
summing-up to be regarded as negative. The purpose of the Meeting was not
to reach conclusions but to see what basic issues linked us together and what
problems we should take up in the years ahead. In both these respects he
felt that the discussions had been useful.
* * *
35
.•
II. THE FUTURE OF WORLD ECONOMIC RELATIONS
ESPECIALLY BETWEEN INDUSTRIAL
AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
The background for this discussion was provided by a working paper
prepared by a Netherlands participant and distributed prior to the meeting.
The rapporteur began by noting that any statement on the future of world
economic relations must start with certain assumptions, e.g. that a major
military conflict could be avoided, that the development of population num-
bers would not show any dramatic changes, that technology would be com-
pletely revolutionized and so on. Even so, everybody was aware of the dis-
turbances which might occur and which could hardly be foreseen. Even if
no major conflict occurred, there might be smaller ones; the attempts now
under way to control the population explosion might be less or more successful
than assumed; automation might be less important than some of us think
or more dangerous than others seem to hold.
He went on to say that there was one major factor that was bound to in-
fluence the subject under consideration, namely the evolution of thinking
in the communist world. It was clearer every day that developments in the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were bringing those countries closer to
Western economies if not indeed to Western societies. It was far less certain
that this phenomenon of growth would soon spread to China or whether, on
the contrary, the rift between the two main currents would induce China
to abide by completely different policies such as those announced in Mao-
tse-tung's writings and speeches. It had to be assumed that in the next ten
years Chinese policy would not emerge as a major factor in relation to the
subject under discussion.
Finally, the speaker suggested that the future of world economic relations
would not be influenced to an appreciable degree by the occurrence of an
old-style depression. The beginning of such a depression might well develop
but we know how to handle it and how to restrict its impact on economic
development.
In the absence of a fundamental change in our policies, an increasing
gap in well-being between developed and developing countries had to be
expected. This was partly clue to the accelerated growth of developed eco-
36
nomies: whereas before World War I the average rise in real national income
in Western societies was in the neighbourhood of 2.5 to 3 per cent per annum,
the rates were now about 4 to 5 per cent. On the other hand, the developing
countries, though not developing any less rapidly than before or even than the
rich countries of the 19th century, were severely handicapped by the popula-
tion explosion. The rate of increase in population was now estimated to be
2.5 to 3 per cent per annum as an average for the whole underdeveloped
world. This implied that an increase in total national product did not give
rise to the same increase in per capita income as before. In fact, per capita in-
comes had advanced by at most 2 per cent for the whole of the underdevel-
oped world during the last five years, as against an increase of 3 to 4 per cent
in per capita income of the rich countries, thus representing the famous
increasing gap in well-being.1
)
Unless there was a fundamental change in our policy, we had to expect
an increase in mass unemployment to an unprecedented extent. Even if the
development of developing countries could be accelerated and brought at the
level of 5 per cent per annum cumulatively for the decade 1960-1970, there
would be an increasing gap in well-being and at the same time in the trade
balance of the developing countries. The present estimate was that the so-
called trade gap might amount to $ 20 billion in 1970 and to $ 32 billion in
1975. If smooth and accelerated development of the developing countries
was to be achieved, financing had to be foun<;l for that gap. The time was past
where we could discuss whether such financing should take the form of trade
or aid: it had to take both forms. As far as trade was concerned, this meant
an extension of the import possibilities into the developed countries beyond
the normal increase already taken into account in the estimates quoted. With
regard to aid it meant an extension of aid to something close to $ I 5 billion.
In order to facilitate appraisal of these figures it would be advisable to
bring together a few of the other key figures which characterized the present
structure of international economic relations and the development to be
expected over the coming ten years.
The rapporteur submitted two tables for consideration:
1) With a so-called capital-output ratio of 3 years, an additional increase in population of
2 per cent per annum required additional investments of 6 per cent of the national income,
virtually all of the savings 1nade in the poorest countries, merely to maintain the standard of
living.
37
•
Table 1. The structure of current international economic relations, 1950 and 1962, in % ef
world trade.
---
Importing country groups
Developed Devel- Centrally Total
opihg planned
Exporting Developed 1950 41 17 2 60
1962 48 15 3 66
country Developing 1950 22 8 I 32
1962 15 5 I 21
groups Centrally 1950 2 I 5 8
planned 1962 2 2 9 13
Total 1950 64 27 8 100
1962 65 21 13 100
Source: World Economic Survey 1963 I, United Nations.
Developed countries: North America, Western Europe, Australia, Japan, New
Zealand and South Africa;
Centrally planned economies: Eastern Europe, Mainland China, Mongolian
People's Republic, North Korea and North Viet-Nam;
Developing countries: rest of the world.
Table II. Some orders ef magnitude ef the development ef the main economic variables, at
1960 prices, in billiorn ef $.
1960 1970
Gross domestic product
developed countries 920 1380
Gross domestic product
developing countries 1 70 261
Gross domestic product
developing countries 170 277
Developing cm,mtries:
- Current payments in
foreign exchange 26 51
- Current receipts in
foreign exchange 2 1 31
- Trade gap 5 20
Exports by industrial coun-
tries 81
Exports by developing 26 45
Exports by other prim.
prod. countries 4
Exports by centrally
planned economies 15
Net capital flow to devel-
oping countries 7.41)
1975 Remarks
1720 Crude forecast
362 Based on past trends
362 At 5 per cent ("plan")
annual growth
70 Estimate by U.N. Proj. and
Prog. Centre ("plan")
38
32
56 Based on past trends
1
) In 1964, at 1964 prices: 8.g; there are, however, interest and profit payments in the
opposite direction, of the order of a few billion $.
38
Developing countries would no longer be able to specialize only in primary
goods: they would gradually have to enter the field of secondary goods, which
meant industrial products, starting with the less sophisticated and relatively
labour-intensive ones and moving to the more sophisticated and the less
labour-intensive goods.
Another very important aspect offuture world economic relations lay in the
food problem of developing countries. This was another consequence of the
population explosion and of the stagnant technology of agriculture in many
of those countries, but experts had warned that critical years were ahead for
India, Pakistan, Turkey and some other developing countries. In all probability
it would require the full use of the productive capacity of the developed
countries in agriculture to overcome the extreme scarcity offood in the coming
five years. At the same time everything must be done in order to raise agricul-
tural production in the developing countries themselves.
Among the major factors which would influence economic development
ten years hence would be the effect, if any, of family planning policies. It had
been estimated by AID that a successful policy of this kind in Pakistan couid
reduce by one half the financial aid needed by that country.
Finally, the rapporteur said that it was hardly necessary to stress that the
biggest single question which would influence the future was the degree of
optimism one could feel with regard to the development potentials of the
under-developed world. Pessimism seemed to be fashionable at present but
a few examples might contribute to a more balanced view. First of all, Japan
offered an example of an Asian country which had succeeded in joining the
developed world. Even more persuasive, perhaps, was the recent news from
Pakistan, where several observers felt that some sort of break-through was
under way. It was believed that some of the really effective stimuli had finally
been discovered and applied. Mediumsized and large farms were rapidly
improving through the combined application of irrigation from tube-wells,
fertilizers from natural gas and better seeds. There might well be hidden sources
of success in other countries: the effect of some long-term investments and of
teaching and training might still turn up. In a number of countries a young
generation of Western educated national civil servants and managers of real
promise was coming to the fore. It also seemed that the Peace Corps idea
might make a real contribution to one of the biggest problems: directly
influencing the rural small-scale enterpreneur.
For the time being, however, the effects of all possible positive factors had
been definitely disappointing and it seemed realistic to take this as a starting
point. A fundamental change in policies was needed. If the West wanted to
play an important part in the future development of the world at large, it
39
'\
r
would have to increase substantially its contribution to the development
of the developing countries.
The guide line for our policy must be to reduce the gap in per capita
incomes between rich and poor countries. This required a rate of growth in
national incomes of developing countries exceeding the rates of the last
decade and reaching the vicinity of 7 per cent per annum until the population
explosion was more completely under control.
The rapporteur went on to outline a number of policy changes which he
considered technically possible and psychologically acceptable to the Western
world. They could, however, only be applied, he warned, if there was suffi-
cient understanding of the urgency of the problems facing us.
The first contribution the developed countries could make -in order to
facilitate the development ofthe low income countries was to reduce the foreign
exchange pressure by an extension of financial aid to the developing world:
$ 15 billion should be the aim, to be attained in a few years. This was a net
figure and should be accompanied by measures to reduce or at least stabilize
the repayment obligations of the developing countries. The additional finan-
cial aid implied was of the order of some $ 7 billion and could partly be made
automatic by the introduction of deficiency payments to primary producing
countries, comparable to what Western countries pay to their farmers. Such
payments might be linked to some general index of the terms of trade, with
a view to maintaining the capacity of the developing countries to import,
originating from their exports of primary commodities: Such payments should
not be made available to the individual producer but to the governments
of the countries concerned for the financing of their imports of capital goods.
Another automatic portion could be handed over to the developing countries
on the basis of the creation of new international liquidities, the need for which
was now generally recognized. While creation of these new liquidities might
be organized by a more restricted group of countries, a proportion might
nevertheless be made available to developing countries. The remaining part
of the $ 7 billion could be disbursed in roughly the same way as at present,
or rather with increased emphasis on IDA disbursements.
The second contribution by the West to reduce the foreign exchange
pressure on the developing countries might consist of more liberal trade
policies, particularly with regard to products which in the future would be
the "natural" products of the developing countries. We had to accustom our-
selves to less protection especially in the field of agricultural products directly
competing with products of the developing countries. Reduced protection
would also be in the interest of Western consumers. With creeping inflation
as a permanent problem, this instrument had to be given more emphasis.
40
~
A third contribution the West could make was to co-operate more positively
in the establishment of stabilization schemes for some primary products.
Not too much should be hoped from this type of policy, but among the instru-
ments to be applied, buffer stocks, which involved np complicated schemes
for the regulation of imports, exports and prices, could be unreservedly re-
commended: for cpffee, cocoa, sugar and rubber.
A fourth contribution could consist of increased activity by Western business
in developing countries with a view to the deliberate shifting of labour-
intensive industries to developing countries. Some interesting activities were
already under way, tending to shift parts of the textiles and clothing industries
to such countries; similarly, shipbuilding and certain comparable industries
could be shifted. Such activity by the private sector would require 'support
from the authorities, especially by the introduction of an international insur-
ance scheme against political risks, and the business community would also
need some guidance in the field of market analysis from more elaborate studies
in this field to be undertaken by some of the new United Nations institutions
such as the Projections and Programming Centre and the United Nations
Organization of Industrial Development (UNOID).
Positive co-operation with these agencies-what might be called "planning
at the world level"-was desirable.
Obviously the developing countries would also have to play their part.
It should not be forgotten that several of them were already making note-
worthy efforts and that, as a rule, the larger part of investment and training
took place within the developing countries. Nonetheless, there was scope
for intensified activity in all fields, especially in the field of training, improve-
ment of efficiency, elimination of red tape, westernization of tax policies, and
so on in addition to population policies aimed at a reduction in a rate of
growth of population.
Finally, a helpful contribution on the part of the developing countries
might consist of a clear announcement of those sectors of industry which they
considered an appropriate field for private activity. Each government had
its own preference for public activity in some sectors but there was often some
uncertainty about which sectors were considered the appropriate field for
public activity and which for private activity. Elimination of this uncertainty
would be useful for both parties.
The rapporteur appended the following table to his report: Percentage
official development aid of the main aid-giving countries.
41
Countries I II III
Italy 39,186 62.3 0.16
Canada 35,419 93.4 0.26
Japan 56,506 171.7 0.30
Netherlands 12,923 59.2 046
Germany, Fed. Rep. of 78,480 436.0 o.55
United Kingdom 73,245 440.8 0.60
Belgium 12,240 83.2 o.68
U.S.A. 528,287 3,696.0 0.69
France 67,291 887.1 1.32
I - Gross Domestic Product at Factor Cost in 1963 (millions of U.S. dollars).
II -Average Flow of Long-Term official Resources to Less Developed Countries
and Multilateral Agencies, 1962-1964 (Disbursements, millions of U.S.
dollars).
III - Official Development Aid in Percentages of Gross Domestic Product.
*
* *
In presenting his paper, the author singled out the increasing gap between
incomes, the population explosion and the food problem as key problems.
The basic figure governing any policy in this field, he said, related to the
trade gap which, it was estimated, would amount to 20 billion dollars in 1970.
The savings gap, which should in principle be the same, was in fact estimated
at 12 billion dollars. A mean figure of 15 billion dollars would therefore
be required for the application of a policy contributing to any real solution.
He went on to say that a feeling of pessimism tended to prevail even though
there were positive elements apparent, such as the improved prospects in
Pakistan.
The "balance of payments" argument used against an increased flow of
aid was not, in the author's opinion, convincing. It was essential to achieve
a balance between the total of national expenditure and the total of national
income.
A reasonable goal would be a 7% increase in the production of the devel-
oping countries to offset the growth in population and the speaker urged that
politicians should concentrate more on this and endeavour to convince the
electorate that it represented a "life insurance for the West".
Automatic contributions could include compensatory financing while non-
automatic controls might include IDA disbursements as stressed by the
World Bank.
Finally, the speaker alluded to the contribution which private business
could make to the training process in the form of know-how; to the need for
generalized insurance against non-economic risks; and to the fact that govern-
42
'~
'·
ments in developing countries had every interest in establishing labour-
intensive industries. The developed countries should reach a better division of
labour, achieve stabilization of the prices of primary products and aim at
financing buffer stocks.
*
* "'
Not all the participants agreed with the figures cited by the author of the
report. An international participant, with a great experience of World Bank
activities, said that he was troubled by the global figures which had been used,
adding that such figures were sometimes misleading. He went on to say that
"personally, I don't take much notice of 20 billion dollars; it is a frightening
figure, and from my own experience I would not know how to go about using
it". The World Bank, said the speaker, felt that perhaps 3-4 billion dollars
a year, in addition to what was now being provided, could be effectively
and intelligently used over the next five years. The amount at present going
to the poorer countries from all sources, including the Soviet Union, was
gt billion dollars. If interest, dividends, royalties, service charges, etc., of
roughly 4 billion dollars were deducted, then between 5 and st billion dollars
was available to the underdeveloped world for purely development purposes.
Three billion dollars more would be a generous amount ofdevelopment finance
if it could be provided.
Similarly, a United States university professor who intervened many times
in the discussions, said that there was perhaps no need to take too seriously
the figures quoted from the United Nations which had been prepared mainly
for the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, one of the
most important purposes of which was to "put the bite" on the developed
world. He also questioned whether a 7% rate of growth in GNP was a real
possibility, pointing out that only 2 or 3 of the less developed countries had
even approached that figure.
Along the same lines, another American participant expressed doubt as
to the validity of the large trade gap figures mentioned in the report while
a British participant, who took an important part in the discussions, suggested
that the plea for a doubling of world aid within a few years was too ambitious.
Even half as much would be a major triumph.
A Belgian speaker warned against the risk of becoming so accustomed to
huge amounts that it was felt there was no difficulty in providing them.
*
* *
There was, however, no disagreement with the rapporteur's insistence
on the need for action and on the necessity for the developed countries to
make sacrifices to this encl. The British speaker, just mentioned, emphasized
43
tl
r
that pos1t1ve action of a world scope and on a massive scale was urgently
needed. The situation, he said, was alarming not only because it was dangerous
to world stability but because it was "an affront to our consciences".
These remarks were echoed by a United States participant who said that
there could be no peace and stability in the world with half the world's popu-
lation unfed. Unless helped, desperate people would lead us from crisis to
crisis and it was essential to raise our sights and achieve a consensus on the
urgency and scope ofwhat was to be done. The speaker doubted ifthe Western
countries comprehended sufficiently the impact of the 20th century's technolo-
gical revolution. He believed that the less developed countries would make in
the next 25 years as much technical progress as they have made in the last
250 years. The rich countries must provide them with the modern tools and
leadership, and must commit themselves and their resources for this task.
It was undeniable, said a Canadian speaker, that a massive effort was re-
quired to assist developing countries. Success in this area was vital if the free
world was to survive and, even though there was no simple or quick solution,
there had to be effective action in this field to supplement the efforts aimed
at preserving NATO. The objective of the Canadian government, he added,
was to extend its aid progressively, having in mind the goal of 1 % of GNP
recommended by U.N. resolutions.
It was broadly felt that the rapporteur was right in insisting that the balance
of payments argument against the flow of assistance to the less developed
countries was not convincing and a German participant in particular expressed
this view, adducing his country's policy and attitude for the near future as an
example.
*
"' "'
There was less unanimity in respect of the type of assistance most urgently
needed. The British participant previously cited felt that priority should be
given to technical assistance (a view supported by a compatriot), to training
of local people, to the transfer of know-how, to surveys, consultations and
educational aid, adding a recommendation that we should concentrate on
points of breakthrough in the field of science and advanced technology, such
as de-salting of water, pest control and, above all, population control. More-
over, donor countries and international agencies should make a special effort
to give assistance in the field of research.
On the other hand, a Belgian speaker considered that the prime concern
should be the stabilization of raw material prices since, otherwise, we were
giving with the right hand and taking away with the left. He believed that
the richer countries should be content with moderate benefits for the assistance
rendered and he pleaded for control on the yield of the aid given.
44
l
r
l
'l,,
!I
l1
11:
"'
A French participant suggested that, while it was difficult if not impossible
to reverse the trend towards lower prices for raw materials, an international
agency, such as OECD, might be asked to devise a system of collective aid
whereby Western countries might be urged to provide assistance in proportion
to the advantages they derived from low material prices.
A Canadian speaker placed the accent on the reduction of tariff-duties,
maintenance of which he described as an anachronism. In his view, it should
now be politically easier to bring about tariff reductions in favour of the less
developed countries and he expressed the hope that businessmen and labour
leaders would exert their active influence to achieve this, recognizing that
the eventual release of the purchasing power potential in the less developed
countries would be the reward.
This was in line with the remarks made by a number ofspeakers concerning
the Kennedy Round. Pointing to the fact that the less developed countries
were overwhelmingly dependent on trade for their economic development,
an international participant said that this made it most important and urgent
to ensure the success of the Kennedy Round which was essential to maintain
and expand international trade. If we fail, he said, we will not merely retain
the status quo but will slip backwards and the first victims will be the under-
developed nations. The Kennedy Round should have top priority on the
agenda. Little had happened, he went on, over the last two years in this
respect and time was running out. The European Economic Community
was not shouldering its responsibility in regard to the Kennedy Round.
Regret at the failure to complete the Kennedy Round was also expressed
by a Canadian participant who nonetheless felt that there was evidt<nce that
things were on the move. As far as his country was concerned, it would do
everything possible to bring about a successful conclusion.
Two other Canadians and an American were among those who attached
particular importance to the Kennedy Round.
A Danish participant referred to the problem of world liquidity, mentioned
by the author of the introductory report. He remarked that we were moving
towards a situation where the total amount of international liquidity might
not be sufficient to face an adequate growth of international trade and he
believed the expansionist school carried most weight in the present negotiations.
It was very necessary, he said, that the Western countries should not be unduly
obsessed with their own stability and thus overlook economic growth in the
poorer countries.
Against this, a Netherlands participant said that he wholeheartedly agreed
with a previous German speaker that an increase in world liquidity with a
proportion going to the less developed countries would result in the latter
45
..
spending such liquidity instead of holding it in reserve, thus defeating the
whole purpose.
*
* *
There was substantial recogmt10n that not enough was being done by
governments, international organizations and private groups to reduce the
gap between the advanced countries and the less developed countries but many
speakers remarked that a considerable increase of government assistance
could hardly be expected.
A French participant expressed some doubt as to whether the various
donor countries would be willing to go much further in making sacrifices,
whereas another Frenchman, while stressing the humanitarian objective of
aid to underdeveloped countries, pointed out the industrial and political
advantages resulting from this aid for the developed countries.
The United States participant previously cited mentioned what he de-
scribed as "one of the really central questions that the Western world should
concern itself with", namely the influence which the developed world can or
should bring to bear on the domestic policies of aid-receiving countries to make
better use not only of their own resources but also of the aid provided to them.
This involved, he said, the very difficult problem of what might be called
"foreign aid diplomacy" covering conditions and strings attached to aid and
the leverage which aid gave the donor countries. We had to remember that
we were dealing with countries which had only recently become independent
and which had a high degree of sensitivity to interference from abroad. Yet
overseas aid, including both private investment and public contributions,
amounted to close on 25% of the total development expenditures in the less
developed world. The speaker did not advocate an aggressive programme
of bilateral negotiations but this state of affairs gave the developed world a
right to say something about domestic policy in the underdeveloped countries.
(This point was strongly supported subsequently by the British participant,
already mentioned many times, who emphasized that we were not only
entitled to impose conditions, we were not entitled not to do so.)
Continuing, the United States speaker said that advice from an inter-
national agency was likely to be better received than advice as between
individual countries and it was his view that the only international agency
equipped to undertake this task was the World Bank itself, a large provider
of funds and better staffed than any other agency to form a sensible judgment
on what kinds of domestic policy could be influenced.
*
* *
46
Related to this analysis was the problem of the machinery for channelling
aid, where a wide range of views was expressed.
The international expert on World Bank activities, already mentioned,
voiced his agreement as to the desirability of finding an institutional inter-
locutor in dealing with the underdeveloped countries. If the World Bank were
to assume this responsibility, it would require the assistance ofregional agencies
throughout the world.
The possibility that NATO-under article II of the Treaty-might offer
suitable machinery for the channelling of aid was also discussed and the
British participant, already mentioned, said his view was that NATO as such
should not get involved in aid but that members of the Atlantic Community,
through the proper organizations in the U.N. family and through the Devel-
opment Assistance Committee of the OECD should go to the limit in order
to make their full contribution to the problems of underdevelopment.
A comparable approach was adopted by a German speaker who said that,
even if NATO could not itself assume a responsibility, there should be a
better co-ordinated effort by Atlantic countries. Another German speaker
said that co-ordination was even necessary within the various countries them-
selves.
A United States participant, however, argued that U.N. agencies, including
the World Bank, were, because of their membership, not the proper organiza-
tions to solve the problem of co-ordinated aid. He favoured consultation
within the NATO Council which had the advantage of grouping the main
capital-exporting states, of being already in existence, of holding regular
meetings at Ministerial level and of being accustomed to convening special
meetings. Such arrangements would produce a greater awareness of needs
and problems among the NATO governments, would perhaps impel them to
make greater commitments in the light of the situation and could lead to
agreement on action and further means of co-ordination.
This suggestion was described as an interesting one and one deserving of
consideration by the international participant who had spoken earlier. How-
ever, he believed the Treaty Organization to be essentially military, as con-
trasted with OECD which was concerned with the broad world of developing
finance. Nonetheless, a co-ordinating review at ministerial rather than at
civil servant level would undoubtedly be constructive and some good could
come of it provided that the ministers spent enough time to acquire an appre-
ciation of the complicated problems involved.
Repeating his conviction that OECD was the vehicle which should work
with the Regional Development Banks, the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund and the consultative groups currently being organized be-
47
l
l
" \
I
tween the aid-giving and aid-receiving countries, he added that even so
representatives of all diplomatic, political and military groups-including
NATO-should be familiar with the economic problems of the underdevel-
oped world and should be in a position to support sound development pro-
grammes by the individual NATO countries. He felt that this would help
to prevent so-called wars of liberation which were, in fact, wars of liberation
from poverty.
An Austrian participant suggested that there should be a combined effort,
planned and channelled by a central agency. This role, he contended, could
not be fulfilled by the World Bank since the agency concerned would have to
carry out elaborate research on the real needs of recipient countries, cut out
any overlapping, co-ordinate and condition all programmes, and administer
centrally all kinds of aid provided by the various States, whether in the form
of money, capital goods, food, training facilities, education or technical as-
sistance.
He went on to say that the greatest failure in respect of aid and trade assis-
tance for the developing countries had lain.in the efforts to· use aid as a means
of purchasing the political sympathies of the developing countries: "to sell
economic aid for political cash". Insofar as the donors regarded their aid as
political, the recipient countries acted likewise and frequently used aid to
build up enormous and expensive statu• symbols, to increase their armed
forces with a view to threatening their neighbours or to line the pockets of
the country's rulers.
It would be necessary to set aside national and selfish interests and to cede
all rights to the proposed supra-national agency which would be non-political
and even neutral, not attached to NATO and probably not even to the West
as such.
Such an agency would encourage broader participation, would deprive
receiving countries of grounds for complaint about "strings" while at the
same time it would be able to attach strict conditions more effectively than
individual nations could do. It might even one day receive the support of
the Soviet Union and the other East European States and turn out to be one
of the first valid means for establishing large-scale co-operation between
East and West.
These views were supported by a United States participant, but strongly
contested by the British participant, frequently cited, who insisted that there
was no justification for saying that bilateral aid was exclusively rooted in
political motivations, that there was no reason to create so huge an agency
as proposed, and no reason to believe that the receiver countries would wel-
come it.
48
The same speaker had previously suggested that the United States Agency
for International Development had shown what could be done in the concen-
tration of aid and had devised the admirable policy of "antiscatteration".
Given the limited resources available from all countries, however, it was not
enough to fix priorities on a national scale. We should practice anti-scatter-
ation on a world scale. At the same time we should support the aid programmes
of such international agencies as the International Development Association,
the UN Development Programme and the International Bank.
Despite the differing opinions expressed regarding the machinery required,
there was, however, a general consensus that economic co-operation had to
be strengthened and a United Kingdom speaker said that a greater degree
of cohesion and co-operation was needed between the Atlantic countries
even if not within the framework of Article II of the Treaty.
*
* *
Many speakers raised the question of the policies and conditions that
should be furthered in the less developed countries so as to ensure an optimum
efficiency of the assistance granted.
For an Italian speaker, the economic and social development of the new
countries was increasingly governed by the possibility of solving their balance
of payments deficit and he contended that the strategy of aid to development
should be concentrated on that problem.
Increasing exports of raw materials, however, was no longer an adequate
solution even if efforts should be continued to bring about such an increase.
The demand for foodstuffs would tend to decrease by comparison with the
demand for more "sophisticated" items. At the same time, the tendency was
towards a decrease of raw material content in finished industrial products
since the traditional raw materials were increasingly being replaced by synthe-
tics. Moreover, it would be necessary to enable the less developed countries
to export their products to the industrialized countries, although for a long
time their export trade would require aid, preferably multilateral.
As a result, the foreign trade of developing countries should gradually
become more and more concerned with industrial items. This meant that
it was no longer merely a question of industrialization to reduce imports
from the more advanced countries but of industrialization as an element in
the international trade of the underdeveloped nations. A German participant,
speaking from personal experience, contended that a new approach to the
industrialization of the less developed countries was essential and that there
should be a carefully balanced blend of different categories of industry. A
United States participant, however, wondered whether the less developed
49
t
countries were not somewhat obsessed with industrialization, a point echoed
by a compatriot who remarked that industry and agriculture were not alter-
natives but mutually supporting. Investment in economic overhead, he con-
tinued, should respect this basic complementarity and the raising of agri-
cultural productivity should be a major objective of development policy. "My
country has indicated," he went on, "that it will now greatly increase its
technical assistance in agriculture to assist the less developed countries to
help themselves-but thry must make a real effort."
With regard to what could be done in the way of helping agriculture in
the developing countries, a Canadian participant said that Canada had
recently removed the duty from such tropical food products as tea. A tariff
was still applicable to sugar but substantial preferences were allowed to
certain of the developing countries. An international participant contended,
however, that preferences, while politically alluring, were of doubtfol effec-
tiveness. Meantime, the Atlantic countries were increasing agricultural pro-
tectionism and this might well harm the less developed countries.
The promotion of research on the application of modern technology to
agricultural production in the developing countries was felt by an Italian
participant to be of considerable importance. He mentioned, for example,
that isotopes gave very satisfactory results when used for tropical agricultural
products.
Another suggestion, put forward by a United States speaker, was that
the government sector in the developing countries could help agricultural
distribution substantially through the allocation of agricultural credits instead
of intervening with price controls, etc.
Finally, a Norwegian participant made the point that much could be clone
to help close the gap between the developing and the more advanced coun-
tries by helping the former to feed themselves so that aid went to investment
rather than to consumption. In this connection, he cited the work clone by
the Norwegian Government in assisting India to benefit to a greater extent
from its fishery resources.
*
* *
The rapporteur had stressed the contribution to development which could
be made by the private sector and this point was taken up by a number of
subsequent speakers.
A United States participant who spoke earlier, while admitting that
Pakistan had received more aid, attributed the higher rate of growth which
Pakistan had enjoyed over recent years in comparison to India partly to the
fact that the former country had given much more scope to private industry.
50
He pointed out that as far back as I 959 Pakistan freed its "trade and food
brains" from government control; it had introduced competition in the dis-
tribution of fertilizers to farmers; it had given great scope to the introduction
of private irrigation facilities, etc.
Similarly, the international participant who had spoken earlier, said that
many of the less developed countries were increasingly convinced that private
investment would bring with it sound management, technical know-how,
and so on. He believed thatthe infrastructure in the developing countries had to
be provided by government-to-government loans or grants, and that it was
up to private enterprise to make the most of the infrastructure created. A
British speaker said that governments were substantially aided by the private
sector in that private finance was more efficient in application.
As an example of the contribution which the private sector could make to
development, another Unitecl States participant referred to the International
Executive Service Corps which was started by a group of businessmen. These
businessmen spent between three and six months with companies in their
own area of experience, with a view to enabling those companies to benefit
from their advice on management, marketing, etc. The International Executive
Service Corps was now operating in 17 countries. Results so far had been
excellent and the approach might well be extended.
It was pointed out, however, that the climate in many of the less developed
countries would have to be improved if private investment was to take place
there. As the international participant already frequently cited said, "many of
the underdeveloped nations are beginning to feel that the private sector ...
must be cultivated, must be welcomed, and they must learn to live with the
private entrepreneur and private capitalists ...".The World Bank, he noted,
had been working diligently to establish an entity responsible for conciliation
and arbitration between governments and private investors. He believed that
such an entity would come into being before the end of the year and added
that the Bank was now concentrating, in conjunction with the OECD, on
establishing a multinational entity for the guaranteeing of investments by
private entrepreneurs. The aim would be to provide insurance against ex-
propriation and nationalization together with a measure of protection against
exchange risks. A United Kingdom participant, already cited, expressed the
opinion that insurance against political risks could give a greater degree of
industrial aid than any other form of industrial assistance.
An American speaker said that the discussion so far had been almost ex-
clusively in economic terms. Political stability in the less developed countries
was no less important. There was a real clanger of totalitarianism unless
political maturity was achieved and this implied that we should not only
51
'.>..
share our technical know-how but also our political knowledge. His views
were echoed by a fellow American who noted that, while education and
educational development was of undeniable importance (as a French speaker
had stressed earlier), yet Argentina, for example, with the highest educational
level in Latin America, had been slipping back precisely because ofits unstable
political situation.
By way of corollary, several speakers referred to the deplorable effect which
the creation of expensive status symbols had on public opinion in the donor
countries.
In this connection, reference was made to the importance of informational
activity from a variety of angles. Even though, as a British speaker put it, the
most that could be expected was a passive public opinion in relation to aid
programmes, it was nonetheless essential to try and persuade people that aid
was not philanthropy but a vital feature of policy and a genuine investment.
This view received support from a United States participant who added that
the American people had backed the Marshall Plan and would be as ready
to back aid to the less developed countries in order to sustain stability if only
they were given both leadership and information.
Another American speaker described the information gap as "crucial"
while a compatriot insisted that full use should be made of communications
satellites to provide the information so necessary to mutual understanding
as well as to economic and social development.
His views were echoed by still another American participant who made
the further point that specific information should be brought to potential
private investors in outside countries. The rapid transfer of investment data
would, he contended, also encourage the flow of manegerial skills.
A speaker from a neutral country suggested that a European ;effort be made
to assist some of the developing countries in organizfog their press.
*
* *
In discussing the various obstacles confronting development, an American
participant suggested that these could be reduced by policies aimed at greater
economic and social freedom, by the employment of both labour-intensive and
capital-intensive methods, by stable tax rates, monetary stability and a relative
freedom for capital movement.
A Norwegian speaker pointed out that in such countries as India one
of the major problems to be overcome was that of pest control. Twenty per
cent of the grain produced each year in India was consumed by rats and
monkeys. The problem of controlling such pests called for extensive education
because of the religious considerations involved.
A large number of participants, however, felt that the primary obstacle
52
,,\'
which had to be overcome was that of the population explosion. A United
Kingdom participant said that this threatened to "defeat all our schemes
and good works". What is being done? he asked. The answer was: too little.
Until this year no official financial support had been provided for family
planning and even now Sweden was the only exception.
Another British participant and a French and United States speaker were
among those who agreed as to the key importance of this issue.
According to a United States participa~lt, with a vast experience in matters
of international development, rapid changes were taking place in attitudes
towards family planning, both in the developed and the less developed coun-
tries. Most of the latter, he said, now recognized the importance of family
planning. There was much wider discussion and acceptance of the problem
and many of the countries had adopted by now very strong principles on this
point in their policies. Contraceptive techniques had been developed which
were particularly suited for use in the poorer countries and family planning
programmes instituted. Specifically, United States policy had changed.
Private groups were no longer left to deal with this matter alone. The United
States had announced that it would assist planning programmes if based on
freedom of choice.
*
* *
A number of warnings were given in regard to the danger of overgene-
ralization. It was felt to be unrealistic to lump all the developing countries
together and, as a United States participant observed, the differences between
India, Africa and Latin America, for example, were too great for these coun·
tries to be treated as one.
His views met with support from a Netherlands speaker and from a com-
patriot who said that it was exceedingly difficult to establish a pattern among
the less developed countries. Assistance therefore had to be tailored to the
situation and requirements of a given country and even to an area within
that country.
Nevertheless, the international participant already cited considered that
developing countries could be more or less equally divided into three catego-
ries. The first comprised those countries where, with appropriate and intelli-
gent collaboration among the capital-exporting countries, there could be a
substantial change for the better in the next ten or fifteen years. At the other
extreme ofthe bracket came those countries which could be considered virtually
hopeless (a United States participant subsequently contested the view that
any countries could be regarded as hopeless). The middle category would
depend, said the speaker, very much on the progress made by the first category.
He hoped and expected that the latter countries would eventually contribute
53
'1
I
to the developing financing in other developing countries lower on the run
than they themselves.
A Netherlands participant felt that the less developed countries could be
divided into three other categories:
r. Those which needed not so much financial aid as stable government
and which were not basically helped by large-scale injections of capital (he
had some South American countries in mind) ;
2. Those which stood more in need of expensive technical assistance rather
than additional capital (he believed this especially applied to some African
states);
3. Those which were in the "take-off" phase and which did in fact need
large amounts of capital.
*
* *
A suggestion was put forward by a United States expert in respect of the
ultimate goal of aid programmes. These should be aimed, he said, at establish-
ing a self-sustaining economic growth process, at which point concessional
aid, e.g. loans at lower than commercial rates of interest, could be terminated.
He cited the example of Taiwan which now possessed a self-sustaining
economy with a built-in pattern of savings, know-how, etc.; United States
economic aid had now come to an end.
The speaker foresaw that Brazil and Chile might reach this stage in some
five years' time; he expected Turkey to reach that stage in between five and
seven years' time; and thought that India and Pakistan would do likewise
in ten or fifteen years.
The principle of self-sustaining growth, he went on, offered standards for
measuring aid policies in the less developed countries and for devising such
policies in the donor countries. It made it possible to determine the amounts
and conditions of assistance needed. If the less developed countries took self-
help steps, then it was clearly incumbent on the donors to provide sufficient
assistance on reasonable terms.
This approach further offered a basis for achieving public support in donor
countries insofar as the aid period was limited and the objectives reasonable.
Finally, it offered a firm substantive basis for co-ordination.
*
* *
Commenting on the discussions which had taken place, the author of the
background paper began by a consideration of the objections raised to certain
of his figures. He suggested that these in fact represented an approximate
average, adding that they were based on various minimum assumptions with
54
\,
regard to the goals set. Global figures, he said, were perhaps less dangerous
than had been suggested. It had to be remembered that they only represented
a starting point and that, in any case, they were accompanied by figures for
different areas and circumstances.
With regard to the doubts expressed by an American participant as to
whether 7% per annum could be taken as a possible rate of growth in the
national incomes of the less developed countries, the author pointed out that
this should be seen as a long-range necessity. Nor should it be forgotten that both
the communist countries andJapan had worked at this level ofdevelopment over
a certain period. Similarly, the third Pakistan Plan gave a 7% increase for
national income in the last year.
The speaker went on to express his admiration for the work of the World
Bank and said that one reason for his admiration was its flexibility. He cited
the fact that the Bank had at one time been opposed to "soft" loans but had
subsequently set up institutions to provide just such loans, that the Bank's
original surveys fell short of real planning but that later the Bank accepted
plans wholeheartedly, and, as a final example of changed policy, that the
Bank now placed greater emphasis than previously on agriculture and edu-
cation. The author of the paper concluded that these changes gave some reason
to think that disagreement over figures might come to be recognized as merely
the difference between a long-range and a short-range view.
In the matter of international liquidity which had been raised by a German
participant, the speaker said that he did not insist on any portion of new liqui-
dity going to the developing countries as long as there was a sufficient increase
in the aid passing through normal channels.
He found some reason for optimism in the fact that the annual increase
rate for India over the last five years had been 3% and said it should be borne
in mind that this, although not sufficient, had been in the I gth century the
normal rate of increase for all develoj;ed countries. India's record, therefore,
compared favourably with what not so long ago was the record of the West as
a whole.
Another encouraging detail was that in considering the ratio between
income created and capital spent over recent years, the figures for the less
developed countries were actually better than those for Western Europe.
In passing, the speaker alluded to the comparison made by the international
participant between India and Pakistan. It was possible, he said, that India
was engaged on a more long-term process than Pakistan and since industriali-
zation provided much higher incomes than agriculture it was conceivable that
within five or ten years the difference between India and Pakistan would be
more in the favour of the former.
55
°'fl> .\>
i
The author of the background paper went on to stress the importance of
regional co-operation between small countries and of participation in develop-
ment as a whole by private business although, in the latter context, he observed
that it was desirable to distinguish between private management and private
property. On the question of stabilizing prices for primary products, he said
that this could perhaps be clone by simpler means than elaborate market regu-
lations. Supplementary payments, for instance, would be easier to handle.
The organization of development policy, said the speaker, called for a
combination of high level and lower level activity but he could not agree with
the Austrian speaker who was anxious for everything to come under a super-
agency, in other words for everything to be at the highest level. Nonetheless,
there was an undoubted need for central co-ordination.
In conclusion, the author emphasized the dimensions and urgency of the
problems in the less developed countries and urged that it was better to fight a
war against poverty than a real war.
*
* *
Summing up the discussions of the second item on the agenda, the Honorary
Secretary General for the United States described the exchange of views
which had taken place as being important and fruitful.
There had been substantial agreement, he noted, on a number of points:
the growing gap between the advanced countries and the less developed
countries and the urgency of doing the utmost to reduce that gap; the fact
that not enough was being clone by governments, international organizations
and private groups, the importance of the private sector, having regard to the
fact that governments could not do the job alone; the need to concentrate on a
combination of trade and aid and to avoid a choice between trade or aid; the
pressing need for priorities; and, implicitly, the importance of planning locally
in the less developed countries, nationally among the donor countries, and
internationally. The meeting had likewise agreed in attaching importance to
political stability in the underdeveloped countries if we were to be able to help
them.
Conversely there had been a wide range of opinions forthcoming on a
number of other issues. Thus, while the need for priorities was agreed on,
there was no unanimity as to what those priorities should be. The meeting came
closest, perhaps, to reaching a consensus in respect ofthe development ofhuman
resources and the urgency of achieving effective population control.
The Honorary Secretary' General noted that there had been a measure of
disagreement with the figures given in the background paper and hence as to
the nature and size of the gap. This suggested to him the need to develop a
56
·~·
,j
''
generally accepted statistical basis so that we would all be talking about the
same thing.
Again, although there was no question as to the desirability of improved
cooperation, organization and co-ordination, opinions varied as to how co-
ordination should be improved and what form it should take, e.g. as provided
for under Article II of the NATO Treaty or through consultation committees.
Similarly, there were differing views as to the probable duration of the
problem of underdevelopment. The author of the background paper consi-
dered that it was growing whereas one of the American speakers felt that
several of the developing economies could become self-sustaining in the
relatively near future.
The desirability and effectiveness of preferential tariffs and commodity
agreements had also provoked differing reactions.
In his opinion, said the speaker, there had been too little discussion of
three key problems, namely: the population explosion; cooperation in the
field in mixed governmental, intergovernmental and private activity; and the
extremely important political question of dealing through institutions with the
pressures imposed on the more advanced countries by the developing coun-
tries.
*
* *
Before closing the Meeting, H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands ex-
tended the warmest thanks ofall those who were present to the German hosts for
the excellent and pleasant way the Conference had been organized in which
connection he particularly mentioned the contribution of Mr. Wolff von
Amerongen.
The Prince also extended his thanks to the members of the Secretariat and
the interpreters for their excellent work.
An American participant expressed the gratitude of all participants to
H.R.H. for his outstanding work in leading the Meeting and he asked the
Prince to extend his congratulations to H.R.H. Princess Beatrix and H.R.H.
Prince Claus on the occasion of their marriage.
57
