BAD AACHEN
CONFERENCE
18, 19 and 20 April 1980
BlLDERBERG MEETINGS
BAD AACHEN
CONFERENCE
18, 19 and 20 April 1980
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS.. . ... . ...... . ........ . ... . .... . ... .. ...... 5
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
I. POLITICAL ASPECT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
French Working Paper. . ..................... . ................... 11
American Working Paper..... . ... .. ... . .... . ...... . . . .. . ........ . 22
Discussion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
A. Iran . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
B. Afghanistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
C. Relations Among the Allies:
Communication, Understanding, Leadership . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
D. Division of Labor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
E. The Current American Mood . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
F. The Political Evolution of Europe....................... . ... 47
G. The Alliance and The Third World ..................·....... 49
H. The Arab-Israeli Conflict. .. ... .. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
II. SECURITY ASPECT . .. .. . .. .. .. .. ... .. . .. ... . ... ... . .. .. .. .. .. . 52
International Working Paper... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
A. The Present Military Situation of NATO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
B. Strategic Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
C. The Need for Stronger Conventional Forces. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
D. Security Threats Outside the Alliance Area..... . ... .. .. ... . .. 65
E. The Question of Political Will . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Ill. ECONOMIC ASPECT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
German Working Paper . .. . .. . ... .. .. .. ... . ............... ·..... . . 72
Canadian Working Paper. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Discussion......... . ............. . ... . ....................... .. . 101
A. The Management of Our Economies. ... .. . ........... . ..... 101
B. Monetary Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
C. Energy Considerations and the Impact of the .
Oil Price Increases ........... . ... . .. .. ... . .... . ...... 105
D. The Less-Developed Countries. ..... .. ... .. . ... .. .. . ... . . .... 110
E. Trade Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 112
CLOSING REMARKS . .. . .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .......... . ............... .. 114
LIST OF PARTIClPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
Lord Home of the Hirsel, K.T.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
Ernst H. van der Beugel
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
William P. Bundy
HONORARY TREASURER:
C. Frits Karsten
AEPPLI, OswALD
ANDERSEN, K.B.
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARING, JoHN F.H.
BARTHOLOMEW, REGINALD
BARZINI, LU1Gl
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BENNETT' JACK F.
BENVENUTO, GIORGIO
BERTRAM, CHRISTOPH
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
BIRGI, M. NURI
BREUEL, BIRGIT
BRUNNER, GUIDO
BUNDY, McGEORGE
CAMUNAS SOLIS, IGNACIO
CARRAS, COSTA
CHEVRILLON' OLIVIER
CrTTADINI CEsr, IL MARCHESE
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
CORTERIER, PETER
DAVIGNON, VICOMTE
DONAHUE, THOMAS R.
DoNovAN, HEDLEY
DUISENBERG, WILLEM F.
DUNCAN, WILLIAM B.
ELIOT, THEODORE L., JR.
EsAMBERT, BERNARD
FERRO, LUIGI
FINLEY, MURRAY H.
FINNJ;:Y, PAUL B.
SWITZERLAND
DENMARK
U.S.A.
U.K.
U.S.A.
ITALY
U.K.
U.S.A.
ITALY
INTERNATIONAL
TURKEY
TuRKEY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
SPAIN
GREECE
FRANCE
ITALY
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
INTERNATIONAL
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
NETHERLANDS
U.K.
U.S.A.
FRANCE
ITALY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
5
GISLING, JEAN-CLAUDE
GRIERSON. RONALD H.
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G.S.
GROSSER, ALFRED
GRUNEWALD, HERBERT
HALBERSTADT, VICTOR
HALLGRIMSSON, GEIR
HAUSSMANN, H ELMUT
HEALEY, DENIS
HEINZ, HENRY J. , ll.
HERRHAUSEN, ALFRED A .
H oVEN, H.F. vAN DEN
H UONKER, GUNTER
HURD, DOUGLAS
IGLER, HANs
JANSSEN, DANIEL E.
JOHNSON, JOSEPH E .
JORDAN, VERNON E., JR.
KAsKE, KARLHEINZ
KOHL, HELMUT
KIEP, WALTHER L.
KISSINGER, HENRY A.
KOHNSTAMM, MAx
KNIGHT' ANDREW
KRAFT, JOSEPH
LAMBERT, BARON
LAMBSDORFF, GRAF OTTO
LEGAULT, ALBERT
LENNEP, ]HR. EMILE VAN
LEVY, WALTER J .
LORD, WINSTON
LUNDYALL, BJORN
L uNs, JosEPH M .A.H.
L UTOLF, FRANZ
MACDONALD, DONALD S.
MAcDoNALD, H. IAN
MAcLAURY, BRUCE K.
MAXWELL, J UDITH
MEDEIROS FERREIRA, JOSE
MONTBRIAL, THIERRY DE
N¢RLUND, NIELS
PARAYRE, J EAN-PAUL
PERKINS, JAMES A.
PITTI-FERRANDI, ROBERT
PRINZ, GERHARD
PRODI, ROMANO
6
SWITZERLAND
U.K.
CANADA
FRANCE
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
NETHERLANDS
ICELAND
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U .K.
U .S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
NETHERLANDS
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.K.
AUSTRIA
BELGIUM
U.S.A.
U .S .A .
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FED. REP. OF G ERMANY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
INTERNATIONAL
U.K.
U.S.A.
BELGIUM
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
CANADA
INTERNATIONAL
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
SWEDEN
INTERNATIONAL
SwiTZERLAND
CANADA
CANADA
U.S.A.
U .K.
PORTUGAL
FRANCE
D ENMARK
FRANCE
U.S.A.
FRANCE
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
ITALY
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID
ROLL OF IPSDEN, L ORD
SCHMIDT, GERHARD
SCHMIDT, HELMUT
SCHWARZENBERG, FURST KARL J.
SEILLIERE, ANTOINE
SILVESTRI, STEFANO
SIMONET, HENRI F.
SNOY ET D' OPPUERS, BARON
SOMMER, THEO
SONNENFELDT, HELMUT
SPETHMANN, DIETER
SPINELLI, BARBARA
STOEL, MAX vAN DER
STONE, SHEPARD
TERKELSEN, TERKEL
THOMAS, FRANKLIN
THORN. GASTON
TlDEMAND, OTTO G.
TINDEMANS, L EO
TREICHL, HEINRICH
TREVERTON , GREGORY F.
Tuzo, SIR HARRY
UMBRICHT, VICTOR H.
VLACHOS, H ELEN
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
W ARIS, KLAUS
WECHMAR, BARON R. VON
WERRING, NIELS, JR.
WILLIAMS, JOSEPH H.
WOHLIN, LARS M.
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO
RAPPORTEUR:
GETCHELL, CHARLES
OBSERVERS:
BoGE, ULF
ScHOSER, FRANZ
ZIMMER-LEHMANN, GEORG
IN ATTENDANCE:
BumSHIN, HANs-JoRG
DREIHANN-HOLENIA, N.
HooGENDOORN, ANNE
;
U.S.A.
U.K .
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FED. R EP. OF GERMANY
AUSTRIA
FRANCE
ITALY
BELGIUM
BELGIUM
FED. R EP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
fTALY
NETHERLANDS
U.S.A.
DENMARK
U.S.A.
LUXEMBOURG
NORWAY
·BELGIUM
AuSTRIA
INTERNATIONAL
U.K.
SWITZERLAND
GREECE
SWEDEN
FINLAND
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
NoRWAY
U.S.A.
SWEDEN
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF G ERMANY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
AUSTRIA
FED. REP. OF G ERMANY
AUSTRIA
NETHERLANDS
7
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-eighth Bilderberg Meeting was held at tht. Parkhotel Quellenhof,
Bad Aachen, Federal Republic of Germany, qn 18, 19 and 20 April 1980 under
the chairmanship of Lord Home of the Hirsel, K.T.
There were 113 participants, drawn from a number of fields: government and
politics, diplomacy, industry, trade unions, transport, banking, the law,
journalism, education, and institutes specialized in national and international
affairs. They came from 18 Western European countries, the United States,
Canada and various international organizations.
ln accordance with the rule adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke in
a purely personal capacity, without in any way committing the government or
organization to which they belonged. To enable participants to speak frankly, the
discussions were confidential with no reporters being admitted.
In opening the meeting, the Chairman, Lord Home, read the text of a telegram
of good wishes which he had sent to the President of the Federal Republic of
Germany on behalf of all the Bilderberg participants.
The agenda was as follows:
America and Europe: Past, Present and Future
To give some order to the consideration of this broad topic, the discussion was
organized to deal successively with the political, security and economic aspects,
and the various working papers were concerned with one or another of those
aspects.
Some subjects necessarily involved two or three of those major aspects. The
crisis in Iran, for example, had important political, security and economic
implications, but for the sake of continuity most of the remarks on Iran have
been included in the "political" section.
In the same way, it might happen that a single intervention would deal with the
whole range of topics encompassed by the agenda, as where the speaker was not
able to attend all the sessions of the conference. Such an intervention has not
been reported integrally; its components have been summarized under each of the
various topics.
9
I. POLITICAL ASPECT
French 1-Vorking Paper:
"EUROPE AND THE UNITED STATES- YESTERDAY
AND TOMORROW"
What changes have taken and have yet to take place! In the world context:
China at loggerheads with the Soviet Union, the end of decolonization and the
emergence of the independent African states; the UN dominated by the African
and Asian countries; and the energy crisis partly due to the oil-producing
countries' control of their main source of wealth. In transatlantic relatiom: a
quarter of a century ago, the success of the Marshall Plan was plain, but the
economic weight of Europe wa~ still very limited compared with that of the U.S.
And the European currencies respectfully followed the untouchable dollar.
Tomorrow, may not the change be even more startling, perhaps the North-South
confrontation wil[ be on a scale that is hardly imagined today. May there not be
a common slump in the West European economies that will largely wipe out the
gains of twenty years of rapid growth? And this slump would not take us back to
where we started, because this time the U.S. would be just as troubled and
problem-racked as the countries of Europe.
And yet at the same time, what continuity! We are still faced, at least since the
late fifties, when the Soviet Union first became able to destroy American cities,
with the fundamental question concerning our security: how to make the threat
of American atomic reprisals credible in the event of a conventional Soviet
attack, in other words, how to use the deterrent when the threat of reprisals
forces the U.S. to risk suicide? The identity problems faci11g the leading countries
of Western Europe remain - to such an extent that they must be analyzed in
some detail. And there is another question which is just as topical in 1980 as in
1950 or 1965: how should the machinery for comultation and decision between
Atlantic allies function in the event of a local crisis or war in regions not covered
by the treaty? Political cultures have abo survived, including images of other
countries. This applies to the French perception of the U.S., although with some
shift of emphasis.
In fact, nothing is more difficult than to detect new trends or even turning
points, for one must be constantly on the alert against ~implifying the past. Take
for example the relations between the Federal Republic and the U.S.: Adenauer's
dealings with the American leaders were often stormy, even when his great friend
John Foster Dulles was Secretary of State, and the memoirs of Henry Kissinger
confirm - which could be surmised in 1970-72 - the extent of American
mistrust of Willy Brandt.
Even more important and even more relevant is the tendency to simplify the
past by assuming that there was a long, bleak period of cold war, followed by a
golden age of detente. Obviously, there were breathtaking moments, especially in
1948-49 and during the Korean war. But it would be a mistake to forget how the
hot and cold spells followed each other. The signature of the Atlantic Treaty in
11
April 1949 was fotlowed a month later by the raising of the Berlin blockade. The
entry of the Federal Republic into NATO on 5 May \955 did not create any new
tensions. Ten days later, the Austrian State Treaty was ~igned and in July the
Four met peacefully in Geneva. And it was only a few month~ <1fter the Cuban
crisis that the nonproliferation treaty was ~igned in \to~cO\\.
Was the cold war a permanent phenomenon of the fifrie.~'? Thi~ is a
retrospective illusion. From 1950 to 1953, it \\ib certainly the case. But in
Geneva, in June-July 1954, Pierre Mende.r.-France wa.~ abk to rdy on the
benevolence of the two chairmen of the conference on Indochina, Mr. Eden and
Mr. Molotov. Was detente the rolicy of any particular leader? Khru~hchcv \\US
at one time the man of the Berlin and mi.r,<;i]e crises, and at anmher, the man of
appeasement. And de Gau!!e? Detente only came into the picture after some
severe trials of strength. These had been met with firmness when it came to
thwarting a Soviet thru~t. as in \Vc.r,t Berlin in 1958, and, to a large extent, with
resignation when it came to recogni1ing the de facto sitwHion in Europe ~ince
1948. In other word.r,, Western a~.r,umptions about detente ha'<e always been
somewhat contradictory. One of them in\·olve.'l acceptance of thl' divi~ion of
Europe, at the expense of the (Jerman, Hungarian and Czech \·ictirns of SO\'ict
domination. The other seeks to contain and offset the power of the USSR. There
is also a determination to go beyond containment and to introduce a breath of
fresh, Western air into the East. It is in this re~pect that detente took on rerhap~
a relatively new character in the ~ccond half of the sixtic~ .
•
• •
Through all these changes and continuitie~. transatlantic relations ha'<e never
ceased to suffer from one major disparity. On one side, the U.S. (e\·cn when the
President is beset by conflicting ad\·isers) can act as a single polirical uniL On the
other, Europe is unable to act as a genuine political entity.
The U.S. has also undergone far-reaching change~ in its attitudes, which have
had serious repercussions on transatlantic relationship~. The domestic unrest
arising out of the Vietnam war provided ammunition for European criticism of
the U.S. (It was somewhat paradoxical to note how far student anti-Americanism
in Europe at the end of the sixties was "Americanized" ewn in irs vocabulary.)
This unrest was one of the causes of a deep-seated American malai<;e, which was
due also to a feeling of decline as a world power and, as a result of Watergate,
of uncertainty as to the value of the democratic model that had once been a
source of such pride. This led to a ~ort of purity mania \\hich had international
implications, not all of them beneficia!. The determination to punish a perjured
president cast general discredit on the White House. The wish to have no more
secrets threw open the files of the CIA, prO\ iding proof of distinctly <;hady
operations which, when carried out by others, ;ue normally shrouded in decent
obscurity.
12
Without the Ank'ri~·:m malai.-.e or 1he \c'\·entie-,, it " imrn,,ihle to understand
American attitude_., in 1he la~t \\·ceJ.-.., ni' 1479 and early \\Cd.' of 1980. Pre~ident
Carter's recmery of ropularity through ad\(Kating and pr<-lcti,ing firmne~s wa~
due to the f:lL'l that the taking of ho-.t:Jg<.'., in Tdh:ran and the SO\'iet int<.'n·ention
in Afghanistan ga\'e public opinion a fresh oprottunity 10 '>Uppon the right
causes and to look 10 a re\'i\al of U.S. leader~hip in the name of morality and
law. Indignation \\iped out the humiliatiom of Vietnam and Watergate. But
could the same degree of emotion be e\rected from Euroream who had not
undergone the s<~me e\rerience'!
For the European~. during the~e <;<~me preceding year~, had been con~ciou_., of
an American ~hirt and aho an American contmuity that aiTcctcd them directly.
The change was the one that occurred around 1969, of \\hieh the key deci_-,ion to
suspend com-ertibility of the dollar on 15 Augu_o,t 1471 w<~s the mo~t ~pectaeular
feature. For twenty years or so, tht U.S. had, in its dealings \\ith Europe, gi\·en
priority to the politkal O\er the e.;onomic. Even though 1he economic benefit~,
particularly through the arri\·al of American firms, were real, the overriding
concern had certainly becn politicaL and included the encouragement of
European unity.
The inconvertibility of the dollar ~ymbolited the new priority for the economic
aspect, with the currency being trcated as a tool of domestic de\·elopment,
whereas formerly it had been largely an imtrume!ll of imernational polky. In the
view of even the best dispmed European leaders, the ~eventies wcre marked by a
certain egocentric irrespon\ibility in American behavior, e~pedally in monetary
matters. This irrespon~ibility certainly did not promote thc practice of political
solidarity among those who had to put up with its con..cquences, ju~t a~ an
appeal for solidarity in using the economic weapon against the common enemy
has only a muted reception when it is launched by a leading part ncr which has
shown itself to be incapable of prO\iding the most urgent and deci~ive evidence
of its own solidarity, by reducing its famaqk domeqic con~umption of energy.
The American continuity is a kind of inability to practice the minimum of
consultation required in an alliance which in theory is between equal~. Of cour..e,
one of the reasons for thi~ inability is virtually built in: the deci~ion-making
process within the administration in Washington i\ so complicated that once a
decision has been painfully arrived at, only a masochbt would wam to reopen the
question through consultations with allies! But this is no excuse for confusing the
provision of information (often tardy, incomplete information at that) about a
decision that has already been taken witt-: consultation beforehand.
Is it reasonable therefore to call for ~olidarity in support of a unilateral
decision? Take, for example, the boycott of the Olympic Game.~. Or to expect
complete confidence without ..upplying the e~sential information? Take, for
example, the concentration of Soviet troops on the Afghan frontier and the
warnings sent to MoscO\\· by the U.S. Government. Sometimes. even the most
loyal ally is treated with devastating casualne5s. A proposal b launched, the ally
is pressured into approving it, he makes a stand, and then the proposal is
dropped and the ally i~ left out on a limb. This, broadly speaking, is what
happened with the MLF, the Multilateral Force, in the early sixties, and also \\ith
13
old continent a breakwater of power and pro~perity akin to that of the
U.S. in the new world. Such a breakwater can only be ba~ed on
solidarity between our two countrie~ .
In fact, the divergences were already considerable at the time. They were
connected with the way in which the European countries defined or felt their
respective identities. Why, for example, were the Netherlands ~uch passionate
supporters of Great Britain's entry ~>.'hen their leaders knew perfectly well that it
would halt progress toward~ the supranational Community which they claimed to
favor equally strongly? Because they feared Franco-German domination of the
nascent Europe. For a long time, Mr. Luns played at the European level the
same role as General de Gaulle at the Atlantic level: he claimed equal rights
between unequal powers. And the General, followed even more emphatically by
President Pompidou, refused the Netherlands what France was claiming from the
U.S. Netherlands policy underwent .~ome shift around 1967 because of domestic
politics, but the entry of Great Britain and a certain loss of solidarity within the
European Community speeded up this shift, which received further impetus from
a feeling of isolation during the crisis of 1973-74, when the Netherlands were
pressured by the other Europeans to behave as ingloriou~ly as themselves towards
the oil-producing countries. The Netherlands determination to play a role of their
own and not simply to follow the lead of the stronger powers has merely changed
its outlet, as was apparent in December 1979 over the Atlantic decision to base
Pershing II missiles in Europe.
The question of the identity of the Netherlands, however, does not raise any
major problem in transatlantic relations. The same is true of Italy. Admittedly,
ever since 1943 the U.S. has retained a certain degree of innuence over Italian
domestic politics, but these now dominate the outlook of all the parties to such
an extent that discussion of external affair~ is a means rather than an end. The
attitude~ of the Italian Communist party - which admits quite readily that
without Atlantic protection, its leaders would, at best, meet the fate of Alexander
Dubcek - cause no alarm, apart from America's virtual obsession with the fear
thai these same Communists may be asked by the Christian Democrats to share
the responsibility for rescuing the Italian political system from its terrible
1mpasse.
On the other hand, a twofold comparison will show that this problem of
identity still faces Great Britain, France and the Federal Republic of Germany.
Take the Franco-British comparison first. Since the end of the war, both Great
Britain and France have been asking themselves the same question, to which
there may be no reply and which they have been alone in asking; "How can I
preserve or regain worldwide influence when I know perfectly well that I am no
longer a world power?" Great Britain replied: by occupying a privileged position
in the counsels of one of the two real great powers. Priority for the "special
relationship" with the U.S. was decisive for a quarter of a century. This was
followed by a gap of about ten years: Edward Heath believed in the advantages
of membership of the European Community, and then, when the Labor Party
came to power in 1974, it hardly aspired to play a prominent international role,
preferring to concentrate on domestic issues. Mrs. Thatcher ha~ resumed the
15
special relationship policy. In strongly supporting the U.S. in the Afghan crisis,
she is impelled not ony by her own energy and amicommunism, but also by the
desire to be a privileged ally (a privilege from which incidentally Great Britain
has never derived much benefit).
The French reply, under the Fourth and Fifth Republics alike, has been to
support a Europe in which France would be the only power to seek worldwide
influence, i.e., to use the power of Europe to strengthen the voice of France. The
reason why this Europe was opened to Great Britain in 1969-70 'WR~ because of
the emergence of a new fear of German economic power, a fear whi..:h President
Giscard d'Estaing does not share, unlike his predecessor, Georges Pompidou. We
had very significant evidence of this in 1978. It is true to say that during the
previous ten years, French monetary behavior had been somewhat paradoxicaL
In principle, France wanted a strong Europe with the Federal Republic against
the U.S. But each time the dollar and the mark collided and went different ways,
whether by floating or by remaining fixed, the franc followed the dollar rather
than the mark. Conversely, the system introduced in 1978 represems a kind of
link between the franc and the mark against the dollar, which fits in logically
with the over-all French attitude.
For against whom does France wish to make her voice heard? This is where the
Franco-German comparison comes in. Of the two great power~. which is the
more important for the two leading partners in the European game? For the
Federal Republic, it is the Soviet Union, against which it needs protection; this
gives the U.S. almost a secondary role. For France, the more important power is
the U.S., precisely because after de Gaulle, as under de Gaulle, France seeks the
rank of a Western power, meaning that she feels and normally di~plays solidarity
in the event of a direct threat from the East (Berlin in 1958 and 1961, Cuba in
1%2), but that when there is no direct threat (and she likes to think that there is
no direct threat), her margin of independence ha\ to be enlarged vis-3-vi~ the
U.S. For, because we are Westerners, our unequal. assymetrical interdependence
with the U.S. is far greater than with the USSR, whether in economics,
technology or culture. In other words, there are times when the So.,iet Union
serves as a fulcrum enabling Fran..:e to raise her stature in relation to the U.S. by
inducing the Soviei Union to treat her as a first-rate power. Whether in the case
of de Gaulle in Moscow in December 1944 or June 1966, or Valery Giscard
d'Estaing in Moscow in April 1979, this was one of the purposes of the visit.
It may be helpful to look a little more closely at these two situations. The
Federal Republic has two lasting, specific characteristics. In the fim place, it is
the only Western country to depend on an international system which has no
other relevance - that of 1945. Second, no other Western country is so closely
confined within the international ~ystem which 5ucceeded it, namely that of
1948-49.
The 1945 system: first of all, there is Berlin, the western part of which is
defended by the Americans. French and Briti5h in their capacity a~ occupants,
who have the right to move about at will in East Berlin as a survival of the
quadripartite agreements of 1944-45. The situation in West Berlin has been
virtually stabilized, thanks to detente, following the agreement between the Four
\6
which came into force in 1972. \Vou\d not the abandonm~nt of detente he liable
to create fresh trouble in Berlin? But there is not only Berlin. The Federal
Republic is not fully a sovereign state, and the Bundestag unanimously declared
in 1972 that it should not become one, and that the rights and responsibilities
exercised by the Four, who had taken over all aspects of German wvereignty in
1945, should be maintained. Indeed, these shared rights and responsibilities of
the four postwar occupying power~ are to some extent all that is left of the unity
of the German nation. In a period of tcmion, the danger of a breakdown of the
system revives.
The Federal Republic is not a nation. It originated, as a result of the cold war,
out of a twofold rejection: of past totalitarianism and of neighboring
totalitarianism. Whereas in France the unifying concept is national independence,
and e.xcommunication take~ the form of accusing a political opponent of being
the "foreign party," the German consensus i~ ba~ed on the FOGO, the
fundamemal liberal and democratic order, and the German equivalent of
"foreign party" is Verjassungsfeind or "enemy of the Constitution. "The result is
that from the start, since 1949, there has been a stronger feeling of solidarity, of
transnational community, v.ith tfle countrie' adhering to these same pluralist,
liberal principles, whether in European or "Atlantic" affairs.
The distinctive identity of the Federal Republic has, however, undergone a
change as a result of a shift in attitude due both to the international situation
and to its own determination, which became apparent - after the shock of the
Berlin wall - with the arrival of Gerhard Schr6der at the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and was further strengthened by the great coalition headed by Kurt-Georg
Kiesinger and above all by the Brandt government. The Ostpolitik has brought
very substantial gains to the cause of freedom in Germany. Millions of West
Germans have been able to pay regular visits to the East, reception of West
German television has been enlarged in the GDR, and telephone links have been
facilitated as a result of jointly agreed technical improvements. The remark
attributed to the present Chancellor - "The Americans have 50 hostages in
Teheran, we have 17 million in the GDR"- i\ certainly not entirely far-fetched.
This accounts for the extreme caution shown in taking sanctions against the
USSR which might result in much more costly countersanctions.
There is a further argument: does not the maintenance of contacts between the
citizens of the GDR and We~tern Germany serve the cause of the West as a
whole? And does not the ~arne apply to the concern, which is shared by the
French leaders, that a new rise in tension leading to a hardening in Soviet policy
towards the other East European countries, might set back the domestic gains in
Hungary and Poland which have been fostered by contacts with the West? The
excellent personal relations between Helmut Schmidt and Edouard Gierek are
symbolical of this state of affairs.
Through its Ostpolitik, therefore, the Federal Republic has made a by no
means negligible contribution towards the general Western cause, even though the
policy was not seen in this light by Henry Kissinger or Georges Pompidou. The
aid given to a virtually bankrupt Turkey for several years past has also
conformed to a Western political responsibility.
17
The fact remains, however, that the Federal Republic does not wish to play a
world role. For a long time, it sought to leave complete responsibility in U.S.
hands, while it concentrated on economic and commercial expansion. It is
somewhat surprising, of course, to have to reproach the Germans for refusing to
exercise their influence in the world when one thinks of 1945. But it is a fact that
the Federal Republic, although now an economic giant, did not and still does not
aspire to become a political giant. It simply wishes to avoid being caught up in
the consequences of decisions taken elsewhere. The turning point in this case was
probably the incident in 1973 when the U.S. u~ed a German port to ship military
equipment from Germany to the Near East without even informing the German
Government. This reluctance to play a leading role is enhanced by the readiness
of the other Western partners (French, British, Norwegians and also Americans)
to hark back to Hitler whenever a German, even if he i~ a perfect democrat,
raises his voice.
In the case of France, the desire to pursue a distinctive policy is all the greater
in that the great power being challenged is the one in her own camp. Hence the
constantly repeated assertion that there is no camp or that there ought not to be
one. The Yalta myth plays a very important part in justifying this lumping of the
two great powers together. It is argued, contrary to all the historical evidence,
that Roosevelt and Stalin divided up the world in the Crimea, because this belief
provides a justification for a policy of independence vis-3.-vis the two
super-powers. The idea of two rival powers from \\·hich France and Europe
should keep their distance recurs regularly in the attitude::. of the French leaders,
even when they took a different line before coming to power. This is true of the
present President of the Republic and of the Miniqer of Foreign Affair~. Thi~
simple fact shows up the great error of appreciation committed by Wa~hington
during the de Gaulle era. Certain attitudes were not accepted by the French
because they liked de Gaulle and were letting him get on with his policies; on the
contrary, they liked de Gaulle because of these attitudes, which retlected
deep-seated national feelings.
These feelings were all the stronger because the U.S. has consistently refused to
understand that pride and prestige are not simply the means or by-products of a
policy; they may also be its purposes, its main objectives. This is true in matters
of language and cultural intluence, and also of satisfaction in a major
technological success. Of course, Concorde was doomed to commercial failure
and the anti-American resentments caused in France by the revelation of its
failure were unjustified. But the American disregard for foreign technological
prowess also had its effect on French reactions, at a time when it was well known
that the USSR had to some extent copied Concorde and had already recognized
the value of the French color television system. The U.S. gives the impression
that a French technical advance is only recognized when it becomes necessary to
compete with it so a~ to limit its impact. This was equally true of the thwarting
of the American program for Caravelle airliners some 20 years or ~o ago, and of
the launching of a competitor for the European Airbus. Pre5tige and economic
interest are closely linked in such cases.
This accounts for a touchy determination not to allow oneself to be
dominated, and a refusal to act (or talk) like the German leaders when they say,
18
for example, as did the Minbter of Foreign Affair\ in February, that it would be
wrong to take part in the Olympic Games became we arc defended by the U.S.;
and also for a constant tendency to treat as an alignment what would after all be
merely a demonstration of .~olidarity. Thi\ doe~ not mean, hcm·ever, that nothing
is done to promote common objectives: preventing Colonel Kadhafi from
penetrating into Chad and Tunisia i~ a ~ervice to the entire We~tern community,
even if this was not the main purpose of the operation.
These specific German and French characteristic~. although very different,
resulted by the beginning of 1980 in similar attitude~ ba~ed on concern over the
future of detente. There wa~ a rash of articles in the German press in a tone very
similar to that of the French Government. And more than one German article
was manifestly government-inspired, whereas the official government reaction
was fairly contradictory.
The tone wa~ to the effect that detente was divisible and that it was important
not to discourage any "doves" in the Kremlin. This latter anxiety was logically
somewhat unsound: the best way of saving or reviving detente is not to
encourage the "hawks'' by telling them that, whatever they do, detente can be
maintained; it is to punish the ha\vks and thereby provide arguments for the
doves. But it is true to say that detente is both indivisible and divisible. If we do
not react over Afghanistan, what is there to prove to the USSR that we would
react tomorrow in the event of another military offensive elsewhere than on the
frontiers of the Western countries? But how man) e>;amples have there been in
the past of Russo-American contacts being maintained and even developed while
at another point on the globe, they were directly or indirectly clashing with each
other!
The transatlantic climate in 1980 would certainly be beuer if the American
Pre~ident observed more faithfully the principle of conflicting reality. Detente is
both divisible and indivisible. The Soviet Union is at one and the same time an
expansionist opponent to be contained and an inescapable partner in the
international political and economic game. From this standpoint, Jimmy Carter's
remark that he had learned more about the USSR in three weeks than in three
years has rightly disturbed Europeans, because it seems to suggest that before the
crisis he had oversimplified the situation by regarding the USSR solely as a loyal
partner and afterwards solely as an opponent to be dealt with through coercion
instead of negotiation.
• •
•
The Europeans - despite everything, it is legitimate to generalize about them
whenever one tackles the general issues, those that affect us all. Take, for
example, the most important issue of the late seventies, the priority of economic
factors. Currency, inflation, unemployment, energy shortages - the Western
world as a whole is confronted with the same crisis.
19
It is interdependent, but it is abo ridden with rivalrie~. Competition is in fact
the greatest obstacle in the way of the coordination that is needed. A competition
with implications that are not always grasped. For example, trade with the East
European countries: if the Europeans (more panicularly the (Jermam and the
French) applied strict sanctions, how could they offset their export losses
(especially in advanced technology items) except by competing with the U.S. in
other markets? (Quite apart from the fact tha·t a brtal-..down in tht Ea\t-Wt.>~t
economic sy~tem, including bank credits, might g1n' the USSR an inter.:'! in a
Western economic collapse, wherea~ for the time being, it ha~ no such interest.)
Can the competition be curtailed? Can it be prevented from ha\·ing political
consequences, for example in the ca~e of Franto-Am<.'rican rivalry in armamenh
exports? There i~ probably very little reawn to be optimi~tic on thi\ ~core.
On the other hand, one of the most fundamental and l:hting probkms ~hould
not be dramatized. For the facts about the defcn'c of I:urope, referred to earlier,
are unchangeable in their contradictory feature~. There can be no genuinely
European security system because the Soviet Union has by ddinit1on a 1\~o-l"old
nature: it is situated in Europe and it is the only 1\"0rld power to he 'ituated
there. A system confined to the European continent would afford no -~ecuritv to
the countries of Western Europe and would mal-..c them dependent on the SO\ iet
Union.The other great world power mu\t aho participate in the ~~qem. But if it
does, European security inevitably become~ a sub~y\lem of tlw Amet ican-Sm iet
balance of power.
Nor can a superpower emerge in Western Europe. In thl' first imtance, because
of the excessive cost - and the !imitatiOn\ on thl' EU1opean dfort didated by
the need to raise living ~tandard\ have been known for a lnng time, in fact since
the NATO conference in Lisbon in \(}52. And ~econdly, because wch a
superpower would inevitably be nuclear, which could not be achie,ed either with
the Federal Republic or without it. Certainly not with it: the rederal Republic
has undertaken too many commitmenh in the opposik ~l'the and nuclear
participation by it would be too unacceptable to the LISSR - and probably also
to France, which relies on it~ nudear power, among othet things, to offset
German economic ~uperiority. And not without it either: to ha'e a "trip-wire"
army and have the fate of it~ citizens depend on foreign dcci_,)~m~ i~ still
acceptable for a ~mall power dealing with one that i\ far greater: hut not in
relation to powers of the same rank ~uch <h Grear Britain and France.
This impasse inevitably gives ri~e to conflicting concern.\. On the one hand.
there is the hope that the U.S. will threaten the USSR ''ith thl' utmost
devastation; and on the other, that in the C\ent of failure of the deterrent, the
Americans will cause as little damage a~ pm~ible in the European countrie~. and
more particularly in the Federal Republic. On the one hand, th<.'re i~ the fear that
the ·u.s. will flirt too much with China and be led into taUng an over-rigid
attitude towards the USSR, with the inherent ri~l-.. of Smit't rcpri~als; and on the
other, there is the fear that the U.S. will come to far too close an understanding
with the USSR and, through SALT Ill, ~acrifice the Europeans' security.
There is no way of not living with these contradictions. Recognizing this fact
will help to de~dramatize a good many situations. Transatlantic debates on
20
defense ~hould then:fore be L'onrined to di\cu~~ion' on the he\! technical mean'
of ensuring security, especially \ince nne of the mo~t explmive political ractor~,
the French nuclear force, had been defu\cd following the 011awa declaration in
1974, which proclaimed obviou~ fact\ that had hitherw been concealed or
di~pwed by one ~ide m the other:
. The Eurapean countrie~. which pro\·ide threc-(.juarter\ ol the
alliance'~ comentional potential in Europe. and two of \\hich pm~cs'
nuclear foras capable of playing a separa/e deterre!11 role contrihutinx
w the oreru/1 strengtheninx (~(the alfiance\ detarent, undertake to
make the nece\sary contributi<)n toward~ the mainten<ilKe of common
defense...
. All the member" of the alliance agree in con~idering that the
continued prc~ence of Canadian force~ and of \Ub\tantial American
forces in Europe pia)' an irreplaceahle part in the defen.\c of North
America as well a~ in that of Europe.
On the other hand, nothing i~ clear and nothing ha., been \ellkd in one key
field in which it is essential that ne\~ policic' ~hould be framed, namely
North-South relatiom, more particularly between the countrie~ of Europe and the
U.S., on the one hand, and the poor countties of the Third World on the other.
It is not for nothing that the French President is con~tantly referring to thi\
problem. It is no coincidence that a political leader like Willy Brandt considered
that his most urgent ta~k wa~ to pre~idc over the v.ork of the North-South
Commission which ha~ jmt completed its final report and one of the mo~t active
members of which wa~ Edward Heath.
This is not simplv an economic problem. It i~ aho a political one, e~pecial!y
where the U.S. is concerned. The European "leftiot~" and the Catholic Church,
through the encyclicals and speeches of the la~t three Pope'>, are not alone in
considering that the U.S., while protecting the freedoms of Europe, is the
principal opponent of liberalion in other continent<., more particularly in Central
and South America. The total population of the small countrie~ of Central
America is much the .~arne a.~ that of Afghanistan, and their lot, by and large, is
little better than that of the At'g:hans today.
To sum up, despite different circumstance~. de~pite rivalries and competition,
the Western coumries, including the U.S., now face probkm~ that are not only
similar but common to them all. This applies equally to their domestic difficulties
and to their international East-West and North-South difficulties. From the
debate on nuclear power to the problem of youth unemployment, from the rise
of inflation to the phenomena of violence in our society, how many examples of
similarity and action there arc!
But these similaritie~ are very inadequately realized, v.hich make\ foreca~ting
hazardous. For two assumption~ are equally probable. The first i.., that the
common nature of the problems will lead to common or at least to jointly
discussed and coordinated policies. The second is that the distorted views held on
either side of the Atlantic as to each other's circumstances and attitude5 will
result in greater divergences, further drift and sharper clashes.
21
But while both assumptions are probable, we can try to make the former more
so. Hence the importance of any proposals for setting priorities for this Aachen
conference.
Proposals for setting priorities ar Aachen
I) How can we affect the mutual exchange of information in such a way as
to ensure that awareness of the facts to some extent replace~ myth?
2) How could a transatlantic system of crisis management be set up? The
prospects of arriving at workable proposals are slight, but the matter is urgent,
for further grave decisions may have to be taken. e.g.• over Saudi Arabia or
Yugoslavia...
3) If there is a genuine transatlantic solidarity and sharing of responsibility,
what domestic crisis policies should be followed, e.g., over energy-saving or plans
for the conversion of the automobile indusuy, or for the industrial changes that
will be made inevitable by competition, desirable though it may be, from a poor
but progressing Third World?
4) What consistent criteria of judgment - and therefore of policy - are
there which simultaneously take account of the North-South and East-West
aspects of the international situation?
5) How can support for human rights, which we claim distinguishes us from
the Eastern countries, be reconciled with the sometimes perfectly legitimate needs
of a worldwide political or economic strategy? For example. a rcspome to the
invasion of Afghanistan involves supporting the regime in Pakistan. Is the same
justification valid elsewhere, in Santiago or Bangui?
• •
•
American Working Paper:
"THE AMERICANS AND THE ALLIANCE IN 1980"
It would be easy, in the spring of 1980, to begin a discussion of the political
relations between Europe and the United States with a catalogue of follies on
both sides. Enjoying as I presently do the satisfactions of independence and free
expression that go \vith life as a professor in a strong university, I have recently
been criticizing my own government in terms that are not ideal for repetition in
an international meeting. And having served for a period on the staff of
Presidents confronted, as Mr. Carter is today, by the odd refusal of foreign
countries to act instantly on every signal from Washington, I think I could give
you a reasonably energetic and plausible account of the tactical dissatisfactions
which may now be felt in Washington. But one effort would be as inappropriate
as the other. We are not met here merely for the purpose of rehearsing
catalogues of mutual recriminations which most of us could recite with ease.
22
These meetings, as I understand them, have a better purpose. Yet recollections of
earlier Bilderberg gatherings, and a review of recent minutes provided by the
excellent secretariat, persuade me that no matter how elevated our initial
intentions may be, we shall almost inevitably engage to some degree in the
ventilation of recent grievances. It can hardly be the role of an introductory
paper to give encouragement to this most human predilection.
II
Let me begin with the simplest and most important point of all: The American
engagement in the Atlantic Alliance remains clear and solid. Differences exist in
my country, as they have since 1948, on the ways and means of fulfilling that
engagement, but it i~ quite simply wrong to suppose that there is any effective
sentiment in the U.S. today for disentanglement from Europe. I underline this
reality because it b fundamental to any understanding of our current difficulties,
which are serious, and our internal debates, which are harsh. There is literally no
significant element in our public opinion which does not accept it as a fact of life
that the U.S. has a truly vital interest in the survival and strength of the open
societies of Europe.
While this reality doe~ not tell us what the Americans will do - about strategic
weapons or SALT or defense budgets or the Persian Gulf - it does tell us what
they will not do: they will not abandon Europe under Soviet threat. Indeed it is
further predictable that any recognized Soviet threat to Europe will strengthen
both American determination and the levels of American defensive action. In this
quite fundamental sense the engagement set forth in Article V of the North
Atlantic Treaty remains in full force for the U.S. It is deliberately confirmed, to
the point of being almost self-executing, by the continuing presence in the heart
of Europe of some 300,000 Americans with weapons of all sorts.
The dependability of this American engagement is questioned from time to
time, most notably in Soviet whispering campaigns. But the Soviet Government
does not believe its own whispers; it only hopes that others will. People who
question the strength of the engagement of the American people on this
absolutely central issue can be charged with one or the other of two serious
failings: either they really do not understand the Americans, or they seek to serve
some other purpose by deliberate defamation.
I know of only one force in all the world that could undo this American
engagement: its rejection by our European allies. If major members of the
Alliance came to be governed by forces effectively hostile to the U.S., the
American commitment could be threatened. Fortunately the single most crucial
country, today as for thirty years, is West Germany. Like Admiral Je\licoe at
Jutland - "The only man on either side who could lose the war in an
afternoon" - the people of West Germany can end the Atlantic Alliance any
day they choose. But if the defection of the Federal Republic were the most likely
danger of the 1980's, we could expect a wonderfully tranquil decade.
I repeat that the enduring reality of the American engagement does not in itself
tell us what the Americans will do. In four presently debated particulars it gives
little guidance.
23
1. lt doe\ not tell us the level and location of the American
nuclear deployment\ that will ensure the "credibility of the deterrent;"
2. lt doe>. not dcl'ine the level and the shape ot the defense
establishment that make~ ~eme for the U.S.;
3. It does not tell u~ what the U.S. ~hould do now about SALT;
4. It docs not tell us how far the American engagement in Europe
may carry with it a special American responsibility for the protection
of the oil of the Persian Gulf.
Of course no American answers to these superficial!y "American" questions
can be complete without some judgment on the reasonable relation between what
should be done by the U.S. and what can reasonably be expected on the part of
European partners. Thus the difficulties of our reciprocal dependence in what
may be the most effective alliance in history do not grow les~ as it enter~ its
fourth decade, and these difficulties are deeper and more seriou~ than most of
our current arguments over relatively small-scale misbeha\ior. We ha\e our
traditional difficulties with traditional subject~. and in 1980 we face a new and
urgent need co work out varied but mutually compatible responses to the dangers
threatening the supplies of oil that are vital to the life of Europe and Japan, and
thus also to the safety of the U.S.
These issues are not trivial; the way they are handled can spell the difference
between continuing succe~s and appalling failure in the relatiom bel\\·een Europe
and the U.S. So our policy debates are not about nothing. But in the U.S. these
debates are also not about our basic objective. That was settled in 1949 and has
not been unsettled since. Even the most dangerous single effort to limit our role
in the Alliance, the Mansfield Amendment of the early 1970s calling for troop
reductions, was justified by its author partly with the argument that 300,000 men
were twice as many a>. were needed precisely because the underlying American
commitment to the defense of We~tern Europe wa~ a "cardinal foreign policy
tenet agreed upon by vinually all Americans." Moreover, the Mansfield
Amendment was beaten, and the idea of unilateral troop reduction ha~ almost no
present support in Washington.
The Persian Gulf aside - and I will come back to it - the mos1 serious
potential strain on the connection between Europe and the U.S. is not
intrinsically political, and still less strategic; it is economic. In most of its aspects
it falls outside my assignment and my competence. Nonetheless the economic
relations between states are always in some measure political; even the most open
international market requires a considerable political consensu~ to support it.
When there is a high level of economic disarray, a.\ there is today in nearly all
our countries, a heavy stress is placed upon that underlying consensu_\. Still more
seriously, economic weakness, especially in a protecting power, can readily cause
nervousness among the protected. And indeed such nervousness i~ entirely
understandable, because in fact a nation in economic disarray can only too ea~ily
give reduced priority to the problems and requirements of its role in maintaining
international security. It would be foolish to pretend that no such dangers exist
today.
It is not hard to compose a scenario in which these economic difficulties could
produce an unraveling of political trust so severe that in the end the Alliance
24
itself would be undermined. Those in ~ean:h or the 1-.ind~ of thing~ that could
lead to such a result have only to examine the interplay between economio.:
disaster and political catastrophe that mark~ the year~ 1929-39. If I am right in
my conviction that only outright European rejection could brcai-. the ba,ic
American commitment to the defense of Europe, <Jnd right Jlso in my high
estimate of the Parallel and reciprocal commitment of the moq crucial of our
European allies, the Federal Republic, then t\\0 of the mmt dangeH)U" element~
of the world of the great depres~ion - German and American unreliability - do
not exist today. But we <;hould not undereqirnate the danger that economic
troubles and then economic quarrels could ha\·e corrmiYe effects large enough,
over time, to put ~uch hopeful estimates in question.
These grim possibilities make me believe that the reduction of our shared
economic disarray is in fact a first order of business for the Western Alliance.
That priority is not absolute, nor does its existence define the policies that are
right for each national economy. I su~pect that the differences in our economic
situations and our internal social priorities make it a perilou~ bu~iness to offer
easy prescriptions to one another. Almost the only general recommendation that
can be made with confidence is that there is a particular danger attached to
beggar-my-neighbor economics when it i'i practiced between mutually dependent
allies. In a free society no one can prevent the existence and expression of
pressure for such measures, and in ..::ountrie~ like my own where party di~ciplinc
is weak and the role of !egi~lators qrong, there may be a ~pecial need for
restraint and responsibility on the pan of the Executive Branch. But in the end
international reciprocity is the one ~overeign remedy, and it is obYiously easier to
preach than to practice.
Ill
Confidence in the American commitment to Europe requires confidence in
American strategic strength. I am convinced that the Ameri..::an nuclear deterrent
is and will remain entirely adequate. Indeed I think there is some danger that in
the years immediately ahead we may spend more money on it than we need to.
AI a level long since passed by b01h the U.S. and the Sovier Union nothing better
than strategic parity is available to either side. I think this essentially political
parity in strategic weapons came in clear sight in the late 1950s (and indeed
Gerard Smith has reminded me that the arrival of such parity wa~ announced by
Gordon Dean in 1957, in his foreword to a remarkable book called Nuclear
Jl'eapons and Foreign Policy* by a young Harvard friend and colleague). Parity
in this basic sense ha:, been a fact throughout the 1960s and 1970~. and it is a
fact today. Moreover, I am confident that the essentially marginal problem of
"Minuteman vulnerability" will be dealt with long before there is any plausible
•1n Henry A. Kissinger, fl,;uc/ear lfeapons and Foreign Polic.~·. New York, 1957, p. •·it: '"For all
pra~tical purposes we have in terms of nuclear capabilitie<; reached a point which may be called
"parity.' 'J.-'e have long known that such a time would come. It is nov. upon u<;. t do not mean
necessarily parity in number,; of large bombs. Numbers become k>' imponam when the point 1<.
reached where b01h sides have the capability to annihilate each other'"
25
•
threat to the survivability of the U.S. strategic deterrent as a whole. There are
many dangers in our future, but political "compe!lence" deriving from a usable
Soviet strategic superiority is not one of them.
As a lesser included case, I find the American strategic umbrella over Western
Europe more than adequate. As long as we have major forces deployed well
forward on the continent, and as long as the underlying engagement of the
American people is solid, the danger of general nuclear war created by any Soviet
attack on Western Europe will far exceed what any sane Soviet government will
wish to risk. Prudent modernization of NATO forces is obviously sensible, and
the conventional element of the NATO deterrent, today as nearly always,
deserves particular reinforcement - the Alliance cannot be defended by
American will alone. But there is absolutely no cau~e for panic:, certainly not
panic over American strategic weakness.
I recognize that many of my fellow Americans do not share this generally
confident view of the condition and prospects of the strategic balance. Their
arguments, if I understand them correctly, turn on their estimate that the
admittedly massive and continuing increa~e in Soviet ~trategic nuclear strength -
especially in the number and accuracy of the large-yield warhead.~ carried by
Soviet ICBMs - could tempt the Soviet Union into a policy of active pre%ure
against the U.S. and its friends. My disagreement with this estimate does not rest
on any optimistic assessment of Soviet ambitions, or any complacent view of the
general Soviet military build-up. I think that both are serious, and that together
they make it likely that the 1980s will be a difficult and dangerous decade. Yet I
remain persuaded that it is not new Soviet nuclear weapons that create this
difficulty and danger. At the nuclear level it remains true in 1980 as it has been
for twenty years that the U.S. and the USSR are mutually deterred by the
overwhelming fact that any large-scale nuclear exchange between them would
have costs to both that enormously outweigh any gains that they could possibly
expect from such a confrontation. This imbalance is so extreme that any action
which carries even a small risk of escalation to a general nuclear exchange must
always seem out of bounds to the leaders of both nations - as long as they are
sane. Any Soviet attack on NATO, as long as the present forces and weapons of
the U.S. remain in place in Europe, must always have this danger in it. No one
can be sure that the conflict would escalate to the limit, but no one can possibly
be sure that it would not. That is enough for stable deterrence, at least a.~ long as
we in the West do not wholly lose our nerve, and why should we?
As Denis Healey has remarked, there is a tendency for our discussions of
nuclear matters to move around and around in the same circle, and at !east for
myself I can claim that the opinions I hold in 1980 are those I have held at
earlier moments of debate. I have believed for many year'- that there has been
nuclear parity between the two superpower~. and I do not believe that this parity
has ever been a threat to the solidarity of NATO. Let me indulge myself in a
quotation of some paragraphs from a lecture I delivered in England almost
eleven years ago:
26
"Another durable element (throughout the history of NATO) is that
the decisive military element in the safety of Western Europe has been
the nuclear strength and commitment of the United States. There is a
highly responsible thread of thought on both sides of the Atlantic
which holds that the safety of the West has never been primarily a
military matter at all - that in this sense NATO itself has been
unnecessary. This line of analysi~ may not be wrong, and both the
men who have pursued it and the notions they have advanced deserve
respectful attention. But still it is a thread of thought too fragile to
bear the weight of continents. It may be that Western Europe would
still be free and peaceful if there were no American nuclear
commitment to Europe. But we dare not take that chance, and still
less does Europe.
"This is a painful conclusion, because what it continues to mean,
twenty-five years after 0-Day, and twenty-four after Hiroshima, is
that the peace of Europe depends on the stable will of Washington,
and that Washington in turn must depend upon a form of strength
whose actual use, as President Kennedy once said, would be a
confession of terrible failure. Much of the most troublesome internal
history of our alliance has turned around the unattractiveness of this
inevitable dependence - a dependence quite as unnatural in its own
way as the division of Germany itself. .. Those in Europe who rely
on American nuclear s!rength have no need to fear an American
sellout. .. Nothing about the changing shape of the strategic arms
race modifies the firmness of the American nuclear commitment to
Europe, and nothing about that commitment requires any American
posture towards strategic missiles which is the least bit different from
what is required in the interest of the Anierkans themselves. It is quite
true that the relative nuclear strength of the two greatest powers is
tending towards parity. There is no secret about that fact. . It is in
the nature of the strategic arms race that over time, if two runners are
determined and willing to spend, their efforts will tend toward parity.
Both the Americans and the Russians are determined and willing to
spend. So in the long run a broad parity is inescapable... Nor does
parity threaten the credibility of the deterrent. It was never the
American "superiority" in nuclear weapons that was decisive in
protecting Europe; it was simply the high probability that any
large~scale use of force against .a NATO country would set loose a
chain of events that would lead to nuclear war... Relative numbers
of weapons have never been decisive in the credibility of the American
deterrent in Europe.
"That deterrent has been made credible, ever since the first Soviet
nuclear explosion, by two quite simple things: first, the American
conviction ... that Lhe safety of Europe runs with our own, and
second, the confirmation of that conviction by the stationing of
wholly persuasive numbers of American men and American nuclear
weapons in Europe."
27
So you see that I can at lea<;t lay daim to the doubtful \irtue of comi:,tency.
And indeed my own belief i~ that the argument I thu\ ~ct fonh in J':i61J i\ even
stronger in 1980 - qrongu for the simple re::N)Il that 11hile the ri~k of
escalation entailed in an~· Sm-ict attack on Europe i~ c~~entially unchanged,
because it ha~ alway~ been intrimically unpredictable, the nature of the
catastrophe that would thcn rc~ult for th<.: So\ict Union has in fact multiplied
over this decade. While it i\ quite true that the expansion of So\·iet 'itrategic
force\ ha'i been ma~-;ivc, it is aho true that thc ~urvi\abk dc~nucti\·e capabilitic~
of American force\ ha\c also multiplied. Nothing i<; more certain than that a
general nuclear war would be e\en more deqructin:, from the standpoint of the
Soviet government, than it would han? been in the 'iixtic<; or the fiftie\ or the
forties. The men in the Kremlin have more to lo\e than ever. and they are not
going to risk it all by ra'ih attack on our Alliance.
A special effort has gone forward over the last year in the field of theater
nuclear modernization. I think that effort make'i seme mainly becau~e sensible
Europeans want it, not because it is indispensib!e from a purely American
standpoint. I cannot myself believe that ground-launched cruise mis~ik~ and
better Pershings in Europe are needed to ease American fear~. But \'.hat sensib!e
Europeans think needed in thi~ field ~hould never be trivial to•Amerkam, and if
such weapons help to solidify the confidence of Europe they \\ill be well worth
their cost. If they can help w persuade the Soviet government thai it\ one-~ided
theater overarmament has been provocative and therefore .<.elfdefeating, ~o much
the better. But 1 do not my~elf believe that they are needed to guarantee our own
American engagement. I think that engagement will be firm with or \\ithout suth
new weapons. The American hand that could commit the new Per~hing-' againq
any enemy already controls the action of the submarine\ as~ignc-d to NATO. For
an American it i.~ not at all clear that one decision would ever be ea~ier than the
other. Bur if Europeans think differently, I respect the difference, a~ I aho
respect the energy and skill ~hown by Americam in office in supporting \\hat has
now become a common enterprise.
There is an inescapable difficulty here. The need is for a form of deployment
which will meet legitimate and serious European concern~. When \\hat i.<, at <;take
is the deployment of weapons under American control, there is an inescapable
requirement for American leadership in the proces) of analysis and decision.
Thus it can readily appear that what is being proposed is American in origin and
that European consent is required in deference to American nuclear leadership.
The possibilities of misunderstanding and even recrimination are obviou~. Indeed
it is far from easy for the American officials engaged in thi~ process to keep it
dearly in mind that their role is not to decide the matter for Europcam, but
rather to support an honest European decision. And at a certain point. both
naturally and properly, what begins as an effon to respond to a European
concern becomes transmuted into a matter of mutual trust and common cau~e.
That is where I think we are today, both with respect to the plan for theatre
modernization and in respect to our shared readiness for serious negotiation on
this whole question with the USSR whenever it is ready.
28
The right size and shape of future American defense budgets will be hotly
debated. My own view is strong: we have not done enough for some ten years
now, and we must now do more. I have no quarrel with the general level of
improvement signaled by the Administration early this year - an increase of 4-5
per cent a year in real terms over the next five years. I think these increases will
have wide public support and that attacks on this essentially modest increase in
defense spending will not be persuasive, since even after such an effort our
defense spending will be a much smaller pan of our gross national product than
we spent routinely in the 1950's and 1960's when we were much less rich.
As I have already suggested, most of what needs doing is not in the
much-debated field of nuclear weapons. The neutron bomb. to pick one item that
has caused some discus.~ion, is very nearly an irrelevance, compared to good
transport and better one-man weapom. We need ships and aircraft that are
numerous and serviceable, but we do not need to encourage ourselves or our
experts in the false belief that technological sophistication can take the place of
well-trained men. Indeed more good men, and more effective ways to get and
keep them, may be the most serious of all our defense requirements.
IV
To speak of SALT in the~e grim days may seem strange. But the SALT process
is at the heart of what b truly common cause between us and the Soviet Union.
Nothing in the invasion of Afghani.~tan, brutal and cynical a.~ it is, reduces the
importance of that common cause. Because we are a people often uneasy with
apparent contradictions, it has been necessary to delay the Senate debate on
SALT II. Because our election years are overburdened with divisive oratory and
senatorial struggles for survival, it is also right not to force the issue this year.
But a strong renewal of the SALT proce~s should be most urgent business in
\981, even- perhaps especially- if the offense of Afghanistan is not undone.
The contradiction here between "confrontation" and "cooperation" is apparent,
not real; we must get through the appearances to the reality, and I believe we
can.
The SALT II Treaty as such may or may not wrvive for a new debate and
decision in \981; I myself very much hope it will, and I do not think it
impossible to work out the few modest adjustments that the passage of time
might require. But the SALT process is something much larger and deeper than
any one document, and it is the process that needs early renewal. Properly
construed that process includes not only the questions treated explicitly in SALT
documents, but a great deal more that is enormously valuable to both the U.S.
and the Soviet Union in their shared responsibility for keeping themselves and all
the world well clear of general nuclear war.
In this connection let me say that there is one complaint currently fashionable
among some Americans that does not impress me: that a situation may be
developing in which we are expected to handle deterrence while Europeans take
care of detente. Detente, of course, is a slippery word (in this respect quite unlike
the language from which it comes), but in its most modest and yet most serious
29
meaning - the maintenance of a level of mutual understanding that can
minimize the risk or war - the necessary first role in the \Vcstern share of
detente belongs inevitably !0 the U.S. If there is not detente, in this quite basic
sense, between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, there will be no detente for
anyone. It is true that in other meanings of the word others have a greater stake
than we. This is true at the level of rhetoric for Pari~. at the level of human
relations for Bonn, and at the level~ of domestic politics and of commerce for
both. But at the level of the basic diplomatic relations that can help to keep the
general peace we have an absolutely inescapably primary role, and it is in
everyone's interest that we should play it energetically. For this rea\on it is
disturbing that one consequence of the invasion of Afghanistan has been a
disruption of the lines of serious communication between ~Ioscow and
Washington. It is not entirely dear by whose choice this has happened, and it is
unlikely that either capital is 5olely respon,ible. But as one American citizen I
believe that the restoration of such communication i~ now urgent, both in our
own interest and in the wider interest of the We~tern nation~. There i~ no
inconsistency between the restoration of such serious diplomatic communication
and the maintenance of a persistent and ~mtained oppo~ition to the aggression in
Afghanistan. Indeed my own impression is that the public temper of both
Americans and Europeans, after the firq heat of undcr~tandable emotional
outrage, will be more resolute in such a ncce~sary per~istence in opposition to
Soviet expansionism if the lines of communi(ation between Mmcm~ and
Washington are known to be open and active.
v
In framing and executing effective policies toward the Persian Gulf r<"gion after
the revolution in Iran and the invasion of Afghanistan, both the U.S. and the
major European nations still have a great deal to do, if only because we have all
had some catching up to do. Thus Mr. Carter's solemn warning again~t assault
from outside the region only confirms a reality that has been evident to careful
observers for a long time: that it is indeed a vital intere\t of the U.S., as of
Europe and Japan, that the Persian Gulf region should not fall under Soviet
control, and that at the upper limits of power only tl1e U.S. can hold the ring
against any direc! Soviet threat. Somtthing very like this was once called the
Eisenhower Doctrine, and while such doctrines quite understandably do not
evoke immediate cheers from people who hope not to be fought over by
superpowers, there is nothing to be gained by a silence that might tempt a test. If
the danger is real it makes sense to warn against it; if it is not, the warning does
no great harm.
What remains incomplete, however, is our own American understanding of the
forces that both justify and limit this American declaration. It is justified not by
American dependence on foreign oil, but by American dependence on the safety
and well-being of Europe and Japan. Less than 15 per cent of all the oil
consumed in the U.S. comes from the Persian Gulf- the corresponding figure
for Europe is about 55 per cent and for Japan about 75 per cent - and in each
30
case the role of oil in the whole energy economy is larger than it is with us. So if
it were rleative dependence that determined these matters, it would be for Europe
and Japan to protect the Persian Gulf region from outside threats. They do not
do so because against the direc! Soviet danger !hey cannot. By the ineluctable
division of labor that is caused by vast differences in ultimate strategic strength,
the role of balancing the Soviet Union falls to the U.S.
Thus the deepest interest of the U.S. in the Persian Gulf region runs through
Europe and Japan. Thi~ indirect but truly vital interest has been explained in
thoughtful speeches to councils on foreign relations by Secretary Vance and
Secretary Brown, but it has not been explained to the broader American public
by anyone, or to anyone outside the government by the President himself. So it is
not yet dear, to put it gently, that the American people fully understand why it is
that their existing and wholly traditional acceptance of the special strategic
obligation to Europe and Japan carries with it, inescapably, the obligation to
play counterweight to the threat of Soviet armed assault on the Persian Gulf.
Nor is it dear that our people, or even the leaders of our goverriment, are
aware of the great difference between this limited but necessary obligation of
strategic deterrence and an adequate overall respome to the common dangers in
the area. In responding to these broader dangers there is very little the U.S. can
do alone, and not much that it can do merely by military deployments.
My own belief is that the most important and constructive opportunities before
my own country are the preparation and execution of two changes in existing
policy, one political and one economic. Each of them is justified on its own
merits and each is also a necessary first step toward a more effective relation with
both producing and consuming countries. The political. change is toward a more
serious exposition and application of our conviction about the problem of
occupied Arab lands in the West Bank and Gaza. The economic change is the
development and execution of a much stronger energy policy - conspicuously
including much heavier constraint on the consumption of ga~oline. I am very far
from believing that either of these changes is easy, or that both of them together
would resolve all the difficulties and differences that are now a part of our
relations with the varied states of the Persian Gulf region. It is one thing to do
what is right by our own standards, and quite anmher to accept the judgment of
others as to either our own basic energy requirement, or our deep and abiding
commitment to the security of Israel. But to put the matter on no higher level,
umil we have done what our own best judgment requires in these two cases, we
shall not be well placed for the conduct of effective discussions either with our
allies or with our friends among the major suppliers.
Of course one object in such a reframing of our own posture must be the
pursuit of better understanding with others. The members of the Alliance, along
with others, have a deep common interest in the security of oil supplies from the
Persian Gulf. But that common interest does not of itself provide a common
frame of discourse, and still less a guide to common action. The Alliance itself,
as we all know, is not self-executing when it comes to the determination of
specific assignments or the acceptance of specific responsibilities. Necessarily it
will be even harder outside the geographical area defined by the Treaty, and there
31
are excellent arguments against any organized and homogenized effort. Our
special capabilities and our panicular day·to-day concerns are different, and
there is as liule persuasivene~s in the notion of a parade led by Washington as
there is in the suggestion that somehow there can be a new triangular harmony
established by Europe, the Middle East, and Africa. We are concerned here not
with paper sy~tems but with the development of a process in which we do not
pretend that we can attack the problem by attacking each other.
This may not be the place, and I am most ~urely not the man, for a detailed
discussion of the ways in which the major nations of the Alliance, and perhaps
also the Alliance as a whole, might play varied and comtructive but mutually
reinforcing roles in the development of their policies toward the natiom of the
Persian Gulf, and more broadly of the Middle East. I my~elf doubt that any
\arge·scale general common plan is either practicable or desirable, at lea~t in the
near future. None of us should forget that a fundamental requirement in any
effective policy or set of policies is that it should re~pect the fierce devotion to
their own independence that characterizes even the most threatened of the major
supplying Arab states - and Iran as well, for that matter. Thus it is predictable
that any public Western efrort at a gang·up would be self-defeating. At the same
rime it is absurd that consumers should continue w remain fragmemed and
enfeebled while suppliers continue to pre~s for advantages that now begin to
threaten - I think for the first time - to go beyond what i~ justified by real
scarcity and real alternative co.~ts.
But all I really feel competent to say on this ~object i~ that there is no other
topic which more urgently requires a determined effort at a most serious and
responsible proce~~ of communication among all the governments concerned,
exporters and importers alike. The urgency of such communication should
override lesser priorities, and since I am speaking as an American I will say only
that in my view the American government should be willing to talk with every
other government on the terms which that government igeJf prefers - privately
and informally, publicly and conspicuou~ly, in ~mall groups or in large, in terms
of assured supply, of a~sured real return, of risk·sharing agaimt the
unpredictable. The only general rule that 5hould govern these di5<:U5sions, I
think, is that we should give no assurances to anyone, on any term~. thm would
limit our ability to take out our own insurance, as, for example, by the timely
and energetic execution of our Jong·a5serted intention to establish and maintain
substantial emergency oil reserves. I make this exception both becau~e it is timely
and because I would equally re~pect the efforts of other con~umers to strengthen
their own access to new and old sources of supply. Every new supply line that is
opened, and every old one that is reinforced, is good for the overall effort, which
is why, to change the subject only a little, it makes sense to sell good drilling
equipment to the Soviet Union, even - especially - after Afghanistan.
In summary: extended conversation with all; reasonable cooperation with those
who are prepared to share it; privacy for thow who prefer it - and in the end
the same independence of judgment for ourselves that we are prepared to respect
in others. It is a very general description of a very general state of mind, but I
hope it may offer some useful guidance to ways of thinking not noticeably wor~e
than those that now prevail.
32
VI
I have now argued that we understand and can fulfill our basic engagement to
Europe. I have argued the case for particular ways and means of doing our part
of the job in four different fields. Before I stop let me offer a very few thoughts
on how Americans in the 1980's should think about the role of Europeans.
First, I know of no reason for Americam to regret that the relative strength of
European countries, at al! levels other than that of large-scale strategic strength,
has grown and is likely to grow further. We should be particularly happy at the
prospect that new dangers in the Persian Gulf may gradually bring a reversal of
the general political passivity which has governed European relations to the world
east of Suez through most of the years since 1956. Nor should we expect that
their growing relative economic strength and their new political awareness will
make their views or actions identical with our own. No two of them indeed will
do things in exactly the same way. But should we not expect and even welcome
that variety, if only because we surely cannot bring it to an end? It is not
perversity but history that gives events in Afghanistan one resonance in London
and quite another in Paris. Yet there can be advantage for all in such special
relations as those between France and Iraq, even while differences among us over
sensitive questions of the transfer of nuclear technology must be expected to
continue (though perhaps with some slow increase in mutual understanding). And
as for Great Britain, we have the recent triumph of British diplomacy in
Rhodesia to remind us that a newly active British voice can only be welcome,
from the American standpoint, all around the Indian Ocean.
But the most important special case of all remains that of the Federal
Republic; no other country in the Alliance is so exposed to the East; no other
bears the triple burden of a national division that gives special meaning to
detente, a complete nuclear dependence whose weight is softened but not
eliminated by fundamental political sympathy with Washington, and an economic
strength that is subject to some measure of progressive taxation for the defense
of the Alliance. So there is no country whose leaders deserve a more careful
hearing in the West, and none with a better claim to know exactly what the
Americans think they are doing. And while the German role outside Europe, and
especially in the Middle East, must be primarily economic, the kind of economic
action that is open to the Federal Republic is just the kind that can have major
meaning in political and even strategic terms.
So the right course for Americans is to try to conduct ourselves in ways which
take account of, and even encourage, the particular activities which are preferred
by our friends for their own reasons. Obviously there will always be
disagreements, but our own purpose should be to avoid them wherever we can. It
really is not in our interest to waste our influence in efforts of persuasion that
are bound to break down on deeply different real attitudes: this is why it makes
more sense to discuss the Moscow Olympics - an issue that can unite us - than
technology transfer, where our differences are genuine, long-standing, and deep.
An alliance that respects its own diversities conserves it strength, and sometimes
also can surmount apparent contradiction.
33
From such a posture an American can ask in return for some understanding of
our own democratic peculiarities. One of them is that we overdo our elections.
Another is that we are impatient. A third is that in day-to-day affairs we are
sometimes undisciplined. Elections, impatience, and indiscipline can be found in
every four-year period of our history, since 1944. But every four-year period over
those same thirty-six years also shows the persistence in our partnership with
Europe, and, at the upper limits of danger, a sound combination of
determination and discretion. We may not be a perfect al!y, but in our
weight-dass we are much the best available. We repay understanding and even
criticism. It is true that we are in a time of economic trouble, but what is most
significant about our present mood is that it carries with it no weakening of our
national determination to do our share in the political and military affairs of the
Alliance. We have met this test in the past and I believe we will in the future, for
as long as we do not come to doubt our welcome.
• •
•
DISCUSSION
A. Iran (It should be noted that this conference took place the week before
the failed U.S. attempt to free the hostages in Teheran.) Discussion of this
subject was dominated by reactions to President Carter's call for alliance
solidarity on the issue of the American hostages - in particular, for support of
economic sanctions aimed at securing their release.
To begin with, most participants agreed that this was not just a matter between
the U.S. and Iran. Not only were humanitarian considerations and political
loyalties involved, but international legal principles and centuries of diplomatic
pracrice were at stake. As one International speaker put it, it could not possibly
be in the strategic interest of the West as a whole for the U.S. to be seen - by
the Russians, the Saudi Arabians and others- standing alone in its humiliation.
A German said that what had happened to the Americans could happen to any
other country, and called for a "joint reaction against this barbaric act." An
International speaker thought that Europeans - for the sake of their own
dignity, and not just to be "good allies" - ought to join in acting against this
violation of international law. The author of the French working pc:.per regretted
that there had not been an immediate European reaction as soon as the hostages
had been seized, at least in words. "The longer you refrain from showing
solidarity in words, the more you have to show it in action."
Two other Frenchmen took a somewhat different view. One professed
astonishment that what he saw as an essentially bilateral problem between Iran
and the U.S. had been distorted and inflated into a much larger problem. Real
solidarity had to begin, he argued, with a recognition of what was realistically
possible. It might be true that legal principles were involved, but for the
34
Americans to insist on solidarity overlooked Europe'~ dependence on Iranian oil.
This psychological error was pushing many Europeans toward neutralism.
A compatriot remarked that, while in the last analysi~ we were all in the same
boat, in the shorter run Europe was much more sensitive than the U.S. to
developments around the Persian Gulf. The closer one was to danger, the more
he had to seek a modus vivendi. If Iran were to fall into the Soviet sphere,
Europe would have to manage somehow. This was the backdrop against which
many Frenchmen today - including some considered pro-American and
pro-Atlantic- were tending toward neutralism. The worq outcome in their view
would be to have followed an American policy which failed. To illu~tratc the
point that emotional arguments were playing too preponderant a role in the
hostage question, the speaker said that a Japanese newspaper had asked
rhetorically whether the U.S. would be prepared to sacrifice important economic
interests of its own for the sake of fifty Japanese hostages. Finally, he quoted
King Hassan of Morocco as having asked whether it was a question of saving
fifty hostages, or of saving America. If it were the latter, one would have to be
prepared for the sacrifice of the hostages. America had to recover its freedom of
action, even if this would cost it dearly.
The growing sense of frustration and humiliation in the U.S. was described by
one American speaker, who was supported by others. No issue in recent times
had so engaged the emotions of the American people as the fate of the hostages;
it was becoming an almost obsessive aspect of life in the U.S. Perhaps the
President's course of patience had been the right one, but people were feeling so
outraged and dishonored that stronger action might become politically
imperative. Through all of this, many Americans felt that they were not getting
the support to which they were entitled from their "reductant allies".
Looking at this from another angle, a German wondered whether the
Americans were not tending to take out their frustrations about Iran on their
European friends, as well as on the Russians. The analogy now dominant in
American discussion was that of the appeasement of 1938, whereas the European
mood was to beware of slithering into an unwanted war unawares, as the world
had done in 1914. The present situation had made the dialogue between the
superpowers more important than ever, the speaker said. The U.S. should not
expect the Europeans to accede to all the demands that came out of Washington.
In the Iranian case, for example, they might reject the idea of a naval blockade
or a breach of diplomatic relations, but support some form of economic
sanctions.
This led into a discussion of the probable effect of economic sanctions. A
number of participants expressed strong reservations on this subject, citing
historical precedents. During the Ethiopian war of the thirties, sanctions against
Mussolini had served to strengthen his hand, forcing even his opponents to side
with him. Economic sanctions against Rhodesia had been somewhat
counterproductive. (An American was not sure that they had really been effective
since they had forced the British to repeal the Stamp Act in 1766.)
Other Americans feared that economic sanctions would not only not lead to
the release of the hostages, but might even invite reprisals against them.
35
Furthermore, by immediately reducing the living standard<> of the Iranian people,
sanctions would play into the hands of the Ayatollah Khomcini, providing proof
of the American tactics he had been warning about. \tloreovcr, sanctions would
strengthen the Soviet capacity for intervention and subversion. If the West
sharply reduced Iranian imports - either through an arrangement by major
trading partners or a naval blockade or mining of harbors - the Russians could
be expected to try to make up the shortfall, by an airlift or land shipments across
Iran's northern border. This might not have a big material effect (Iran's
population was nearly twenty times what West Berlin's had been), but the
propaganda value for the Soviets would be considerable. Reduction of exports-
mainly oil - would work a greater hardship on Europeans than Americans.
If economic sanctions succeeded, they might lead to the collapse of the current
regime, the disintegration of Iran as a state, and an invmion from neighboring
countries.
A German participant was convinced that sanctions would not lead to the
liberation of the hostages so long as Iran lacked the normal organs of
government, including a respomible decision-making center. The pain and
suffering of economic deprivation would be felt by those who v.ere powerless to
do anything about the problem. And the more effective they were, the more
likely they would be to push Iran into the orbit of the Soviet Union and other
East European countries.
The greatest danger, though, would come if economic ::.anctiom did not work.
What would we do next? Would there not be intense prc~surc on the American
government to resort to military measures, with the accompanying risk of
interruption of Persian Gulf oil movements, extensive armed conflict 111 the
region, and a direct military confrontation between the superpowers?
Despite al! these misgivings, the ~peaker ~aid that the government of the
Federal Republic was prepared, a~ an expre<,sion of solidarity, to ~upport the
U.S. by participating in economic sanctions. All that the Germans a~ked, he ~aid,
was that their judgment that sanctions were not sensible \\Ou!d be carefully
weighed by the Americans. He said that he spoke \vith a great sense of personal
sympathy for the plight of the Americans, hadng been invol\led himself tv.o
years previously in negotiations with a criminal terrorist group which had held
some 90 people hostage for over six weeks. In that case, many "very exotic
solutions" had been considered, and leaders of the major political factions had
been informed and consulted continuously. Comequently, no possibilities had
been overlooked, and nobody in public life had been able to que~tion what the
executive was doing. Based on that humiliating experience, the speaker was able
to understand the emotional frustrations of individual Americans, and he had
great admiration for the ~elf-di~cipline and caution with which the U.S.
administration was behaving under political pressure.
Other Germans, who were equally skeptical about chances for success,
remarked that nonetheless sanctions against Iran would be relatively ea~y to
control and that they would at least buy time. One speaker wondered to whom in
Teheran we could address our common prote~t. and asked ju~t what those who
were against economic sanctions would propose in their place.
36
An answer to this was offered by an American participant, who was also
dubious about economic and military measures, but who advocated the
diplomatic isolation of the Iranian regime. He suggested that the hostage crisis be
taken out of the bilateral mood of an Iranian-American confrontation; having as
one of the adversarie~ the "imperialist, oppressive" U.S. just played into the
hands of Khomeini and the Soviets. Instead, it would be appropriate for the
Europeans to take an initiative by announcing to the Iranian government, in
effect; "Since you have shown total diHegard for the sanctity of embassies,
established now for ~orne 500 years, we can no longer afford to maintain a
diplomatic mission in Iran, with all the risks which that entails. Accordingly,
until such time as the hostages are released the European governments will
withdraw their embassie~ from Teheran and, on a reciprocal basis, send home the
diplomatic representatives of Iran in Europe."
This would be a punishment to fit the crime, and the Ayatollah would have a
hard time making propaganda out of a measure which originated with
Europeans, not Americans, and was not aimed at the well-being of the Iranian
people. Nevertheless, it would be bound to have an effect on the Iranian
population.
This proposal received support from a number of participants. A fellow
American was reminded of the success of another European initiative - the
Nuclear Planning Group - and thought that this new "exercise in agreement,
rather than disagreement" might have considerable impact on even the Ayatollah
Khomeini. A Briton regretted that Europeans had not taken such collective action
months previously, when it had been evident that Iran had put itself beyond the
pale of civilized countries. Moreover, he added, such political isolation might
now dissuade President Caner from taking more drastic action under political
pressure. An International speaker was worried, too, about the prospect of
military sanctions and hoped that there was still time to prevent them.
Two Germans registered their opposition to the political isolation of Iran, and
an Italian likened it to "a man's cutting off hi.> manly attribute~ to spite his
wife." It would mean, he explained, breaking off all communication with the
person you want to talk to, while allowing your adver~arie~ to have free access to
him. Both economic sanctions and political isolation had been suggested as the
only means to deal with an irrational government moved by crowd emotion. At
the same time, one expected a rational reaction from the irrational, and
sometimes demented, leader of that government, which wa<, a vain hope.
The speaker ventured to guess that Lorenzo di Medici would have ~ettled this
maTter by giving the Russians a free hand in Afghanistan in exchange for a free
American hand in Iran. Some of our fundamental difficulties today lay inside us
- our noble, respectable incapacity to do things to people who were ~till, in
essence, living in those earlier times.
One American welcomed the political i~olation proposal, but characterized it as
a "one-shot solution," which did not go very far in meeting long-term problem~.
A compatriot agreed that we would be confronting for some time in Iran a major
revolutionary upheaval whme end we could not foresee, which might lead to the
ethnic division of Iran and a greater opportunity for the USSR to usc that
37
division, along with other factors, to increase their influence. The radicals in the
Khomeini regime needed a foreign scapegoat, and the hostages were filling that
need. Instead of completely isolating Iran politically, would it not be wiser to
devise some plan among us whereby - even if the U.S. could not do so
Europeans could maintain contact with moderate elements inside Iran?
A Luxembourg speaker tended to favor the political isolation of Iran, but he
predicted that political action taken by Europeans would not necessarily be along
lines requested by the Americans, who should not expect to be blindly followed.
In solving problems like the Iranian crisis, we should rely more on the advice of
traditional diplomatists. Above all, we should seek solutions together, not alone;
there were potential hostages in all our countries, and our actions would set
important precedents.
A Portuguese participant said that his country had made it clear that the
Azores would be available to the U.S. as a base if needed in the liberation of the
hostages. At the same time, the Portuguese were made uneasy by the memory of
1973, when a similarly helpful attitude had resulted in their being cut off from oil
supplies and left with little support or help. They would hope not to be put in
such a spot again.
An American participant intervened to say that his government had arrived at
some "hard-earned modesty" on the subject of the hostages. No one could say
with any certainty what would or would not bring about their release, and we all
had to approach the question with humility. It would take some time to
determine what effect the sanctions would have. The U.S. had tried a variety of
approaches, loosely characterized as "diplomatic," through a number of
channels. The President was now proposing an intensification of peaceful
measures without foreclosing other diplomatic approaches or sterner measures.
The speaker did not. share the fear that a failure of the sanctions to produce
some very rapid result would lead to further intensification or indeed to military
measures. We should nevertheless be thinking about what to do if the sanctions
did not work.
An International speaker reported that there had been full and active
consultation about Iran (as we!! as Afghanistan) within the North Atlantic
Council and the Defense Planning Committee. Very recently a message had
arrived from the administration in Washington detailing the measures that the
U.S. might be compelled to take in the hostage crisis, and discussing in a pmitive
way how the alliance might react.
Finally, an American participant argued that what was going on in Teheran
was not in the interest of any of us. After months of patience, it was time to
apply not only political pressure but economic sanctions. We should not get
sidetracked on an analysis of how effective economic sanctions would be. Simply
agreeing to them would be a significant political act, demonstrating that our
countries were prepared to risk certain concrete interests. Several speakers had
counseled against a tough stance, for fear of pushing Iran into the Soviet camp.
But that was a recipe for paralysis; a great power had to pay a price when its
citizens were held illegally month after month, and this had important
implications for the alliance.
38
Beneath all the discussion here lay the fundamental question of whether the
allies shared a common analysis of the international situation. If the Europeans
saw the Iranian crisis as essentially an American problem, and were only going
along to show their "solidarity," then we had a much more serious problem in
the alliance than we realized. The same was true of Afghanistan.
B. Afghanistan. A British participant likened the three major current
international crises to "three plays being performed by different actors on the
same stage at the same time," which had led to substantial intellectual confusion:
the Afghanistan play, the Iranian play and the Arab-Israeli play. While the most
dramatic of these was the hostage play - which one hoped would be only one
act - the Afghanistan play was perhaps more important in the long run,
pointing up the need for an effective counter to Soviet pressure, not as a means
of punishing the Russians, but of deterring them.
The governing party in Britain - before being elected - had completed and
published an analysis of Soviet policy which had prepared them to issue, after the
Afghanistan invasion, a reaction which was sharper than either their French or
German allies. (It might have ended up being the only sharp reaction, had
President Caner not undergone his own change of feeling about Russian
intentions.) In any case, this harsh British reaction was the resuh of their own
assessment of the situation, and represented in no way an attempt to renew their
old "special relationship" with the U.S., as the author of the French working
paper had suggested.
One reason most of the allies had not better prepared to react to the Russian
invasion of Afghanistan, according to an International speaker, was that they
had heard "wolf!" cried too often before. Nevertheless, the U.S. government
had warned its allies as early as last November that Soviet troops were massing
on the northern frontier of Afghanistan, a presage of possible intervention. All
the allies were menaced in the same way by this escalation of Soviet military
power, but they did not all see the danger in the same way, so that there was no
consensus about how we should react. The U.S., though, had unequivocally
warned the Soviets that any new movement toward the oil fields would mean
war. If the European powers had given the ~arne sort of warning to Germany
after Munich, World War II might have been avoided. (A German speaker
differed with that, saying that no protest would have stopped Hitler, who had
"wanted his war.")
Another German speaker, who was seconded by a Luxemburger, wondered
whether Afghanistan was part of a relentless geopolitical advance of the Soviets,
or rather a specific response to a specific problem on their southern border - a
passing phenomenon. In either case, the problem of Afghanistan would not be
solved by moving the Europeans into the firing line. That \vould jeopardize all
the palpable gains of detente, which had brought more room for dissidence and
more human contacts between the two Germanys.
The author of the French working paper took exception to the general
European preoccupation with analyLing at length why the Russiam had
intervened in Afghanistan. To him, it had been simply to avoid the
contamination of Islam, as they had intervened in Czechoslavakia to avoid the
39
contamination of liberty. One could say that they had acted to protect their
internal empire- but none of this was important to the que~tion of whether and
how we should react.
On this point, an American speaker said that the basic questions about Soviet
motives in Afghanistan should be asked in connection with their part in the coup
d'etat which had brought a Communist regime into power there in April 1978.
The Soviets had been preparing for that opportunity for many years, having
begun a training and advisory program in the 1950's which enabled them to
organize their own cadres within the Afghan armed forces. As early as the
1960's, they had organized Communist political groups inside the country, and in
1977 they had forced a merger between the two principal feuding groups. Given
their close ties to Taraki and Karma!, it was inconceivable that the Soviets had
not had advance knowledge of the coup of April 1978.
The key question was why they had found it necessary at that time to destroy a
nonaligned and independent government which fully protected their interests and
posed no threat to them. The speaker's conclusion was that this had been an act
of imperialism, culminating !50 years of advance into central Asia. He further
believed that neither the Americans nor the Europeans had possessed the political
or military assets to forestal! that coup.
After April 1978, the old split within the Afghan Communist movement had
re-emerged, and insurgents had begun to operate in the fall and winter of
1978-79. In September 1979, Taraki had been overthrown by Amin, who had
proved to be a less dependable puppet. The USSR had then invaded in order to
protect "their revolution," a clear example of the operation of the Brezhnev
Doctrine.
The Russians' entrenchment in Afghanistan offered them various advantages.
Through overlapping· tribal groups in Iran and Pakistan, they had new
opportunities for infiltration and subversion in those countries. By contending
that history was on their side, they also could hope to intimidate other states,
especially in the Gulf area. This participant disagreed with the suggestion of the
previous speaker that the Soviet invasion had resulted from their own fear that
the Islamic revolution might spread into their southern regions, although the
growth of the relative size of the centra! Asian population within the USSR was
indeed a cause for concern in Moscow.
We should not base any of our policies on wishful thinking that the Soviets
could be dislodged by military means. The Afghan insurgents lacked firepower
and outside support, and no groups were openly complaining in the Soviet Union
about Russian casualties. Nor should we hold out much hope for neutralization
of the country. Furthermore, it was unrealistic to expect the Soviets to leave
voluntarily, as anyone who had been associated with their regime would be
summarily dispatched by the Afghans after their departure.
Unfortunately, the Western response to the coup of April 1978 had been
almost nonexistent. And our neglect had not even been "benign." The most
important thing we could have done was to restore close ties and working
relations with Pakistan. Instead - in the name of human rights and nuclear
nonproliferation - we had virtua!ly destroyed the links between the U.S. and
40
Pakistan, cutting off all American assistance to that country in 1979. The shock
of the Soviet invasion had finally made dear the threat to international stability
and to our oil lines.
The speaker concluded that, for the most part, our response to the invasion of
Afghanistan had been appropriate. Although we could not hope to oust the
Soviets militarily, we had to make the point that this kind of transgression
against the international order could not be tolerated, and that we would not
hesitate to take measures to protect our access to the oil of the region. We would
have to keep our military forces "over the horizon", and we could not expect the
Arab states to help us. We should seek to regain Pakistan·~ shaken confidence,
and to supply arms to the Afghan rebels, who would continue to fight as long as
possible. The terrain in Afghanistan was not conducive to effective guerilla
warfare, especially against helicopters, but the rebels' bravery would keep them
going for some time. Above all, our response to what the Soviets had undertaken
would have to be with consistent policies which underlined our interests both in
that region and globally.
A Portuguese participant said that the Afghan invasion had to be condemned
on the basis of international principles. It had changed the geostrategic picture
not only in that region, but worldwide. The question was, what were we going to
do next in response to this Soviet move? The speaker found the Iranian and
Afghan problems to be very different in nature, and he regretted that the
Americans in both cases were "going along the same road, taking similar
mea~ures. ''
The pros and cons of boycot!ing the Olympic Games in Moscow were dealt
with in several interventions. A Briton thought that such action would only be
effective in the context of a wider demonstration, while an International
participant characterized it as a sentimental rather than a strategic reaction. Let
us not make Afghanistan the touchstone of the survival of detente, he said. An
American emphasized that a boycott would be a powerful symbolic protest,
delivered within the Soviet Union in a highly visible and dramatic way. Its
message would not be lost on the Russian people, whether or not it was followed
by other measures.
A German speaker agreed about the symbolic importance of staying away from
the games. Thinking back to "Hitler's Olympics" of 1936, he asked whether the
various countries really had to wait for a lead from the U.S. Olympic Committee
before acting on their own. With all of our talk about human rights, did we not
have the moral strength to adopt a stand'! The German Committee would take its
final decision the following week, but it appeared that three-quarters of the
citizens of the Federal Republic favored a boycott.
Another German predicted that his country was likely to fol!ow the American
lead and boycott the games, although many people doubted this would induce the
Russians to leave Afghanistan, and indeed feared that it might bring reprisals on
dissidents and Jews in the Soviet Union. The Germans in any case could not be
more concerned than they were about the implications of Afghanistan, and
believed that there had to be a Western response. They were prepared to support
economic sanctions in matters of strategic importance, but not if certain
41
countries, or the West as a whole, would be hurt more than the Russians. It had
to be remembered that the Germans had certain treaty obligations with the
USSR, and they wanted to avoid giving the Russians any excuse to break those
treaties. (A compatriot agreed that it was enormously important for the
Germans, living in a divided nation, to maintain their obligations, and they
would not let themselves be talked into not honoring their agreements.) Most
people in the Federal Republic believed in a combination of incentives and
pressures to get the Russians out of Afghanistan, and in the need for a long-term
strategy to deter further aggression. This would include redressing the military
imbalance, and perhaps the single most important and credible signal America
could give the Russians in the wake of Afghanistan would be the reintroduction
of Selective Service in the U.S.
' A Greek speaker advocated both a boycott of the Moscow games and a limit
on the growth of Western credits to the USSR.
According to a German participant, the French working paper had
overemphasized the consequences of economic sanctions on the Soviet Union,
and the possibilities of Russian retaliation. Germany's trade with the Eastern
bloc, for instance, amounted to little more than seven per cent of its total foreign
trade, and the value of high technology exports to the East had been exaggerated.
Furthermore, an embargo could be easily bypassed via neutral or socialist
countries, and the Soviets could take counter measures within their own orbit.
Perhaps the strongest argument against economic sanctions was that relations
among the allies were bound to suffer as they wrangled month after month about
the framework and its details.
Several participants commented on the sugge~tion by the author of the French
working paper that the fate of the people of EJ Salvador, under a regime
supported by the U.S., was probably not much better than that of the Afghans.
One American remarked ironica!ly that he was "fascinated by visions of 80,000
U.S. troops in El Salvador," while another called the comparison "inaccurate,
outrageous . not helpful or productive."
A Swiss participant commented on the difference between the two situations as
observed by the International Red Cross. In Latin America- e.g., El Salvador,
Nicaragua, Guatemala, Argentina, Colombia - the Red Cross was allowed to
visit all political prisoners without the presence of witnesses, to bring letters and
family news both ways, and to give medical care. The prisoners in these countries
were free to register complaint~ on any subject, including the U.S. But it wa~
notable that, while there might be complaints about U.S. political innucnce,
there were no complaints of American military aggression or torture.
In Afghanistan, the Red Cross had not been allowed to visit a 5inglc prisoner,
political or military, and it had been furnished no list of names. In the USSR, it
had not been permitted for the last fifty year5 to visit political prisoners, and
such visits were also forbidden in East Germany and other East bloc countrie~. as
well as North Vietnam. Some access to prisoner<; had recently been granted in
Iran, but not without witnesses. These fact~, which had been publi~hcd in the
IRC's annual report, had to be borne in mind when one was tempted to make
facile comparisons about human right'> conditiom.
42
C. Relations Among the Allies: Communication, Understanding, Leadership.
The crises of Iran and Afghanistan, and our various responses to them, had
inevitably focussed attention on the subject of relations among the a!lies. A
Canadian speaker led off the discussion of this subject by saying that we were
referred to as an "alliance" and the time had come for us to start acting like
one. During these recent crises, there had been no summit meeting of heads of
government of the major partners, nor of their foreign ministers, and no cohesive
position announced by the NATO Council. We lacked the degree of consultation
which had marked a!liance relations in the past, as during the Bertin blockade.
Besides a redefinition of NATO's area of concern, we needed more effective
consultation among the "senior" members of the alliance; the "juniors" would
certainly welcome that. The speaker disagreed with those who feared that a
united alliance front might impair relations with the Soviet Union. The line with
Moscow had to be kept open, but "a clear message should be going down it."
A French participant agreed that our "family crisis" was dramatic.
Divisiveness in the West was much more serious than in the past. Many people
seemed resigned to the fact that the challenges coming upon us had been lost in
advance. This mood was accentuated by the Russians' ostentatiously brutal
attitude, designed to intimidate. Soviet tanks had been gratuitously put before the
cameras of the world, and Georges Marchais, secretary of the French Communist
Party, had called detente "the right that capitalist countries have lObe beaten."
Was it any wonder that there was discord in Europe and a feeling in the U.S.
that the alliance was disintegrating? When the German government declared that
it would choose solidarity with the U.S. in spite of grave misgivings about tactics,
did one not sense considerable underlying bitterness? A German wondered if
there were minimal requirements for transatlantic solidarity, and if there were a
point beyond which solidarity turned into folly. Where exactly was the place of
his own country in all this?
A British participant said that the difficulties many of us were going to face
would arise from complicated local circumstances where East-West relations did
not play a major role. We had a worrisome tendency- often visible in the U.S.
- not to gear on a problem until it was placed in an East-West context, which
was usually artificial. Differences between the U.S. and Europe reflected not only
divergences of interests and of national psychologies, but also of judgment. But
perhaps the greatest bar to improved alliance relations was not insufficient
consultation but structural arrangements in the U.S. - notably the relationship
between the Congress, the President and the diplomats. Many Europeans had
observed that the U.S. tended not to make the best usc of its experienced
diplomats. It would be well advised to concentrate on solving problems as they
arose in various regions, with the help of its diplomats, instead of always seeing
things in terms of the two-power conflict, which was outmoded now with the
emerging importance of Japan, China, the Arab countries and others of the
Third World.
A Frenchman complained about the difficulty of following the U.S., which
changed tactics frequently - often without forewarning - and gave the
impression of having no well-established policy. According to a Luxemburger,
43
this tended to make Europe's "solidarity" with the U.S. merely tactical or
emotional. The divergence of anitudes did not need to concern us; that was
common enough within the European Community, so why should we not expect
it across the sea? But we should each put our analysis of a problem on the table,
discuss the substance of our differences, and hope to arrive at a consensus.
A German participant described the event~ of recent months, a~ well as ~orne
of the interventions at this conference, as being "as peculiar as they are
unusual." The Iranians had taken the American hostages and the Soviets had
oppressed the Afghans. Europeans had expressed regret at this, then turned back
to their daily business, including criticism of the Americans. Perhaps criticism of
the Carter administration was justified in many ways, but it had to be admitted
that many Europeans would have criticized any U.S. administration, no matter
what its policies; it was simply a pretext for not taking any action themselves.
The national egoism which Europeans had so clearly displayed in recent months
would not help us to find our way back to the spirit of the alliance and to do the
courageous things which had to be done.
Another German speaker called for a concerted Western response to the
constellation of four crises: Iran, Afghanistan, Palestine, and a new arms race if
SALT II were not ratified. These dangers were all interrelated, and it would be
unwise to try to settle some of them without reference to the others. Only on the
basis of close consultation and cooperation could real alliance leadership emerge;
it was no good to try to command it. The leader had to listen to its allies, to be
prepared to talk to them ~everal times about a single is~ue, to put it5elf into their
shoes every day. It was not enough to proclaim leadership occasionally in Sunday
speeches. But the leader's role in the alliance could only be exercised by the U.S.,
which could not be supplanted by another nation or configuration.
The latter conclusion was described as "perhaps too Manichean" by an
International participant. Could not the allie5, all together, facilitate the ta~k of
American leadership, and at the same time do more than they had in the past?
Another International speaker said that the Americans, whose generosity and
unique power had provided the framework for past alliance policy, were
"becoming more like the rest of us." They would no longer be abk to provide
that leadership - no matter what administration was in office - and this
foretold a reformulation of the alliance into a real multilateral affair, with the
other partners, especially the Federal Republic, Britain and France, taking up the
leadership ~lack. If that did not happen, though, we rbked drifting into an
"everyone for himself" policy, which would generate profound frustration on
both sides of the Atlantic. The U.S. would be led to blame its allie~ if America's
unilateral policies did not succeed, and European~ would resent being pushed into
responsibilities for which they were not yet ready. The fumbling of the alliance in
trying to come to grips with Afghanistan and Iran underlined the need to start
meeting the next crisis, having learned something from the last one. In any case,
this transition to shared leader~hip was bound to give us "a rough ride, over
choppy seas."
An American speaker reflected on the role of political leadership, which was,
as he saw it, to explain to the public amid51 the confu~ion of events what the
44
underlying pattern was and what the ba~ic direction of policy ought to be. The
most dangerous course would be to try to register every fluctuation of public
opinion that might arise. The public would not forgive its leaders for producing
catastrophes, even if they were the result of public preference.
The trouble with our discussions - both in the U.S. and among the allies -
was that they were focussed on technical questions, such as the working of
economic sanctions, and not on the fundamental issues of where we were aiming
to go and what we were trying to do. We would have continual difficulties until
we explained those issues to our people in a coherent and clear-cut fashion.
D. Division of Labor. The division of respomibilities between the U.S. and
its European allies had been nicely responsive to immediate postwar conditions,
according to an American speaker, but the reallocation of wealth anendant on
Europe's recovery had not been accompanied by a reallocation of responsibilities.
Several participants said that a new division of labor was now appropriate, but,
as one Briton put it, thi~ would probably mean a change in the thrust of the
alliance. The U.S. would still be the most important nation, but no longer the
dominant one.
An Italian dated the onset of the transition phase to the collapse of the Bretton
Woods system in 1971. Just as the dollar had fallen as the cornerstone of the
monetary system, so American military power had ceased to be convertible into
credible action. This presuppo~ed a new sharing not only of responsibility but
also of labor. America was still the center of power, but as it wa~ a democratic
state, we could never expect to be as quick at decision-making as the Warsaw
Pact.
Various speakers agreed that if the U.S., and possibly Britain, were called on
to deploy military or naval forces outside Europe, the other allies would stand
ready to fill in the gap. But one German participant explained why his country
had to be careful not to do this alone, or to "stick its neck out too far," as he
put it. Germany was a divided nation: 17 million Germans lived in the eastern
part, some two and a half million in Berlin, and hundred~ of thousands in the
Soviet Union, Poland and Rumania. Since the Hehinki conference, 230,000
Germans had been allowed by agreement to leave the East, and to acquire fu!l
human rights in the West. German leaders had been worried that the human
rights campaign might jeopardize the progress that was being made along these
lines. If the Eastern administratiom, which were already very sensitive about the
matter, were to be challenged too openly by the Federal Republic, these
repatriations could be brought to a halt. The delicacy of the situation was not
widely understood among Germany's allies, but it was being played out against a
backdrop of heightened nervousness in the Eastern countries. A recent military
parade in Budapest, for example, had lasted for three hours - an intimidating
display of tanks, rockets and low-flying M!Gs. This speaker asked parenthetically
whether it was appropriate for the U.S. to question the solidarity of its European
allies when it did not even have military conscription. Granted there had to be
more equitible ~haring of the burden, but even American politicians and
journalists were raising the quc~tion of whether the U.S. was really Jiving up to
its defense capabilities without the draft. The author of the American working
45
paper intervened to remark that the U.S. might well have to re-examine its
all-volunteer army policy.
An Italian objected to the term "division of labor," which he said the
Comecon nations used in place of "the market." It suggested that one party did
the deciding, and the others had to do what had been decided. This concept
would not increase the force of the alliance, but just change the rankings.
A Briton, though, judged a fairer division of labor to be a reasonable
American aim, and a "touchstone of an effective and truly Atlantic a!liance." lf
the alliance could not respond as a whole, then those who could should be more
forthcoming.
The author of the French working paper remarked that nothing had changed
on this subject since the first NATO conference in Lisbon in 1952. Suggestions
that the Europeans shoulder a greater share of the burden had invariably been
met with the objection that increased defense spending would weaken their
economies, which would encourage Communism. The truth was that Europeans
did not honestly wish for real European military strength. They recognized that it
could not be achieved unless Germany had nuclear arms, which was politically
out of the question.
A Briton conceded that this might be the habitual European mood, but he
argued that it was the task of politicians to try to change public attitudes. It was
demonstrably false that Europeans could not spend a larger percentage of GNP
on defense without favoring Communi~m. All the European governmenb at the
moment were deliberately depressing living standards "out of theological
devotion to untested economic theories from Chicago," and increased defense
spending - if not at the expense of other public spending - would in fact
reduce the threat of Communism. We could really not go on basing our thinking
on the premise that nobody wanted to see the German defense forces increased.
The speaker was not advocating nuclear weapons for Germany, but simply a
greater European contribution on the conventional side, which would relieve
some of the burden on the U.S.
E. The Current American Mood. A U.S. participant described the mood in
his country today, which he said was marked by much confusion, the absence of
a sense of great crisis, and a reluctance to make important sacrifices - whether
for energy, for defense, or for the hostages in Iran. This was perhaps not
surprising, as the American people were confronted with a series of problems for
which they felt they had no answers, including inflation, oil and Islamic
fundamentalism ("a curve ball thrown by history"). They had got through the
last quarter century fairly well, but the future would not be a projection of the
past, as there were many new elements in the picture.
To judge from the leading presidential candidates, one might say that
Americans were reasonably content, and did not want an activist government.
But their problems were deep and long-term, and could not be solved by passing
them along to the diplomats, as a previous speaker had suggested. The most
important contribution Europeans could make now was to be very much aware
of U.S. politics, and to try to advance their suggestions in a way that would not
antagonize "the sleeping, unknown god of American public opinion."
46
A compatriot agreed with this analysis of U.S. op1mon, but thought
nevertheless that, given proper leadership, the American public could focus on
new things. Most of us tended to forget what an unprecedented step had been
taken by the U.S. in 1949 in signing a treaty of alliance with Europe which called
for its troops to be stationed abroad indefinitely.
A British participant sensed that, if American opinion was muddled, it was the
result of an incoherent U.S. policy over a period of time and could be remedied
quickly by a coherent one. Several participants had suggested an irrevocable shift
away from American leadership in the political and military fields, but the
speaker did not agree. President Carter's incoherence had been unnecessary and
had produced doubt and hesitation in the public mind. The lessons of
Afghanistan and other crises might begin to turn the tide.
An American speaker alluded to the effect on alliance consultations of the
U.S. election campaign (which had become, in the words of another participant,
"as stylized as a Japanese kabuki play"). Apart from some philosophical
patterns, though, the two U.S. parties had no fundamental differences on foreign
policy. The American handling of the Iranian and Afghan crises had not been
influenced in any substantial way by the presidential campaign, and the members
of the alliance were certainly not being asked to support policies created for U.S.
domestic political reasons. The policies might or might not be wise, but they were
being offered on their merits.
Just as Americans were used to disagreements on domestic political issues, so
they did not expect full agreement from their allies. But discord "was not always
welcome in individual cases," and recent policy disputes in the alliance about
Iran and Afghanistan - which Americans thought involved Europe more
intimately than the U.S. - had produced stirrings of isolationism in the U.S.,
which the speaker hoped would subside. In any case, the alliance remained
central to U.S. policy for profound reasons, both strategic and sentimental.
A German participant, who said he had argued about this subject for a decade
with Senator Mansfield, agreed that a revival of isolationism was always a latent
danger in the U.S.
F. The Political Evolution ~~Europe. If America's current mood complicated
alliance relations, so did the growing pains of the European Community. A
Belgian participant felt ill at ease with the ambivalence surrounding talk about
"Europe." True, a certain number of geographic units had banded together, and
international organizations had been formed, but there was no real European
decision-making machinery in operation. This was a constant source of difficulty,
since American public opinion tended to think that the Community, with all its
organs, was in a position to act in a crisis. This was unfortunately not the case,
as a veto process was effectively at work, in violation of the Rome Treaty. One
of the major responsibilities of Europeans now as to set up a rapid
decision-making process. A Luxembourg speaker lent his support to that point.
An International participant regretted that the European Community, as an
entity, had been largely ignored in these discussions. European speakers had not
underlined the importance of the Community, nor had the Americans indicated
that the E.C. might be useful in negotiations to resolve the current crises.
..,
Without greater cmpha~is on Community action, Europe would not be able to do
"the diffio.:u!t things" in either the political or the economic sphere.
A German speaker shared this concern, warning of the dangers that the
Community might break up in bickering over secondary issues, voluminous and
important though they might be.
A British participant described as a completely new development of the past
half-dozen years his country's acceptance of the discipline of European political
cooperation. Britain's first response in any ~ituation now was to wish to consult
and coordinate with its partners in the Community. (This attitude was not always
reciprocated by the others, a fact of which those who criticized British diplomacy
might not be aware.) The speaker believed that the emerging European political
cooperation - although the resultant delays might exasperate the Americans -
was potentially very important. Europeam should build on it and forego the
small political successes which they might achieve if they acted a little faster
alone. The manifestation of this spirit was beginning to bear fruit, as with the
recent program to help Turkey, in which Germany had taken the lead. The
machinery of the two great institutions- the E.C. and NATO- would grind
on, but in the gaps between them problems would continue to be slowly resolved
on a country by country basis.
Concerning Turkey, an International speaker praised the alliance for the
program it had supported to assist that country, but a German participant
remarked frankly that the disparities in commitments given to Turkey by the
various al!ies invited a "ridiculous compari~on". He went on to comment on the
Community's decision to admit Greece. There had been no need to enlarge the
E.C. membership, and this would mean a certain economic burden for all
parties, but it was an important step for Greek security. The same reasoning
applied to Spain and Portugal; their national industries would have a hard time
at first, but in the long run their people would benefit.
A Greek participant ventured to say that the preceding speaker, in his
conception of "helping Greece," was perhaps overlooking the substantial popular
discontent and loss of faith in NATO among the Greek people. There was a
fundamental disharmony which could lead within a year and half to Greece's
departure from NATO. The absence of support now on issues of principle could
bring results which pro-Western Greeks would not want to see.
A Turkish participant said that the next task for his countrymen, along with
building up a healthy economy, was to mend their relations with the Greeks. The
sources of their difficulties must now appear insignificant compared with other
problems in that part of the world. As a Greek participant at this conference had
pointed out, there had not been a single Greek murdered during the recent
political crisis in Turkey. That could be taken as one measure of the lack of real
animosity between the two peoples.
The Turkish speaker praised the remarkable spirit of solidarity behind the
OECD efforts- led by Germany- to provide necessary aid for Turkey, which
had been put in severe financial straits by the foreign exchange crisis produced by
oil price increases and the U.S. arms embargo.
48
G. The Alliance and rhe Third World. The foregoing speaker went on to
discuss the way in which the West, in its relations with the Middle East, had
repeatedly chosen to identify itself with individual governments, kings, princes,
shahs and sheikhs, rather than with nations or peoples. If our intelligence services
had not alerted us to the fragility of those regime~. then we had not been well
served. The only worthy statesmanlike approach in the long run was to identify
ourselves with broader national interests in spite of the temptations of short-run
advantage.
We also tended to bring a double standard to our dealing<; with that pan of the
world, and to employ rather questionable practices to facilitate our relations - a
phenomenon which would shock us if med at home. If we looked the other way
rather than face the issue of corruption, would we not be partly responsible for
the fall of the old structure which we hoped to pre~erve? For the longer run, the
speaker was not pessimistic about the outlook for the Middle East. Tens of
thousands of students from those countries had been, or were being, educated in
the West. If we did not spoil those students, but treated them like our own,
giving them a real sense of the world and a sound education, we were bound to
reap the benefit. They would eventually bring to the management of their
countries' affairs a wiser and more ~ophisticated mentality than would otherwise
have been the case. The combination of a fundamental Islamic faith and an early
exposure to the humanistic values of the West should constitute a strong bulwark
against Communist pressures in the Middle East.
A Greek participant remarked that the working papers had looked at
European-American relations as the center, with Third World problems put in as
addenda because of the crisis in the Persian Gulf area. He was more inclined to
look at the Third World as the center of the alliance's problems. In the post-war
period, the U.S. had placed immediate pre~tige and self-interest second to
considerations of longer term interest. As a result, Europe and Japan had
recovered to become nearly equal partner~ with the U.S., while the Soviets had
been contained in Europe. By the mid-~ixties, then, one could have hoped for
similar acts of statesmanship toward other pans of the world, but by and large
these had not come to pass. There had been some wcce"es - America's
negotiations about the Panama Canal, Britain's about Rhodesia-Zimbabwe,
France's approaches to the Arab world before 1973 - but these were the
exceptions.
The gap in psychological comprehension between the West and the Third
World had been too wide. A few Westerner~ with a long experience of political
subjugation understood, but there were not many of them. Too much stress had
been laid on simple geopolitics. This overlooked the fact that, only when the
internal situation of a country became untenable, wa~ the Soviet Union able to
move in. Difficulties had also been caused by the West's having to defend the
free market concept in the Third World. Political pre'isure~. including
consumerism, had made it easy to cut back on foreign aid. with the result that,
by 1973, we had not succeeded in making the Third World feel a large
community of intere~t with the West. Comcquently we had been puni~hed ever
since then, and our varying re5pon~es to that puni~hment pointed up the
49
differences among us. Even at thi~ late stage, there were certain lessons to be
learned from our experience: (I) It was a mistake to support regimes just because
they were anti-communist; "an internally sound neutral was ten times better than
an unsound ally." (2) The OPEC countries had somehow to be brought into
partnership with the West. (3) Aid should go to needy countries, not just to those
with political appeal. (4) We needed to be concerned with countries for their own
sake.
A Swiss participant felt that the Western countries would be well advised to
include humanitarian considerations in their common global approach to world
problems, and to defend their position with conviction. Otherwise the prisoners
and other victims of turmoil would have to endure suffering without end.
H. The Arab-Israeli Conflict. One of the most dramatic examples of being
concerned with countries for their own sake involved the Arab-Israeli conflict.
While we a!l wished for a secure Israel, we did not all sec equally clearly that the
only way to achieve it was through a relationship between an Israeli and a
Palestinian state. A German said that, just as Israel had a claim 10 wre and
acknowledged borders as a state, so the Palestinians had a claim to
self-determination.
Two Britons, an Italian and an American agreed that any effective
restabilization of borders in the Middle East was inseparable from progress
toward a solution of the Palestinian problem, in which Europe ought to play
some role.
The author of the American working paper spoke of the need for a radical
improvement in the fairness of arrangements and the prospects for citizens on the
West Bank and in the Gaza Strip.
•
• •
An International participant said that he had found the working papers and
the discussion of these political aspects too complacent. We were not taking
seriously enough "the trembling beneath our feet." The main source of our
difficulties within the alliance was the changing power relationship between the
U.S. and Europe, and the ball was in the Europeans' court to organize
themselves better to speak with the Americans.
But European criticism of the U.S. seemed to have become unusually
intemperate; one could not help comparing the mood now with the solidarity
expressed at the time of the Cuban mi~si!c crisis. The speaker suggested that there
was more behind this than simply Europe's desire to be heard, and to take a
bigger share of responsibility. Did the explanation perhaps lie in the fact that all
of us - and particularly the Europeans - had begun to feel like hostages, partly
of the oil-producing countries and panly of the Soviet Union? Had our
50
self-confidence given way to self-doubt, which we were 1rying 10 rationalize by
criticizing our allies? If thi~ was so, we had to make these fears conscious if we
hoped to deal with them.
•
• •
II. SECURITY ASPECT
International Workinx Paper:
"NEW THREATS AND OLD AlLIES:
PROSPECTS FOR THE SECURITY OF EUROPE AND Ai\11-.RICA ..
Nothing in relations between Europe and America changes \'ery much or n•ry
fast. That is nowhere more true than in the realm of security. It is fru~trating for
analysts, who must seek to judge whether the latest !lap i~ a pa~~ing thing or the
portent of real change, and who find it i~ almmt always the former. For citi1ens
on both sides of the Atlantic, of course, it i~ a happy state of affairs. It reflech
stable societies and sellled relations among them rooted in enduring common
interests. It means that pattern~ of tramatlamic security relations persi~t e\en
though the bumbling of government<, wain\ them. NATO at age thirty !nob
much like NATO at twenty, and not much different than at ten. the military
departure of France having made surprisingly little difference.
On their surface, recent events contain hinh of a turning point. NATo·~ recent
decisions on theatre nuclear forces (TNF) are a beginning, not an end to that
issue, and they sugge~t changing patterns of nudear relations b~·tween Europe
and America. Similarly, the taking of American hostage~ by Iranian tl·rrorist~
and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan stand a~ ~tark tc~timony that the moq
probable threats to Western security derive from out~ide, not in~ide Europe.
Afghanistan also marks the definitive end of the period of Ea5t-We~t detente that
began in the early 1970's, even if the shape of what will foliO\\ is not dear.
On second glance, however, recent event~ appear ILl confirm exi~ting patlerns,
not overturn them. NATO decided, in December 1979, to deploy new crui'ie and
ballistic missiles in Europe capable of reaching the Soviet Union. That qep,
politically difficult in Europe, repre<;cnts a reinforcement of, nm a departure
from existing NATO nuclear strategy: the new wcaptm~ will he American, and
the principal rationale for them wa~ that they enhance the link to America',
strategic nuclear deterrent.
Responses to Afghanistan are harder to read at thi~ diqance. hut there, wo,
major change in existing tramatlantic patlern~ is unlikely. European~ will be
called to do more in defense, out'>ide Europe but primarily inside; America will
remain the pre-eminent military guardian of Western interests outside Europe.
The U.S. will want more nexibility in u\ing its European-ha<,cd garri'ions for
purposes beyond Europe, but that will ~top 'ihon of the need to draw down
forces in Europe soon.
Still, it would be unwise to take existing pattern~ a~ immutable. The history of
the last 35 years is littered with "might-have-bcens" 'iugge~ting that security
arrangements could have turned out differently. When in \951, for in~tance, the
U.S. first sent large number'i of troop~ again to Furopc, Secretary of State
Marshall told Congress that there wa~ nothing "magic" about the numbers, and
clearly implied that the 5tationing was temporary. Or suppose the French
parliament had approved the European Defense Community in 1954; a much
52
more significant European defcn~e organization was not out of the question. Or
take the sequence of events from de Gaulle's proposal for a directoire in 1958
through the Skybolt misadventure and French non to British entry into the EEC
in 1962 to the end of the Multilateral Force (MLF) in 1965. If that sequence had
played out differently, the European share in Western nuclear responsibilities
might have been much greater.
More than likely, the future will look much like the recent past. The U.S. and
its European allies will continue to live with the dilcmma5 and paradoxes of their
defense, never mind that the dilemmas gr01., sharper. Yet it is worth considering
what might drive future security relations between Europe and America to
patterns sharply different from simple projections of the present and recent past.
I look for possibilities in three areas: one is traditional, nuclear weapons and
conventional defense; a second is the question of threats outside Europe; and a
third, addressed briefly, is shocks from outside the realm of "security" as usually
defined.
Nuclear Weapons and Convemional Defense. In his celebrated Bru~sels speech
last September, Henry Kissinger said that the nuclear umbrella with which he and
his fellow secretaries of state rhetorically had covered Europe consisted of
assurances that "cannot be true, and if my analysis is correct we must face the
fact that it is absurd to base the strategy of the West on the credibility of the
threat of mutual suicide." What was mischievous about his words was hardly the
newness of the thought - it ha.<. been in the back of the mind of everyone on
both sides of the Atlantic who thought about the issue for a decade - but was,
rather, the political fact of the emperor's aide saying that the emperor had no
clothes. He began to back away from his words as soon as he said them.
Plainly, there is in the current pattern of transatlantic nuclear relations a
paradox that cannot be resolved. No one could ever be sure, 20 years ago or
now, that the U.S. would in fact use- nuclear weapons if only Europe were
attacked. The reasons for doubt arc greater now, but the situation is not
qualitatively different since the time in the mid-1960's when the U.S. became
vulnerable to a nuclear attack from the Soviet Union even if America struck fir5t.
Weaponry matters, but now, as two decade<. ago, it come~ down to Europe's
confidence in America's will. That is why nuclear issues are barometers of more
general strains in transatlantic relations.
Necessary as nuclear moderniLatiom - by both the U.S. and its allie~ in
NATO - arc, nuclear parity between Ea~t and Wc~t. both in Europe and in
intercontinental systems, will be a continuing fact of life. The Soviet Union is
deploying SS-17, 18, and 19 ICBMs at the rate of about 125 launcher<; a year. In
systems aimed at Europe, the SS-20 ha'i received most of the attention; some
50-60 are being implaccd each year. But the Soviets al~o arc dc;cloping new
shorter-range sy~tems for Europe: the SS-21, 22 and 23.
Whatever the U.S. and Europe do, and there are a number of things they
should do, they will not recover a nuclear ~uperiority that is psychologically
reassuring, let alone militarily significant. Nuclear questions will continue to be
sensitive. The December deci~iom by NATO thw, repre'ient a beginning, not an
end; they will not usher in anything like the la~t l.'i year.' of re!mire quiet on
53
nuclear issues between the U.S. and Europe. What will that mean? A
continuation of the present is most likely: modest new deployments plus
evolutionary changes in doctrine plus efforts at political reassurance. Yet several
other courses are possible, though neither is likely.
The recent decisions by NATO, and the process that produced them, bear
comparing to the MLF episode of the early 1960's. Many of the initial concerns
were the same; then as now they came down to the unknowable: would the U.S.
respond? Allied attentions first ran to hardware "solutions" culminating in the
multilateral force (MLF) - a fleet of NATO surface ships, manned by sailors of
different nations, carrying medium-range nuclear missiles whose firing would be
under American control. In the end, the resolutions were much more political
than "hardware". From 1963 onward the U.S. assigned submarine-launched
missile warheads from its central strategic arsenal to NATO for planning
purposes, and officers from NATO countries became interested bystanders at the
Strategic Air Command (SAC) headquarters in Omaha.
However, the principal measure was the creation, in 1966, of the Nuclear
Planning Group (NPG). Initially with a rotating membership always including the
Alliance's major members and now with a permanent membership, the NPG
served to give Europeans access to American nuclear planning. It built confidence
without changing weaponry or procedures for its use. It sufficed to lay nuclear
matters to rest, I judge, in part because of the evident lack of wisdom of more
dramatic "hardware" solutions. However, it was also enough because the
East-West climate was warming, and European confidence in America was
growing, hence nuclear matters were less sensitive.
Last December, NATO opted for a combination of hardware and procedural
solutions. The hardware - 572 cruise and Pershing II ballistic missiles - while
more political than military in purpose, was based on a solid military rationale,
even if that rationale was not always the one argued in official pronouncements.
In 1980, unlike 1966, procedural solutions alone probably would not have
sufficed, but NATO's decisions embodied several of these as well. New nuclear
machinery was created: the so-called High Level Group of the NPG made ~enior
officials from capitals central to NATO discussions, and a parallel Special Croup
dealt with arms control implications.
The spectre of the neutron bomb debacle was much on the minds of those who
made the December decisions. Washington learned from the neutron bomb that it
could not, on a sensitive nuclear issue, merely tell its European allies that it was
prepared to do what they wanted. Washington left no doubt where it wanted to
come out on theatre nuclear forces (TNF), but did so without bullying
Europeans. And new procedures helped. But in the end, decision-making was not
very different from the previous two decades of NATO nuclear practice,
notwithstanding the European-ness of the TNF issue and the prominence of
European NATO members, especially the Federal Republic. That pattern
amounted, somewhat crudely, to the U.S. deciding, with American preferences
overturned only in light of serious European complaints.
Now, as in the 1960's, the most dramatic alternative to more of the same is a
European nuclear force. On that score, General de Gaulle's logic is compelling: if
54
Europeans fear that America will not push the button, then they need buttons of
their own with nuclear weapons to match. If the logic is both familiar and
compelling, so are the obstacles: the political difficulty of Anglo-French
cooperation, and the much greater problem of how to include Germany. The
most that can be said about recent developments is that Europeans have moved
slightly toward more interest in their own nuclear weapons.
If European nuclear independence is beyond the pale, the opposite po~~ibility,
conventional deterrence, merits more consideration. Again, the logic 1s
compelling: if deterrence through the prospect of nuclear escalation is improbable
or unwise, then deterrence without the threat of nuclear weapons is preferable.
Again, of course, the problems arc familiar and formidable. For so long NATO
has preached its hopeless inferiority in conventional forces that it has come to
believe it. And beneath the surface of that debate other factors are at work,
especially the abiding reluctance of Europeans to contemplate a conventional war
in Europe.
There is no question that the Soviet force in Eastern Europe is impressive and
growing more so. Since 1965, the Soviets have increased the total number of their
divisions from 148 to 170, and added about 1,400 aircraft and 31 regiments to
their tactical air armies. Much of the expansion in numbers has resulted from the
military build-up in the Far East, but qualitative improvements spread across the
entire range of Soviet forces.
Yet the situation hardly is as bleak as it i~ often portrayed, and probably never
has been. If the Warsaw Pact attacked without mobilization, NATO could field
almost as many men in the central region as the Pact. The Pact's numerical
advantage would peak after about two weeks of mobilization, but still be less
than 2: I, hardly happy for the West but not appealing to a con~ervative Soviet
military planner. Moreover, despite continuing Soviet force improvements,
NATO's position should look better in several years, not worse, given the
improvements undertaken in the Long-Term Defense Program (LTOP). The
debate over the impact of new weaponry, such as precision-guided munitions,
still rages, but it is hard to believe that on balance it does not favor the defense.
Assessing the conventional balance is bedevilled by bean-counting and the
distance between Eastern and Western worst-case analyses. Popular analyses of
the balance too often still count numbers of divisions on East and West, ignoring
differences in size and structure; or compare numbers of tanks, forgetting that
tanks may fight other tanks but so do anti-tank weapons and aircraft. Prudently
conservative military planners in the West must assume that most Soviet tanks
would actually work, and even more improbably, that Soviet allies in Eastern
Europe would fight alongside their Russian comrade~. Suffice to say the situation
must look different from the Kremlin.
There is no question that reliance on conventional deterrence would require
more defense effort, especially in Europe, but the increases need not be ~o large
as to be completely out of the question. There is something anomalous in a
Europe as big and far richer than the Soviet Union unable to defend itself
without America. Nuclear weapons would then be structured to deter other
nuclear weapons, and NATO would be spared the awful prmpect of planning for
55
a first-use of nuclear weapons that seems more and more incredible. America
would loom less large in a less nuclear NATO, but it~ conventional presence
would remain, surely through a long interim.
The Nature of rhe Threat. It has now become ritual on b01h sides of the
Atlantic to say that the gravest threat to Western security lies not in Europe but
outside it. Iran and Afghanistan have given more evidence in ~upport of that
rhetoric. Yet it is far less clear precisely what ~uch statements mean for American
and European policy, still less what they imply for existing security arrangements.
This issue is as old as the nuclear question. Most of the time it has been the U.S.
hectoring its European partners to attend to the Soviet threat beyond Europe.
Vietnam is the most obvious case in point. There, the preaching failed:
Europeans simply did not see Vietnam as a threat to them. Worse, it diverted
American attention from Europe. The most Europeans would do was limit
criticism of the American role.
Now, there is a shared assessment of the threat, at least in rhetoric, but no
consensus on what to do about it. Afghanistan may turn out to be a watershed.
Surely it is not hard to imagine how threats beyond Europe could change the
nature of transatlantic security relations almost beyond recognition. If there is
near-term threat to the cohesion of the Alliance, it is this.
The problem is both one of managing alliance politics and a deeper one, of
substance. Afghanistan underscores the problem of alliance politics. The strong
American reaction caught Europeans off guard. There were the customary
problems of consultation. As usual, the Washington reaction presumed that
America had wisdom, and that Europeans should line up behind the American
lead, as irritating as ever. When Europe did not follow America's lead, it was
easy for Americans to see Europeans as weak and parochial, special pleaders for
special European interests. They were bound to ask if there was any 5ecurity
threat outside Europe that would induce Europeans to respond by curtailing rheir
detente through limiting trade and other relations with the East.
Of course, European perceptions were just the obverse. The American reaction
came out of context. After not doing enough for years, the U.S. was now doing
too much, too fast, or not doing the right things. Underlying European anxiety
was the feeling that Washington had no tolerably dear conception either of its
relation with the Soviet Union or of how to respond to turmoil outside Europe.
From America's perspective the pattern is much the same as for nuclear issues:
America decides, Europe complains, as Peter Jay put it. Europe's responsibility
lags behind its capability and its stakes. That makes an impossible tightrope for
American policy: too little consulting on security issues is to ignore European
interests, too much is to evade leadership; too little military reaction to Soviet
adventures is weakness, too much is provocation.
In the wake of Afghanistan, Europeans will certainly be called upon to do
more in the realm of defense, mostly inside Europe and mostly by meeting
existing commitments. However, several European nations, Britain and France in
particular, can contribute to broader Western military cooperation outside
Europe. Whether that cooperation takes place inside or outside NATO is a
secondary matter in the short run; NATO has a role to play, but the allies do not
56
lack for meam of talking with each other if the will i~ there, and institutional
issues 5hould not be allowed to hang up the debate.
Europeans can also contribute by allowing the U.S. more flexibility in the use
of its forces stationed in Europe to meet threats beyond Europe. Beyond that,
there will be pressure on Europeans to do more in Europe to compensate as
increases in American forces for contingencies outside Europe begin to compete
with, or even cut into force~ earmarked for Europe. What Europeans cannot do
is refuse to do more outside Europe yet complain if any American actions
threaten existing levels of American deployment in Europe.
The new catchword, "division of labor", suggests a more appropriate
formulation of the transatlantic bargain than the "burden-sharing" of the 1960's.
Yet without a forthcoming European attitude and careful American handling,
division of labor could easily produce the same kind of strain in the Alliance as
burden-sharing, for there is a real risk that the American Congress will perceive
Europe not to be doing it~ share.
Managing the politics in the short run will be hard enough, but deeper issues
must also be confronted. For 15 years the ritual refrain on both sides of the
Atlantic has been that detente is indivisible. What the American and the
European response to Afghanistan demonstrates is not that the refrain is untrue
as that it always was too simple. Detente is, and was, divisible for some
purposes.
There is no question that detente in Europe is real in a way that
Soviet-American detente never was. For Germans, in particular, but for other
Western Europeans as well, the web of economic dealings and humanitarian
contacts creates stakes for Europeans that do not exist for Americans.
One-fourth of all the Federal Republic's trade is with the East. Total American
trade with the Soviet Union amounted to a little over two and one-half billion
dollars in 1978; West German trade with the Soviet Union was well over twice
that figure.
Europeans are thus bound to view detente through the prism of Europe. That
need not be bad. It may make 5ense for Europeans to differentiate between
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union ~o that the situation in Eastern Europe may
not close down entirely, and to su~tain some "carrot~" in relations with the East.
There may be virtue in Europe and America pursuing the same objectives
through somewhat different policies.
Yet the concept is easier than the practice. That i~ clear enough in European
arms control. When negotiations on theatre nuclear forces (TNF) look so
unpromising - because the U.S. is in the position of trading its potential
weapons for real and increasing systems on the other side - Americans are
bound to ask why European politics sustains a romantic attachment to
negotiating before arming.
The danger is even grater in framing responses to threats outside Europe.
Americans could see Europeans prepared to spend billions insuring against
military contingencies in Europe that are, admittedly, the worst but also the least
likely, while unwilling to do much about more probable military contingencies
outside Europe. If there is anomaly in a Europe unable to defend itself without
57
America, so, too, is it anomalous that 35 years after the war the U.S. is still the
preeminent military protector of Western interests outside Europe, interests that
are easily as important to Europe as to America.
"Mansfieldism" in the American Congress is quiet but not absent. It could be
awakened, perhaps dramatica!ly, by a perception that Europeans were not doing
their share 10 meet the real threats to security, threats outside Europe. Division
of labor cannot mean that Europeans do the easy or nice things - sustaining
"carrots" in relations with Eastern Europe, developing special economic ties to
Yugoslavia- while the grubbier, military tasks fall to America. Europeans must
share risks as we!l as labors. There is more than a hint of unilateralism already in
the American mood, partly reflecting nostalgia for past American strength, never
mind how true the image, but also reflecting impatience with friends and allies.
The danger for NATO is not that it will be seen as ineffective, only irrelevant.
In the early days of NATO, there was a neat one-to-one correspondence between
the nature of the perceived threat to Western security and the ~cope of the
institution designed to deal with that threat. That i~ no longer true. NATO, even
if effective, seem~ relevant to only a narrower and narrower slice of the security
threat Europe and America confront.
External Shocks and Internal Politics. In the end, the shape of security
relations between Europe and America will be determined more by factors that
have little to do with "security," even by a broad definition, than by anything
discussed in this paper. Those relations will be driven by internal politic~ in
Europe and America and by outside shocks. The 1973 oil embargo is a case in
point. Its repetition in a stark form - such as a complete cutoff of Saudi
Arabian oil- would turn relations between the U.S. and Europe upside down.
The SS-20 would pale as a threat beside the prospect of homes without heat, and
a transatlantic scramble for energy would make a mockery of the Alliance.
Similarly, while Eurocommunism is less fashionable as a topic these days, it
and other internal political development5 are just as important over the long run.
My own sense is that NATO i5 fairly resilient in dealing with internal political
changes in member countrie~. The special arrangements created for France, or
Greece, or briefly for Portugal suggest some possible adaptation~. The real
problem is not that special mechanisms cannot be created, but that they further
erode the cohesion and common purpmc of the Alliance, a central theme of this
paper. They convert NATO into a more and more limited security organization.
Some developments in internal politics could make a dramatic difference. For
instance, Mansfield-amendment type pressure for v.'ithdrawals of American forces
from Europe might ari~e not from perceptions of Europe's irresolutenes~ and
NATO's irrelevance, but rather from the combination of deep recession in the
U.S. with a turn toward serious trade-warring across the Atlantic.
There is not much those who tend the ~ecurity of Europe and America can do
about such shock-;, other than bear in mind that they may occur. In the \9HO's it
will be all the harder to frame common respon'c~ in purwit of ba,ic interests
becau~c there will be ~o many more unccrtaintie~ and issue~ around, ~orne of
them divi.'>ive acrmr; the Atlantic. There will be all the more ri~k that in the next
crisis the allie~ will break apart like character~ in a bad play: Amcricam <,hooting
from the hip, Germans frening, the French gloating, the British waving the flag
and the rest standing around trying to sort out the plot.
The question of leadership i~ the most overworked topic in transatlantic
relations. It has become trite, though no less true, to say that America can no
longer lead as it did but that Europe is not yet in a position to fi!l the gap. In
that sense, a transition is clearly on us. But it has been on us for a decade or
more.
Something much more complicated than a loss of American will is afoot.
Europeans exaggerate the lingering effect of the trauma of Vietnam. The nature
of the change in the international environment is straightforward: the
preeminence the U.S. enjoyed by comparison to both Europe and the Soviet
Union in the early postwar period was unusual in history, and it should not
surprise us that it has eroded. Nor should it surprise or even dismay us that the
world became more complicated as the center of power shifted vaguely
southward, though specific manifestations of that shift are cause for dismay.
In that context the public mood on both sides of the Atlantic is bound to be
unpredictable. That matters more in America'~ case because of the still central
U.S. role, but it is a difficulty for Europeans in framing their role as well.
Varied, even conflicting undertones in public mood will coexist, with one or
another breaking to the surface: a desire to wish problems away by believing
that, after all, nothing much that happens in the world affects the U.S.; or a
feeling that America must build strength and go it alone, impatient with allies
who complain but cannot act.
Common security interests between America and Europe are strong and likely
to prevail. No doubt NATO at 40 will look much like NATO at 30. But there is
real risk that in a more and more turbulent world, differences, many of them
over secondary issues, will undermine basic interests Europe and America
continue to share. To prevent that, issues like the following must be addressed:
I. Nuclear questions will continue to be sensitive. They are as much political
as military, renecting the state of European confidence in American will. There
arc no "hardware" solutions once-for-all, though the U.S. and its allies must
modernize their forces. But Ea~t-Weq nuclear parity will be a continuing fact of
life.
2. It is thus more urgent than ever to come to a scmible assessment of the
conventional balance in Europe. it is not beyond the pale for the allies to defend
Europe without the awful reliance on nuclear threats - such as first usc in a
losing conventional war - that arc less and less credible.
3. The most immediate challenge to common purpose between Europe and
America is security threats outside Europe. "Division of labor" cannot be
cosmetic, nor can it mean only that Europe does the easy things.
4. Europe must share risks as well as labors. That means cooperating in
military measures beyond Europe. It may also mean facing the fact that, for the
time being, East-West negotiations over theatre nuclear forces (TNF) are unwise
in substance, notwithstanding their political attraction.
• •
•
59
DISCUSSION
A. The Present Military Situation of NATO. A Briti~h participalll took is~ue
with the implication of the author of the International working paper that NATO
was a rather complacent and weary organization where nothing ever changed
much. As a military alliance which existed to field force~. NATO could not
entertain the idea of changelessness. In truth, the picture had been one of
constant evolution, in response not only to advances in military science but also
to political events (e.g., France, Greece, the founding of the NPG, Briti~h
withdrawal from the Mediterranean, the revolution in Portugal, the phenomenon
of Eurocommunism, the impact of the Long-Term Defense Plan). NATO was
indeed a very adaptable organization, and harnessing it depended on the will of
the member nations. To say that the body was a lively one, though, did not mean
that its thoughts and actiom alway~ responded to the demands of the hour.
An International speaker offered an overview of NATO's present military
situation. He began by recalling the beginning~ of NATO, which he de~cribcd a~
a tremendous improvement over previous alliance~ with its unique peacetime
military integration. De~pite numerous internal crises, the alliance remained
"alive and kicking." The recent events in Iran and Afghanistan had produced
shock waves in NATO and, for the first time since the Cuban missile crisis, there
was the specter of a generalized war. We faced this prospect ""'ith the knov.·lcdge
that the Ea~tern bloc had an overall ratio of superiority in the conventional field
of 2:1 in armor and ground forces, somewhat less in aircraft. But if NATO could
take full advantage of the minimum warning time- say, five days- it would
be able to contain a Soviet onslaught by it~ conventional forces after some initial
sacrifice of ground. The ~peaker wa~ worried, though, about the use of warning
time. In the annual paper exerci~es, there were alway~ ~orne governments which
feared to declare an alert and mobilization. This renected the widespread pacifist
leanings among our people, and the wi~h not to increase the chances of war. In
fact, the contrary was true. By inaction, we might miss the last opportunity to
defuse a dangerous situation.
Since the summit meetings of 1977-78, NATO had 5et about correcting the
disparities which had been expected to tip the military balance dearly toward the
East by the early eighties. Its members had sought to do this by ~pending, on
average, three per cent more a year in real terms. (Some, like Turkey, \H'rc
unable to spend that much, but Portugal, on the other hand, had raised ih
military budget thi~ year by.ten per cent in real terms.) The Long-term Defense
Program, with well over a thousand concrete project'l, wa~ proceeding ~moothly.
Just as a slackening in these effort~ had been detected, we had been rudely
awakened by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
But our military expenditure~ a~ a percentage of GNP were only about half
what they had been 20 year~ ago. Thi~ belied the common thesis about the
unbearable burdens of defeme.
The Soviet Union was still spending four to five per cent more for arms in real
terms each year. With only slightly more than half the national income of the
60
U.S., the USSR was ~pending $20 billion more on defen:<.e - and only ten per
cent of their budget repre~ented per~onnel costs vs. 50 per cent in the U.S.
A~ for comparing NATO's readine~~ and efficiency with that of the Warsaw
Pact forces, however, the speaker thought that thi~ could not be done with any
authority or certainty. The proof of the pudding was in the eating, and he hoped
that this particular pudding would never have to be eaten.
A Briton argued that it \~a~ difficult in the nature of things to agree on
military facts. Everyone would have a different view about how a war might
start, how it would be fought, and what would happen at various stages.
Moreover, there was a tendency in the military always to exaggerate the strength
of the adversary, for rcasom of in~titutional vc~tcd intcrcsb. None of the nuclear
wcapom system' in the world had ever been used, and no one could be sure just
how they would work. There was a whole new range of electronic
countermeasures. Any rational aggressor would need a degree of certainty which
was beyond reach to take a step involving a significant risk of nuclear response
from the other side. These comiderations had enabled the Europeans to feel
secure even though the Russians had achieved nuclear parity.
This discussion of the military situation struck one American participant as
rather complacent. If the consensus here was correct, then the consensus of many
military experts was incorrect. Few of them believed that NATO had a significant
capacity for prolonged conventional defense in Europe. The whole hi~tory of
European defense showed that what was needed to win a conventional battle was
superiority, not to an overwhelming degree, but at the decisive points. Did our
conventional strength really justify our counting on such a breakthrough? If so,
this should be made clear to our policy makers. Certainly it was not beyond the
wit of rational men to come to an agreement about what our true military
position wa~.
B. Strate~ic Issues. An International participant was struck by the volatility
of our defense debates, although the problems remained the same. Six months
before, our discussion here would have been dominated by the issues of theatre
nuclear forces (TNF) and the effectiveness of the nuclear deterrent. Now we
seemed to be groping for confidence about the conventional balance in Europe,
and doubtful if our military forces were relevant to trouble~ in the Third World.
In our debates about both TNF and strategic forces, we tended to project our
political question~ and doubts into the nuclear argumcnt5. For example,
discussion about TNF and the SS-20 would have been conducted completely
differently at a time when there wa~ more confidence in Europe about U.S.
leadership. "When something i~ wrong politically, the alliance gets nuclear
pimples." Was there not, underneath the current American debate about the
vulnerability of its land-based missiles, more of a political than a strategic
rationale, i.e., what was to be the role of U.S. power in the 1980's?
The speaker foresaw that, in five to eight years, the strategic nuclear position
of the Soviets would be in no way enviable, as trends were running against the
kind of ar5enal they had ~et up. But even if we should get back to a position
where the U.S. did not have to worry about a measure of qrategic weakness,
there would be no return to the fifties or sixties. There was a central trend now
61
in nuclear strategic technology which would lead sooner or later to the
vulnerability to pre-emptive strikes of a\! strategic systems. We were ~eeing this
with the land-based systems today, as well as in U.S. pronouncements about the
possibility of finding and destroying Soviet submarines. This would offer a
profound cha!lenge to the European-American nuclear umbrella rclatiomhip.
Whether you doubted it or believed in it now, the U.S. Pre~ident'~ readiness to
be the first one to usc nuclear system~ for a European contingency was bound to
be affected by his knowledge that he would be exposing his own domestic
strategic sites to a counterstrike by the USSR. This problem was not here yet, but
it was time for the alliance to start thinking about it. [f the first lt~c of nuclear
weapons became more unlikely and less credible, was there another \\ay, and
would conventional forces provide it? But we risked discussing this i~sue in the
wrong way. It was not technology and equipment which were at stake, hut
available personnel. The fact that the U.S., with its global role, had significantly
fewer re~ervists than the Federal Republic, v.ith a regional role, ~aid ~omcthing
about this.
Two German interventions touched on the TNf question. One speaker alluded
to the fact that the USSR was deploying one additional SS-20 every week, and
said that the best approach to redressing this imbalance still lay in a serious
attempt at arms control, based on the NATO po~itiom of December 1979. Jt was
to be hoped that the ratification of SAlT !I after the U.S. election would open
the way to further negotiations on theatre nuclear force~. Without that. we would
be led on to an unbridled arms race.
The other speaker, who opposed any bilateral or trilateral arrangements within
NATO, had favored modernization of theatre nuclear forces for some time. But
this must not be done by putting medium range ballistic mi~siles only on German
soil. That would not only tempt the Sovieh to single out German targets, but
might lead the Gcrmam themselves, ~ay in 1986-90, to behave differently from
other Europeans.
An Italian speaker said that the U.S. was maintaining a ~trategy that had been
elaborated when it had been the principal superpower. That position had
declined, and this had been perceived by it~ allies, adversaric~ and third parties.
The entire political situation of the alliance now had to be re-thought. Elements
such as long-range TNF's would mean an increased role for Europe in nuclear
negotiatiom - indirect perhaps, but with an impact on the alliance nevertheless.
Unless this proces~ could be carried out within SALT or a similar l"ramcwork,
seriou~ problems might result.
An American participant sensed that the military debate~ in all of our countries
were surrogates for political debate, and that a systematic strategic analysis was
hard to achieve because of the intru5ion of political con~idcratiom. In the U.S.,
the most "bloodthirsty" strategies were being advocated by the mo~t "liberal"
group~, apparently as a way to avoid building up nuclear force~ and 10 evade the
i~we of whether there was any military significance w the u~e of nuclear
weapom. This had led to the elaboration of theories that related deterrence
largely or entirely to an economic analy~i~ of the degree of de~truction needed to
give pau~e to a potential aggrc~~or. The curiou~ re~ult wa'i that ~ystems analysi-,
62
had been used, on all sides of the debate, as a way of using numbers to prove
preconceived positions. Not only would the American Minuteman force be
vulnerable, but there were substantial psychological inhibitions on a president
whose only option was the mass extermination of civilians, in the absence of
plans that gave him any rational basis for relating the outcome of a war to the
challenge he might face. This dilemma would likely be intensified by the end of
the eighties, when there might again be a mutual vulnerability of strategic forces,
but the point was that it was extremely dangerous to gear our defense policy for
the indefinite future to the sort of plans which now existed for the use of nuclear
weapons. This could lead to a degree of escapism that might produce paralysis in
a crisis. Of course if there were an all-out Soviet attack in the center of Europe,
the risk to the USSR of something unforeseeable would probably always be
greater than they would be prepared to take.
Those who had a sense of strategy were oddly united with those who wanted to
do nothing with military force, in that the latter reckoned that leaving U.S.
forces in Europe could do no damage. They could never be used, according to
this reasoning, because they were protected by the nuclear umbrella, and it was
better to have them in Europe than in some remote place where they might
actually become involved in a military operation. In short, there had been a
misleading consensus behind the presence of American forces in Europe that did
not really guarantee a willingne~s to look at the world in geopolitical and
strategic terms.
According to the author of the American working paper, although it was not
inevitable, it was certainly in the line of inertia in the development of nuclear
weapons that we might find ourselves moving steadily away from the sound part
of the strategic doctrine of the fifties and sixties, elaborated in the notion of the
secure second strike deterrent force, which was a totally different thing from
"mutual assured destruction." It was now true that- because of MIRVs and
the possible large scale deployment of ICMs -a time might come when one side
or the other would perceive the kind of advantage which did not now exist in the
international strategic forces. But it was still possible to make technical
improvements and design arrangements which would make the next generation of
these weapons at least fundamentally no more dangerous than what we had at
present. One of the most important tasks before our defense planners and their
political masters would be to block the inevitability of the "If-1-go-first-1-win"
kind of thinking.
Another American speaker said that, while parity might have existed since the
late fifties or early sixties, there must surely be a difference in that parity (a)
when the U.S. maintained a substantial advantage and the Soviets were able only
to destroy American cities, and (b) when the U.S. no longer had a substantial
advantage and the Soviets had the capacity to destroy American weapons.
Likewise, there was a difference in Europe between (a) a situation in which the
U.S. and the alliance contemplated with some degree of rationality the strategic
first use of nuclear weapons, and (b) a situation in which we knew that the
Soviets were contemplating such a strategy, had executed it in their own
maneuvers, and had added to their forces a whole family of nuclear weaponry,
63
quite apart from the SS-20. In short, we were entering a period that was
qualitatively different from what had gone before.
A German speaker remarked that we had arrived at a military equilibrium, or
parity in a rough sense. This had been marked by SALT I, confirmed by SALT
II, and would possibly be further confirmed by :'vtBFR. It was time to think
again about the meaning of "deterrence", and about its practical
implementation, for which we needed above all men, not just money.
The author of the French working paper observed that efforts to strengthen the
nuclear side of the alliance had made the possibility of non-nuclear intervention
Jess credible. We sought instinctively not to mix up the two theatres, knowing
that we were not very strong in theatre strike forces; yet we still had the desire to
intervene locally. A model for such intervention had been pro\ided by France's
assistance to Tunisia against the attempted coup from Libya. Much of the French
strategy in Africa had been criticized in the U.S., but it should be seen in the
perspective of a worldwide strategy for Western defense.
A Briton detected in this discussion a feeling that the present strategic situation
wa a "straitjacket" which was stultifying to Western interests and was not giving
us the scope we needed. We could not hope to recover that degree of nuclear
superiority which was psychologically reasssuring, taking into account anything
that Europe could do now through its two nuclear powen or was likely to find
politically convenient and feasible in the near future. The ~uperpowers knew that
their differences were not going to be senled by nuclear exchange, and had
reached a stage of mutual deterrence, which some modernization here or
additional deployment there would not alter significantly. But this was not the
kind of deterrent which would preclude carefully calculated expan~ion on the
Afghan model. The Russians would stand ready to take quick advantage of
ambivalent situations.
C. The Need for Stronger Conventional Forces. The above speaker went on
to say that NATO had almo5t talked itself into a po~ition of conventional
inferiority. Europe might not be reluctant to face a conventional war if it would,
by so doing, avoid the nuclear alternative. In any event, new conventional
possibilities ought to be much more closely studied. The ~udden leap forward in
a\! branches of electronic warfare had opened the way to technical!y-advanced
nations to neutralize opposing forces, and by the threat of such neutralization, to
deter al!acks. Advances in light, maneuverable, reasonably cheap anti-armor
weapons were potentially dramatic. Developments allowing the attrition of armor
at long range by ~pecia!ized aircraft, combined with defeme suppre~sion by
electronic means; firing from gun-launched "smart" weapons; at ~ea, the ability
to deceive enemy fleets- all these were now within our grasp. They could make
conventional deterrence a way to break free from unsatisfactory nuclear
dependence. This would demand much more highly developed industrial
collaboration between nation~ and far be11er system~ for the training and
integration of re~erve.'>. The proces~ v.ou!d be painful and politically difficul!, but
it would be worth it.
An Italian participant agreed that improved conventional deterrents would
carry a high price tag in terms of indu~trial and military integration. This would
64
also mean a greater political weight for Europe, a divergence of political
perceptions, and perhaps a different strategy for the alliance itself. A!l this would
work if the Americans would be flexible enough in their strategy to make usc of
European differences for common ends; but if the rigidity of U.S. strategy
increased, it would not work.
A German intervened to say that, even in the conventional field, his people
must not become the largest army in Europe. Not only would the Russians and
Poles not like it; neither would the Britons or the French. At first the other allies
would be glad to have the Germans do the job alone, but eventually it would
damage the psychological cohesion of the alliance.
The author of the International working paper reiterated that, if we feared that
the threshold for the use of American central strategic nuclear forces was too
low, we ought logically to try to raise it by greater reliance on conventional
forces. We should aim, he said, for a situation where NATO's main reliance on
the central front would be on conventional deterrence and where nuclear weapons
would be structured to deter other nuclear weapons. But we should seek to spare
ourselves the awful prospect, which we now faced, of being forced to make the
first use of nuclear weapons. We were often the prisoners of our own claims of
conventional inferiority. In fact, the situation should be getting better rather than
worse, as NATO implemented measures in the Long-Term Defense Program. The
situation would never be as happy as we would like, but it probably did not look
very tempting to Moscow, either.
D. Security Threats Outside the Alliance Area. The author of the
International working paper remarked that it had become commonplace to say
that our greatest threats now emanated from outside Europe. But what did this
really mean, and what were the implications? To speak simply of the division of
labor needed to deal with those threats tended to focus on the question of who
was to do what. The more important question was whether we were all -
individually and together - doing enough.
A British speaker said that the conventional basis for deterrence would allow
for greater flexibility in dealing with threats outside Europe. Whatever strategy
we adopted, Europeans would certainly be exhorted to do more, and to take a
hand in some of the "grubbier" jobs. If this could be done within the context of
NATO, all our interests would be better served, but there were still bound to be
demands made on us on a bilateral or ad hoc basis. The rules of the alliance
provided for the redeployment of troops in national emergencies, and several
countries had taken ful! advantage of that. Perhaps we had moved toward a
substantial blurring of the frontier between Europe and "outside". Certainly the
Soviets recognized no border. In this environment, we should expect those
nations which manifestly possessed the means to do so to maintain intervention
forces with which their allies could be supported. Granted, Soviet action in the
future might be much more diffuse and difficult to pin down, but our vital
interests were almost certain to be threatened. The new technology referred to in
the previous section, leading to a greater empha~b on conventional strategy,
would make it easier to visualize a concerted response to worldwide challenges,
and geographic rules on the map were not beyond alteration. This did not mean
65
that an intervention force was in any way dependent on a move to a more
conventional strategy; it would just be made far easier. The biggest difficulty in
mounting an intervention force lay in deciding exactly what one wanted to do.
Once the strategic and tactical objectives were agreed upon, the rest tended to fall
into place. There would certainly be logistic problems to surmount, but we could
not go on accepting a situation in which we were powerless to intervene out~ide
Europe in even quite minor contingencies.
An American participant said that, for his country, the Middle East and the
northwest quadrant of the Indian Ocean had already become a major strategic
front, imposing new demands and giving ri~e to major new programs which
would be expanded over the next five to ten year~. with important military and
political implications for the alliance. The U.S. was developing, at an accelerated
pace, the ability to bring to bear various levels of military power in various
plausibly foreseeable circumstances, sometimes difficult to define, but involving
the concept that units of central strategic reserves could be moved rapidly by air
and sea. Substantial funds and diplomatic efforts were required to insure passage
through the territory of various friends and allies, in both the Pacific and
Atlantic areas. It was not just a matter of planning, but also of paying for
"parking spaces" and a!l the facilities needed to support a higher level of
American presence, primarily through naval deployments. This would include
fuel and lubrication products, shelter, water and reserve munitions. A major
expansion was envisaged at Diego Garcia, as a hinge to U.S. capacity in that
area. These programs, already underway, would cost tens of millions of dollars,
but more could and would be done.
The object of the exerci~e was to develop a fundamental capacity to affect the
attitudes and behavior of the Soviets and others in that part of the world, and to
acquire the option to provide help against security threats - to play, for
example, the kind of role that the U.K. had played in Oman. Such a role would
only be feasible if we, and other people in the area, did not have to work in the
shadow of overwhelming Soviet military power, to which we had no counter.
What was needed was not a show of force, but a substantial force capable of
handling a range of contingcnde~. even some involving the USSR, in Pakistan
and Iran. We did not need the capacity to meet the Sovieb everywhere at once
under the worst cases, but we needed a substantial force that could be moved
quite rapidly.
This U.S. inve~tment was based not on an economic calculation about the
importance of oil, but on a cool-headed reckoning that our rc!atiomhip~ could be
skewed by an imbalance in that part of the world. The speaker could not think
of a case where the interests of the European-American alliance had been so
tangibly and palpably engaged outside the area of the alliance as they were now
in the Middle East. We were indeed fortunate that the threat wa~ 50 clear, so
lacking in the ambiguities that had been between us in the case of Vietnam. But
there were two key implications for the alliance: (I) Cooperation between the
U.S. and the powers able to play a role in that area (Britain and France) was
critical, but other countric~ would be important in providing: access. (2) This
effort targeted on the Indian Ocean did not mean that the U.S. would not do
more elsewhere, although it would not be able to do as much more as it
otherwise would have. Therefore its allies would have to do more, especially in
replacing some of the reserve mobilization capability. The implementation of
these enlarged responsibilities would have to be informed by a political awareness
on two points: (I) That the Middle East was a new strategic front; and (2) that it
was so for all of us, so that traditional notions about how alliance lines were
drawn would have to be adjusted.
A Briton agreed that there would have to be a division of labor in planning
for collective action outside Europe, especially as it was too expensive for small
and medium-size powers to maintain a broad range of capabilities. But
significant increases in defense expenditure in some Continental countries seemed
inevitable if we wanted an intervention force outside Europe. This would raise
the much more difficult question of where such a force would be used, and how.
Would it be to help local governments resist external attack or internal
dissidence? There was a role to be played in the latter case, but it was usually
best given indirectly. The moment one went beyond that, one risked trouble. A
decade ago, the Kuwaitis had been anxious for a commitment from Britain to
protect them from an lraqui attack. But they would not allow the stationing of
British forces, who therefore had had to be based 500 miles down the Gulf at
Bahrein. The whole time they were there, the Kuwaiti government had been
financing the Free Bahrein movement whose purpose it had been to get British
forces out of Bahrein!
Similar difficulties had been encountered in recent months by officials seeking
bases for an expanded Western capability in the Gulf. It was proving hard to get
the agreement of local people for this, yet it was appallingly difficult and
expensive to design a real all-purpose, intercontinental intervention force which
did not require a base in the area. Perhaps it was easier to design forces to deter
the Russians from intervening, but this would require an enhanced role for
Europeans in the defense of Western Europe.
An International participant confessed to serious reservations about this broad
redefinition of the responsibilities of the alliance. The alliance, after all, was just
barely able to defend Europe, and burdens in distant areas would in effect have
to be borne, as now, by the U.S., with perhaps some help from the U.K. and
other countries. The danger of a general war would be greatly increased. But the
alliance could at least take concrete diplomatic measures and reinforced defense
measures which would have an unequivocal meaning for the USSR and third
countries. We would have to see how our peoples and governments responded to
such a call, though, as "enthusiasm is rather patchy." Above all, we should not
allow the Soviet Union to sow discord among us, and we should not countenance
heads of NATO member governments going abroad purporting to act as
mediators between the U.S. and the USSR, and pretending that their country
could commit itself to another policy, "which in no way corresponds to actual
fact."
A Canadian speaker said that, while the divi.r,ion of responsibilities was quite
clear at the military !eve\, it was less so at the political level. It was
understandable enough to say that detente was indivi~ible, and to want to apply
67
this concept outside of Europe, but there were practit·al difficulties. For one
thing, problems were unforeseeable, and it was difficult w ~peak of a global
strategy when a regional spirit persisted. Broadening NATO's jurisdiction might
render the alliance impractical. The Third World would ~ec it as a new form of
imperialism and nco-colonialism. There was also the prospect of nuclear
proliferation, which would tend to water down the cohesion of the alliance.
NATO was perfectly credible insofar as it dealt \\ith the military defeme of
Europe, and what had been accomplished by the members out~idc of the alliance
framework had not really been so bad {e.g., comultations on terrorism, on the
political stability of African regime~). With the ad\ent of dCtcnte, it would be
increasingly difficult to justify the military budgets attendant on a greater role
for Europe. The Europeans would follow America as much as they could, but
perhaps the most likely avenue would be one of ad hoc cooperation on projects
related to specific difficulties (such as the Iranian ho-"tages or other crises). This
approach would be more easily ju_.,tified than broad-based military cooperation in
the eyes of Europeans who did not feel any direct threat to their security.
An American speaker found the ~a-called Carter Doctrine di~quieting. For the
first time in the postwar period, the U.S. had enunciated a doctrine for the
defense of an area without changing its forces or increasing them ~ignificantly,
and without creating the capability of dealing with comingendes in the area. We
were thus creating an extraordinarily dangerou~ gap benvecn our commitmenb
and our capabilities.
Our policy-makers were likely not to be expert~. and the e,\Perts them~clves
were so influenced by their philmophical preconception~ that they tended
somewhat to "cook" their military analyse~. The experts were far from agreed
about our relative capacity to intervene, but it would be critical to have an
accurate meawre of that if we were confronted V.'ith cri-"e~ outside the alliance
area - for example, in places like Yugo~lavia or the Arabian pcnimula, not
necessarily caused by the Soviet Union.
The author of the American working paper remarked that admini~tration
"doctrines" were seldom successful. The content of the "Cartl'r donrinc" ~imply
lay somewhere among the multiple military optiom which we confronted.
An Italian participant wondered whether the Carter Doctrine did not contain
an element of politcal uncertainty. Wa~ there not a gap between it~ long-term
objects and the relationship of forces in the region, and bcmeen the willingness
expressed and the reali~tic political pm5ibilities? In the medium term, it was
impossible to set up local military forces without increasing the risk of Soviet
military intervention. In the long run, a~ Keyne5 had ~aid, we would all be dead.
So we had to devise a containment strategy for the 5hon run, and this was
complicated by the fragmentary nature of the information we had to \\·ork with.
Moreover, it was not politically credible that our ~hart-run effort-' would be
extended into the medium term. In the speaker's opinion, we had to work toward
fostering local alliance5 upon whom we could count in emergencies. Bilateral
alliances were not sufficiem in countric~ v.hich were \'Ulnerable and su~picious of
direct American support.
68
An American speaker analyzed the probable conwquences of military
intervention in the Per<;ian Gulf. The oil field~ would be the first thing to go, he
predicted. If the three ports and eight pumping ~lations in the area were
destroyed- internally or externally- 60 to 70 per cent of the oil flow would be
interrupted. More than enough material for upheaval in the region had been
provided by political and social in~tability, massi\e corruption, inadequacy of the
ruling regimes, and the increased component of foreign indentured labor. One
did not need "Cubans, Soviets or any other foreign force 10 do the job." In the
last dozen years, 15 of the 2R Arab rulers had been removed by non-peaceful
means. In the past 15 years, there had been 12 inter-Arab wars of substantial
magnitude, without Soviet involvement.
What was fundamentally involved in the concept of our "willingne~~ to fight in
the Persian Gulf" was our protection of the <;latus quo. If we ever really got
engaged in a successful military venture there, the most likely result would be the
complete destruction of, not only the oil fields, but the ~ocial and political
structure of Iran and many other countries, accompanied by an irrational
Moslem uprising against the infidel~.
Our strategic 5tockpile of oil wa5 extremely limited, and the Saudis had refused
to add 10 it. But the Soviet<; could very well do for a number of yean without oil
from that reg10n, and without the disorganized ~ituation there. Local
government5 had refu~ed to be a'isociated with any major effort by the U.S. 10
build up the strategic ~tockpile, and America's European allies were reluctant to
come along.
Was the Carter Doctrine not really ju~t a reiteration of the Dulles Doctrine:
that we would retaliate at the place~ and times, and with the mean~. of our
choosing? Did that not make ~en~c in the circumstance~? Many other proposals
on the ~ubjcct seemed to emanate from a "never-never land." The beginning of
all wisdom was to know one·~ wcakne~se~.
Another American observed that any military build-up in the Middle East wa~
first and foremost the responsibility of the U.S. It would have to be \ufficient to
make clear that any further Soviet aggres<;ion entailed a risk of direct
confrontation with the U.S. Until the Paleqinian problem wa~ solved, Arab
cooperation in any security meawre~ v.ould be limited. Indeed 'iuch cooperation
would be dangerous to the internal stability of the Arab ~tate<;.
We had to recognize, according to a U.S. 'lpcaker, that what wa' happening in
the Near Ea~t amounted to the opening of an additional front vis-3-vis the
We~tern alliance. Whatever their motives, the Soviet~ were now intruding
militarily into wuthwest Asia, the Saudi Arabian peninsula, and acro~s from it is
East Africa. The current American capacity to re~pond in that region had to be
seen agaimt thi~ background: There had been 10 or 15 year~ of neglect of it.~
forces, induced partly by the burdem of Vietnam. Moreover, the traditional U.S.
form of intervention on the ruro-A<;ian land ma~'· through massive
reinforcement by sea and air, unchallenged by any oppo,ing force, wa\ no longer
a workable strategy. It could now be contested by the Soviet navy and air force,
whose capabilities were being built up.
69
We were also being subjected to a proliferation of Soviet military pressures
around the world, through their naval forces or proxies. There had been
instances of this in the fifties and sixties, but it had not added up to the pattern
we saw now. The ostensible - even real perhaps - reason for these Rus~ian
involvements was to support some local movement or authority, but in every case
they had used their presence, once established, for their own purposes. We
should not turn the new slogan, which said that a military balance was necessary
but not sufficient, into the notion that it was not really necessary, that what we
needed was just skillful diplomacy, more sympathy with the forces of change,
and so forth. All that could not compete effectively with Soviet military growth.
The alliance now faced a crucial problem, in the technical, political and
procedural sense: while it was itself confined to Europe, it had interests which
were outside Europe. Although the instrumentalities of the alliance and of other
institutions could not always be put at the service of those interests, we could no
longer avoid the necessity of behaving like allies on a worldwide basis, not just in
the area of the North Atlantic Treaty.
E. The Question of Political Will. The author of the International working
paper remarked that defense efforts in all of our countries had gone up and
down very substantially over the years. In 1953, the U.S. had been spending
almost IS per cent of its GNP on defense, and France and Britain 11 per cent.
By 1978, the U.S. had been down to five per cent, and only recently had this
figure begun to rise. Europeans were right in pointing out that, while more
military power might be neccs~ary, it was unlikely to be sufficient.
In American debate on this subject, there was an almo~t nostalgic feeling that,
if we augmented our military force, that would solve our problems. Although we
comemplated doing more, we did not seem to have a very good idea of what we
ought to be doing. If one country decided to spend more on aid to developing
countries instead of increasing its military budget, that should be acceptable. But
the "admission ticket" for all of us for spending on defense and related matter5
probably ought to be six to eight per cent of GNP rather than three to five per
cent. Whether all of us could achieve that was a hard question of domesti..:
politics, not alliance politics.
What did we expect to get for our money? For some purposes (e.g., deterring
the USSR from certain kinds of activitie'i), we might not want to be very precise
in our public proclamations about what our forces were to be used for. But we
then risked creating a gap between what we said we wanted to do and what we
actually could do. Unless we explained to our people what their money was being
spent for, it might prove hard to sustain the willingness to make the required
expendimre.
An American participant was reluctantly persuaded that increased military
spending for preparedness would be necessary on both ~ides of the Atlantic. But,
given the problem~ of intlation, unemployment, unsatisfactory productivity, and
the distractions of national electiom, he was not sure that our political processes
would succeed in producing the nccC'isary financial support.
The author of the French working paper thought that the will of his ..:ountry
could be characterized as strong in one sense but weak in another. One strong
70
element in French independence consisted in her always remaining somewhat on
the outside. On the other hand, the sense of independence in the world conflict
that was partly the result of France's nuclear strategy had encouraged a trend
toward neutralism, particularly in the left wing parties. Nevertheless, it had been
remarkable that, in the whole Atlantic discussion about Pershing II, there had
been total silence from the French. Experienced observers would have understood
that this in fact amounted to "shouting approval." Furthermore, it was
noteworthy that the French Communist party had totally failed in its campaign
to mobilize opposition to the alliance's decision. Even the C.G.T. had balked.
When the Communists had used "Pershing II!" as a rallying cry, the response
had been "SS-20!" In Italy, the will to defend the country was relatively strong
within the Communist party, as Berlinguer realized that without the Atlantic
alliance a fate similar to that of Dubcek was likely to befall him.
Another French speaker referred to the neutralist current developing in
Europe. People had not been seduced by Russian ideology, but they were
intimidated by the displays of naked force and were becoming fatalistic. They
sought to minimize and rationalize the worrisome signs.
One could understand the impatience of European leaders with the
shilly-shallying of the U.S. administration, but instead of giving voice to their
criticism could they not have proposed getting together with the Americans to
work out a common strategy? Was it really too late for Europe to avoid the
dilemma of appeasement or war?
A German participant said that we had to inform our people honestly if we
expected to enlist their support for defense; we could not "steamroller" them.
He mentioned two examples: (1) Before the German debate about the deployment
of rockets, the trade union leaders had been well-briefed by the government. So
when "doves had come from all over the world to ask the German unions to
stand firm for peace," they were prepared to reply. (2) If our people were
sometimes reluctant to take on a greater defense burden, it was perhaps because
NATO had shouted "wolf!" too often and too loud.
A Briton was worried by our tendency to find every possible reason for not
facing up to our problems. It wa.<, right to acknowledge our weaknesses, but by
turning away and not risking certain dangers, we would actually help to bring
them about. Wringing our hands was the best way to invite provocation.
A similar rule could be applied to the question of American leadership, at least
in military and political matters. Unless the U.S. showed a willingness to act
alone, it would not get collective action from its allies, or a peaceful reaction
from its adversaries. This was not true in the economic sphere, where events since
the Marshall Plan and Bretton Woods had shown the necessity of collective
action. But for the U.S. to say that, in political or military matters, it could act
only in concert with its allies was to undermine its credibility; it would maintain
its credibility only by expressing a willingness to act unilaterally.
• •
•
71
III. ECONOMIC ASPECT
German Working Paper:
"ENERGY POLICY, MONETARY POLICY, FOREIGN TRADE AND
PAYMENTS: RELATIONS BETWEEN EUROPE AND THE U.S."
The external conditions for the development of Western democracies are
determined by their political and military security and by basic factors in the
world economy. Whereas a liberal economic system will find the framework for
its future development in political stability and a secure defense policy, the
resources it needs will come from the economy.
Public opinion, and even government circles and political parties, are still
unable to appreciate fully the overriding significance of the economic side of
external relations. Foreign policy is seen primarily as the involvement in political
relations with other nations in the classic diplomatic tradition. But developments
have long since taken a different course. The potential that was available to the
former nation states for economic and social development using their own
resources is now increasingly limited, and today it is more evident than ever
before that the international exchange of raw materials, goods and ideas has
become for many countries no less than a question of survival. Clemenceau is
credited with saying "War is too important a matter to be left to the generals."
Today, this remark should perhaps be amended to read "Trade is too important
a matter to be left to businessmen and experts."
The 25th anniversary of this conference is a good occasion for a brief
excursion into the past. It seems to me that the attitude of our American ally as
regards the relationship between business and politics has undergone many a
change over the past decades. The massive reconstruction program launched by
the U.S. after the Second World War for the benefit of its future competitor,
Europe, was a political program. On its presentation to Congress, President
Truman called the bill "an undertaking of vital importance for our foreign
policy." Secretary of State Marshall referred to it as "an investment in peace,"
explaining this in the following words: "If we come to the conclusion that the
U.S. is unable or unwilling to support economic reconstruction, then we must
face the consequences of a collapse in these countries and their transformation
into dictatorial police states."
In line with this statement of political principle, the countries of Europe
received from 1948 to 1952 economic aid totalling $9 billion, the equivalent of
$80 per capita of the population of the U.S. Not only did political leadership,
and leadership in international economic and monetary relations, devolve upon
the U.S. in the postwar years by virtue of its economic potential; in addition, the
U.S. pursued this as a political task. American influence was decisive at that time
in creating with institutions like the International Monetary Fund, the GATT and
72
the OECD a framework for the economic and monetary system of the West that
was both durable and suited to the po~twar era.
Since then there has been a radical change in the premise<; on which the system
of our external and monetary policy cooperation is based. Insofar as a specific
period of time can be identified in connection with this change, the early
seventies would be the most likely candidate. In the terminal phase of the
Vietnam war, America was compelled to recognize the limits of its power. In
retrospect, America came out of the Vietnam war a weak leader, chary of
alliances and morally insecure. There was a need for it to redefine its global
political responsibility in the old debate between i~olationism and
internationalism. As I see it, only the most recent events in Afghanistan have
finally made it clear that there can be no question of a total retreat from world
politics, because not even the U.S. is able to flee the 20th century and seek refuge
in the 19th.
At the same time, the acce~sion of Great Britain, Denmark and Ireland to the
European Community contributed to the growing strength of Europe,
accelerating its transformation from the role of an American protege to that of a
partner. This was a natural, and politically a most neccs~ary, consequence of the
shift in economic emphasis. The European Community had taken the place of
the U.S. as the largest world trading nation and was in the process of shortening
America's lead in technology. While the U.S. still accounted for 40 per cent of
global GNP in \950, this share had sunk by 1970 to 30 per cent. The U.S. had
surrendered its position as the economie dominanle.
The events of the first energy cri<;is led to fundamental 5hifts in the underlying
monetary and foreign trade system. It would not be too much of an
exaggera!ion, I feel, to say that it was in those years that the U.S., under the
repercussions of the Vietnam war and the energy crisis, relinquished the
authoritative position in international economic and currency matters which it
had maintained throughout the fifties and sixties. This gave way to a system of
collective decision-making as between partners, the predominant feature of which
are the world economic summits that have been convened at regular intervals
since the first energy crisis: It was in event~ in the monetary ~ector that this
transition was most meaningful!y demonstrated. With the col!ap~e of the Bretton
Woods system, the dol!ar ~urrendered its special role. Sinl.:e then, to quote the
Governor of the Bank of England, Gordon Richard~on, we have been living in
an "oligopolistic world."
Given the current circum'>tances of !arge-~calc economic~ of roughly equal
strength in the We~tern al!iance, the re~ulting situation i~ irreversible. V.'hat i'i
more, it conforms to the liberal spirit of the al!iance. Although it i~ surdy a \·ery
difficult task 10 assess the strengths and weaknesses of this form of cooperation
as between partners, we have still to ask ourselves the following: what i'i the
capability of our system, and how suitable are the instruments of Western
cooperation in providing an adequate answer to the growing economic ta~k~,
problems, even challenges in the world today?
73
II
On his return from a recent visit to the Gulf States, the German \1inistcr for
Economic Affairs declared that with regard to energy we would have to accustom
ourselves to life at the edge of an abyss. He was criticized for this from several
quarters and accused of overdramatizing the situation. The suitability of the
word "we" in that quotation is open to question, as the problems facing the
present generation will stay within limit. But this is not an adequate perspective.
One of the basic aspects of our energy policy concerns the periods of time in
terms of which such policy is formulated. As James Freeman Clarke so
excellently put it: "A politician thinks of the next election, a statesman of the
next generation." If we accept this definition, the first thing we should have to
do would be to forbid all politicians to have anything at all to do with energy
policy.
There are quite moderate forecasts saying that world energy consumption by
the year 2000 wi!l be almost double what it is now, and roughly three times as
much by the year 2030. And these forecasts are based on a low estimate of world
population growth (9 billion by 2030), moderate economic growth (global average
of 2.2 per cent a year), and progress in energy conservation and in the usc of new
technologies. In face of this projected development of demand, the limitations of
available energy resources are alarming. If global energy consumption rise~ at
only three per cent a year, the economically exploitable reserves of oil would last
just over 20 years, those of natural gas just over 30 years, and those of coal more
than 60 years. The rising cost of energy will certainly serve to make further
reserves economically viable and to encourage the development and deployment
of new technologies. Mobilizing this potential supply, however, would take a
great deal of time and call for the provision of substantial financial resources for
research and development and the solution of growing problems of
environmental protection.
Any estimates of energy supply and demand have a large uncertainty factor.
This is especially true of oil. While political developments in the oil-producing
states are of vital importance, they are at the same time hardly predictable. In
many of the major oil-producing countries, the large income derived from oil
exports has been the cause of what is often hectic economic development, giving
rise to social and cultural tensions. Structural weaknesses in the economy, the
disparate development of various population groups, and the growing search for
a national identity trigger off conflicts within the country and ~ow the ~ccds of
instability. In the Islamic countries there are already ~trong forces in favor of
limiting oil production, slowing down economic growth, and greater orientation
toward regional and 5Cparatist interests. The socialist countries arc in any case
hardly prepared to make allowances for the eco_nomic intcrest5 of Western
industrialized nations. Fortunately, however, this attitude is generally outweighed
by their need for the funds they receive from oil exports.
A further important risk factor is the lasting international tension in the
~iddle East, and in particular the continuing conflict situation. The maximum
threat to oil supplies will arise if and when the great powers are drawn into a
74
local contlict. The Soviet presence in this area which is vital to Western interests
is now greater than ever before in terms of politics and both land and sea forces,
especia!ly in Afghanistan, South Yemen and Ethiopia. With its invasion of
Afghanistan, the Soviet Union has advanced toward the world's most imponant
oil supply center and the oil transport routes. The first aim of the Soviet Union
will probably be to consolidate these bridgeheads. Its foreign policy toward the
conservative oil-producing states is sti!l a pragmatic one. In the long term, I
would say that the Soviet Union is putting its hopes on the collapse of the
present systems and the decline of Western influence.
In doing so, the Soviet Union is obviously pursuing a global strategy. But I
also feel that insufficient weight is given to the fact that the Soviet Union itself is
faced with ever-increasing energy supply problems. The Soviet Union, which still
exports oil over and above its supply commitments to Eastern bloc countries, will
soon be compelled to import oil in increasing quantities. Reliable estimates place
the import requirement for 1985 as high as 150 million tons. While some Soviet
sources are already nearing depletion, the Soviet economy either cannot deal at
all or cannot deal quickly enough with the huge organizational and technical
problems of developing new oilfields in the east and north, panicularly as the
U.S. is now no longer supplying the necessary technical equipment. In this
situation, the Soviet Union is faced with substantial problem' with regard to its
foreign trade and foreign policy. Presently, 50 per cent of its foreign exchange
inflows come from oil exports. If the Soviet Union is forced to become an oil
importer, this would largely erode the financial basis for its imports of consumer
goods. It will also have to face up to the question of whether it should curtail or
at least freeze its exports of oil to Comecon countries. This in turn would force
the Comecon countries that are dependent on Moscow for their energy supplies
to expand their trade with the West, in order to earn the foreign exchange they
need to buy oil. I feel that developments of this kind should be recognized within
the Western alliance, and encouraged.
The end of the oil age is becoming increasingly apparent, and this is again
placing greater emphasis on nuclear energy as an indispensable substitute for oil,
particularly as regards the nations of the West. In my opinion, a number of
mistakes were made in the psychological preparation of our citizens for this
means of generating energy. It is easy to see that the concept of nuclear fission
will engender in the mind of those people who are unable to comprehend the
technology behind it a degree of apprehension which cannot always be dispelled
by logical arguments. Those who spoke of the absolute safety and reliability of
the new technology were not doing the confidence of the population a good
service. We are all of us at risk, in every aspect of our lives. What we have to
ask ourselves is whether this risk is justified, once we have weighed the
alternatives, and whether we arc compelled to accept it.
In what I have to say about nuclear energy I am speaking as a representative
of the German constituent state which bears the main burden of responsibility in
connection with German nuclear energy development, because it is concerned
with the problem of nuclear waste disposal. As you may know, the State
Government of Lower Saxony was faced with a difficult political decision in May
75
of last year, and was unable to agree to give the green light for the reprocessing
of irradiated fuel element~, \.lihieh would have created the conditions for entry
into the - and I am putting this into inverted comma~ - "plutonium
economy." Thi~ deci~ion wa~ determined c~~entiall) b} the fact that the
population is not yet prepared to accept the nc"' technology, and the will of the
majority of the people is of course the main element in any democratic
community, and additionally by the fact that no conscn5us was reached either
among the major political forces. However, in the course of a lengthy hearing in
which a great number of experts gave their opinions for and against reprocessing,
the State GO\·ernment came to the conclmion that reproce~sing i~ fea~ible with
current technology and that it would also he justifiable from the viewpoint of
population safety.
I am convinced that the reproces~ing of nuclear fuels and the peaceful use of
plutonium constitute an issue that will gain in significance in future, both for the
Federal Republic of Germany in particular, and for the countrie'l of the West in
general. We know that with current reactor types, and particularly if construction
picks up, global resources of uranium will probably already have reached a
precariously low level by the start of the next century. Only by making use of
advanced reactor ~ystems would we be able to extend the useful life of these
resources by hundreds of years, unless of course completely new technologic~
were in the meantime to become available. The question of rcprocc~5ing i~ thus
much more urgent for countries with no resources of uranium at their disposal
than for countries such as the U.S. and Canada which ha>ve their own abundant
supplies. These countries will be able to do without fast breeder reactors for
much longer, provided of course that they cut back on their uranium exports. In
this context, it seems to me that the U.S. is pursuing a policy that cuts both ways
by making the export of nuclear technology more difficult and hy attempting to
push through at the international level a moratorium on or at least the control
over reprocessing. However laudable and appropriate thi~ policy of
nonproliferation may be in ih essentials, one cannot help asking whether it will
not in fact achieve just the opposite by inciting other countries to direct their
efforts toward a state of nuclear autarky.
I am convinced that in the long term, measures taken on market economy
principles will be the only promising answer to the worldwide shortage both of
energy and of other resources. In our debates on the economy, we are in general
still caught up too closely in the conventional mode of thinking in term~ of the
two production factor~. capital and labor. For the industrialized countries of the
West, however, this is a matter of the delayed effects and aftereffects of social
problems of the 19th and 20th centuries, which have since then lmt a great deal
of their incisiveness. It was above all in the wake of the classical 1\.larxian
economic theory with its single pair of opposites, capital and labor, that the
classical value of nature as incorporated in the third production factor, land, fell
completely into oblivion.
Today we can no longer follow in the footsteps of David Ricardo, who in his
seminal work on economics entitled The Principle.~ of Polilicaf Economy and
Taxation referred to air, water, land and commoditie~ as ~o-called ··free goods"
76
that were there for the taking. We need to readjust our way of thinking to
include the third production factor, so that natural re'iources are given their
proper ~ignificancc as one of the fundamental factors of economic policy and so
that the ecological ~cope of such policie~ may be clearly determined. There b a
great difference between presenting price ri~es to the public as the result of
mysterious price manipulations by international corporatiom or producer cartels,
and presenting them a~ the inevitable consequence of the global shortage of a
vital production factor. The first-named course is hardly convincing as a meam
of achieving a new energy-consciousness, becau~e in offering ~ubstitute solutions
of a political nature it shirks from the issue instead of facing the consequences of
a world market be<,et by shortages. Just as in the fifties and sixties labor shortage
in the German economy cau~ed disproportionately large wage increa~e~ in
accordance with the laws governing the market economy, the present shortages of
the production factor nature will force us to accerpt di<;proportionately large
price increases for natural re<,ources.
I am thus cominced that restricting the ~cope for energy price formation would
be tantamount to sidestepping ba~ic economic fact~ and would in the medium
term remain a futile attempt to ignore changed conditions. Coming to terms with
scarcity will be soone~t effected by way of market prices that make allowance for
it. Higher price~ will lead to more economical consumption. They are an
incentive to accelerate the development of additional and in part completely new
sources of energy. They are the precondition for the necessary increased
investment and \\I ill make the exploitation even of les'i favorably located source~
viable. Finally, they will encourage the reuse of raw matcriah, an a~pect which is
gaining ever greater economic significance.
At this juncture, I feel I should ~ay a few words on the American system of
energy price controls. European observers are irritated by the fact that there has
been a further increa~e in the difference bet\\·een the American dometic price
level for petroleum product~ and their price in the world market. In October
1979, the American composite price for oil was some 18 per cc!H below the world
market price. Since then, OPEC price increa~es will probably have \\idencd this
gap by some 5ix to eight per cent. The American gasoline price, including taxes,
remains low in compari~on to European price~. amounting for in~tancc to lcs~
than half of the gasoline price in France, Italy and the Federal Republic of
Germany. Since there arc a~ yet no sigm of a removal of price controh on
ga.;oline, there will be no change in thi-, artificial divergence from world market
price level~.
We are of course aware that any adju-,tment~ to price policy mmt be made
with great caution if social tcnsiom are to be avoided. The ~tarting po~ition of a
coumry with a large territory and a relatively inefficient sy-;tem of local transport
is different from that of the countric~ of Europe. Nevertheles,, one i' 'urely
justified in ~aying that the artificially depre~sed price level in the U.S. i'i the cau~c
of many problem~. The U.S. i~ one of the fe\\ indu~trialized countries in which
oil consumption continued 10 innca'iC in the period from 1973 to 197!l, namely
by 10.6 per cent. In the ~arne period, oil comumption in the European
Community declined by 7.3 per cent and in Japan by 12.3 per cent. In ab'iolute
77
terms, however, this reduction by some 67 mi!lion tons was not ~ufficicnt to offset
the increased consumption of 78 million tons on the part of the U.S.
The tiresome issue of U.S. import subsidies for petroleum products should also
be dealt with in this context. Controlled and artificially deprcs~ed prices have an
adverse effect on the international attractiveness of a market, leading to
corrective adjustments in foreign trade. This has long been known from
experience. But there is a danger that other countries will be induced to take
similar measures and that this will in the end result in a disastrou~ international
race in contradiction to all the well-tried rules of our international trade
cooperation. It would be the financially weak countries that would lose thi<; race,
and the winners would be the small group of countries that have control over the
world's supplies of oil.
There is in any case a danger that the oil-exporting countries will anernpt to
derive ever-increasing benefits from their strong position. As a basis for
transactions with the countries they supply, they may well in future start to
demand economic considerations of a new kind, such as concrete assurances to
take specific products which are otherv...ise difficult to sell, or the transfer of
technology and the like. What is indeed to prevent their demanding that the
countries they supply should toe a specific pol;tical line?
I feel that on no account should the countries of the We\!ern alliance gi"c any
encouragement to such development~. One of the consequence~ of the
international oil companies being pu~hed back by oil-producing count ric~ is that
the question of supply contracts from state to state ha~ become a prc~~ing one. I
regard supply contracts of this kind as a double-edged instrument, because they
promote the continuing politicizing of world oil trade, whereas they should at
most be a subsidiary measure to private-sector activities.
The solidarity of the countries in the Western alliance will in future be subject
to an ever-increasing pressure in the conflict of interests over d\\·indling supplies
of oil. Despite aH manifestations of solidarity, there will stiH be a \Cry great
temptation for countries to go it alone. Even within the European Community
there is very little scope for supranational decision-making in view of the marked
differences between the economic deployment and availability of energy. The
European Community doc~ not alv.ays succeed in ~peaking with one voice at
international conference~ on energy. The fact that France is not rerrcscntcd in
the International Energy Agency makes it difficult for Weqern industrialized
countries to work together.
At the same time, there i<; no way of avoiding the task of pu~hing forward with
the coordination and if possible the harmoniLation of Wc~tern energy policic'i.
The countries of the West will otherwise run the risk of becoming divided as
regards energy policy to the detriment of their united impact on world politics in
general. Ba~ically, what we need is some kind of code of fair conduCT, if only
one might be permitted to hope that a code of this kind would remain valid in
times or crisis as well.
III
Oil price increases will have a significant effect on monetary policy in the years
to come. The most frequently used hypothesis postulates a real increase in oil
prices of some 100 per cent from 1975 up to the year 2000. This would be
equivalent to a yearly increase in the price of crude oil of roughly three per cent
above the global inflation rate.
In conjunction with the worldwide boom, the first oil price explosion in
1973-74 led to an intense upsurge in inflation which slackened off only gradually
in the following years. By 1978, many countries had succeeded in curbing price
rises, if not to the full extent required. Floating exchange rates made the
insulation against imported inflation more effective. Gradually, however, more
countries came to share the view that inflation destroys jobs instead of creating
them. Experience has shown that it is not possible in the long term to buy full
employment and a high rate of economic growth with "easy money" and soaring
inflation. Greatest success was registered by the countries that had come to grips
with inflation by applying restrictive policies.
At the world level, inflation started to gather pace again a year ago. In
October 1979, the consumer price average in the industrialized countries
registered some 10 per cent, the first time it had reached two figures since August
1975. The upward movement of prices can be attributed to another very marked
rise in the price of oil and other raw materials and also to the acceleration of
"homemade" inflation. In other words: inflation is· just as dependent on the
price of oil as on the money supply. The rush to buy gold is symptomatic of the
growing fear of inflation. The price of gold has become the "temperature chart
of international fears." With rising rates of inflation there has also been greater
regional dispersion of price increase rates. Thus the inflation differential between
the U.S. and Europe increased from 0.1 percentage points in 1978 to 2.5
percentage points in 1979.
The future of the dollar, too, will ultimately depend on whether the U.S. is
able to get a grip on price increase~. where the annual rate of some 13 per cent
has assumed dimensions unknown ~ince the end of the Second World War. This
price increase rate is even higher than the average rate of inflation in the
European Community at roughly 10 per cent. A stable dollar is in the interest of
us all. The dollar is still the most important currency in the Western world and
can be replaced by no other. On the strength of its dominant position in the
world economy, the U.S. assumed the role of the country providing the key
currency after the Second World War. Today the dollar is still the major reserve
currency, and approximately four-fiflhs of world currency reserves are held in
dollars. The dollar has similar importance as a world trade currency. Roughly 60
per cent of world trade is transacted in dollars, as compared to about 40 per cent
in Deutschmarks. Finally, the dollar fulfills a function of prime importance as an
intervention currency.
While the U.S. would clearly be quite content if the dollar were to surrender
some of its importance as the key currency, the Europeans resist the idea of their
currencies gradually assuming the role of reserve assets. Many Europeans claim
79
that there is no alternative to the dollar as a reserve currency, that currencies
such as the Deutschmark and the Swiss franc can only be "substitute" reserve
assets, and that there is no other way than to restore confidence in the dollar and
to give it the role of key currency in the eighties as welL This is probably one
reason why European countries are prepared to participate in measures designed
to stabilize the dollar.
However, long-term stabilization of the dollar is t;onceivable only if the U.S.
makes progress towards achieving balance--of-payments equilibrium. To do this
will first require the marked dependence on imported energy to be substantially
reduced, the consumers to be compelled to conserve energy, and the introduction
of a free market energy pricing system. Secondly, the U.S. economy must make
better use of its export potential, in order to offset the prcsetn large deficits in
the balance of trade with Japan and the OPEC countries.
The sustained lack of confidence in the dollar was just one of the factors
behind the initiative for the deliberate creation of a zone of nonfluctuating rates
of exchange in Europe by means of regional agreements. On 13 March 1979, the
European Monetary System (EMS) came into effect, replacing the arrangement
known as the "snake." After a transitional period of two years the EMS is to be
permanently established and a European \1onetary Fund set up. The jurisdiction,
function and institutional form of the latter are still under debate. The EMS is a
regional solution to problems of monetary policy. It carries the hope for new
impetus to economic and monetary policy cooperation in Europe. Beside this, the
EMS can be seen as an attempt to encourage renewed activity directed toward the
political integration of Europe. lts purpose is not to isolate the European market
from the rest of the world, nor is it intended as a means of discriminating against
any particular currency. By creating greater stability within Europe, the aim is to
contribute toward more stability in the world currency system and in world trade
relations. The EMS is not intended to compete with the International :'Vtonetary
Fund (IMF) either, but rather to complement it. As the Council of Europe has
expressly stated, the system is fully consistent with the IMF Articles of
Agreement.
The EMS has already achieved one of its two objecthes, namely a greater
degree of exchange rate stability. It has not led 10 communal stability in view of
the marked divergence between rates of inflation. The underlying risk in the EMS
is that stable rates of exchange can be maintained on a lasting basis only if the
partners aim to achieve greater price stability. The harmonization of intlation
rates at a medium level would not be justifiable. The main burden of an
economic policy directed toward stability will devolve on monetary policy, which
will call for a greater degree of autonomy for central banks in other European
countries as well.
Fixed rates of exchange tend to ease the transfer of inflationary developments
from one country to another. If we are unable to eliminate the inflation
differential within the EMS by means of reduced price increa~c rates in the
countries with the highest inllation, there is a danger that strong-currency
countries will be compelled by large-scale intervention to create excessive amounts
of money, which would jeopardize the stability already achieved. If rates of
80
exchange that are no longer in line with real conditions are not to be supported
by large~scale intervention, exchange rate adjustments arc called for, as expressly
provided by the system, which are timely, adequate, and wherever possible free
from speculative potential. The readiness to give higher priority to stability,
however, could greatly improve the prospects of success for the EMS. But it still
remains to be seen whether the high-inflation countries will in fact make the
changes in monetary policy that are needed for the system to be successful.
In their external relations, the countries of the Western alliance are facing the
following three major tasks in respect of monetary policy: the reduction of
oil-induced balance-of-payments disequilibria, their adequate financing, and
making allowances for the investment requirements of oil-exporting countries.
The recent price developments in world energy markets are having drastic
effects on the non-oil developing countries. Given the as yet limited foundations
of their economic development, it is much harder for them to be forced to
sacrifice prosperity as a result of added burdens on the balance of payments, and
such sacrifices may well lead to a dramatic rise in social tensions. Probably the
most important task in the economic policy of developing countries is the
formulation of strategies for adjustment to the present situation. In the long term
they may even have better prospects for achieving this than industrialized
countries, because an economy that is still in process of development is more
adaptable and better equipped to make usc of new technology, particularly solar
energy. In the deployment of development aid from Western industrialized
countries greater emphasis than in the past should be placed on its being used
selectively and primarily for economic and technological assistance, to enable
developing countries to lessen their dependence on energy imports and to ease the
burden on their balances of payments.
However, we can hardly expect things to proceed without any dramatic
developments. The oil bil! of the developing countries (that is, the net oil
importers) came in 1973 to $5.2 billion, but by 1979 it had risen to over $50
billion. This is more than twice the total development aid provided by the West,
which amounted to approximately $20 billion.
In my opinion the oil-exporting countries, whose policies are directly
responsible for such developments, should assume a special responsibility in this
connection, and should constantly be reminded of their obligation. The
oil-producing countries must themselves contribute as much as possible toward
financing the deficit of developing countries by investing their oil income and by
providing development aid. The development assistance provided by the West
cannot function as a means of compensation for balance-of-payments difficulties
caused by oil price increases, nor is this its intended purpose.
The international financing institutions, particularly the International Monetary
Fund, but also the World Bank and the regional development banks, will
probably have to assume the responsibility for financing an increasing volume of
such deficits. The funds presently available will be sufficient for this purpose.
Additional financial assistance in special instances will have to be decided from
case to case, taking account of the surpluses of oil-producing countries. I do not
at present see any need for new financing institutions.
8/
Despite all this, the pressure exerted by the Third World on the industrialized
countries of the West for more extensive international redeployment is bound to
increase. External factors will play an ever-increasing part in our policies toward
the Third World in the coming years and will inevitably result in developments in
the sectors of trade and financial policy which will be detrimental to the
industrialized countries of the West. To the same extent that East-West relations
will fluctuate even more strongly between antagonism and cooperation during the
eighties, extreme developments in the Third World will be potentia!ly more
explosive than ever before. In view of this, the policy we adopt toward the
developing countries will gain fresh significance as a means of safeguarding the
basis for peace in the eighties.
With regard to the oil producers it is becoming apparent, in contrast to the oil
crisis of 1973-74, that recycling their additional income in the world economy is
coming up against sizeable difficulties. The need to boost exports to the
oil-producing countries is being blocked by their limited absorptive capacity, their
increased caution as regards development planning and their growing opposition
to an excessively rapid conversion of their economic and social conditions.
During the first eight months of 1979, exports by Western industrialized countries
to the major OPEC countries fell off by some 7.5 per cent. There has been a
drastic deterioration in the current accounts of industrialized countries as a
whole. Whereas in 1978 they still registered a surplus of $33 billion, 1980 will
show a deficit of $18 billion.
This lends even greater significance to the question of whether and to what
extent the recycling of capital will prove feasible. There are still a number of
question marks over this issue. The process of recycling has got off to a very
sluggish start, as is shown by the exponential increase in the foreign currency
reserves of the OPEC countries in 1979. The freezing of Iranian accounts with
U.S. banks, the insecurity of the global political and economic situation and the
preference for gold a~ an investment medium give rise to considerable doubt as to
whether the oil producers will be prepared to place their income as a long-term
investment in the capital markets of the West.
In my opinion we shall have to generate even more ideas than we do at present
on how to arouse the interest of oil-producing countries in investment in our
countries. We shall have to ask ourselves whether and in what form we can
increase our offer of industrial participation. This would be of particular interest,
for instance, in respect of capital-intemive projects in the energy sector, such as
the transformation of coal.
It is greatly to be hoped that the planned substitution account within the
International Monetary Fund will comply with the investment requiremenh of
oil-producing countries. Reserve dollar holdings can be deposited in this account
by monetary authorities against the issue of bonds denominated in Special
Drawing Rights. The aim is thus to steer the diversification of currency reserves
out of the dollar that is required by the oil producers into an orderly
arrangement that will have no adverse effects on exchange rates. The account will
be able to function as a reservoir for unsteady dollar holdings only if the central
banks arc prepared to inve~t ~uch holdings. In order to ensure voluntary
82
participation on a broad scale, the substitution account will have to be attractive
to potential investors even in comparison with other objects of investment. Some
important issues, such as the interest rate, potential mobility and the maintenance
of capital value, arc still to be rc5olved. The U.S. will have to be assigned an
adequate joint responsibility for the guarantee of capital value and the interest
payable on holdings, which should give it additional encouragement to pursue a
policy in line with ~tability objectives.
The 5ubstitution account can contribute toward easing the pressure on the
monetary system and making it more stable. We should not expect too much,
however, in view of the fact that at best a limited part of existing dollar holdings
will be eon.<,o]idated. As it is, the success of the account is dependent on there
being no critical developments in the foreign exchange markets, otherwise
currencies that appear ripe for revaluation would probably be regarded as a more
attractive alternative.
In the final analysis, the decisive question with regard to the investment policy
of oil producers will be the effectiveness of the stability policie~ pursued by the
industrialized nations of the West. By taking consi~tent action against innation,
these countries will at the same time be making their capital markets more
attractive for investments from oil-producing countries. Here, too, it is important
for us to recreate and w maintain confidence in the \alue of our currencies.
IV
Developments on the world energy market, above all the most recent political
events in the Middle East, and in particular the occupation of Afghanistan by the
Red Army, are bound to cau~e the countries of the Western alliance to put the
principles and methods of their trade cooperation to a renewed test. In this
context I should like to put up a personal opinion for discussion, a question that
will doubtless have to be considered. Phrased in a somewhat pointed manner, the
question is as follows: is not our trade policy in the Western alliance too illiberal
where it ought in fact to be more liberal, and is it not too liberal where it ought
not to be liberal?
I am convinced that we should pursue a liberal trade policy where the
international exchange of goods takes place, in the classic form, so to speak, on
the basis of reciprocity under peacetime conditions. It may not be very original to
declare one's support for the conventional proposal of free world trade, but in
politics it ha~ long since ceased to be a matter of course. For some people, the
claim that free world trade i~ the best guarantee for prosperity, growth and full
employment will always amount to a provocative statement. But the freedom of
world trade is both an economic and a political quantity. It is the mirror image
of a free economy just as controlled world trade is the mirror image of a state
economy. To relinquish or even only to accept sweeping restrictions in the
concept of free world trade would inevitably have repercussions on the very
structure of our national economies. So in advocating a liberal economic ~ystem
at home, the freedom of entrepreneurs to make their own decisions, and private
ownership, we must also come out in favor of liberal systems abroad. The
83
renunciation of state control of the economy, centralized planning and controlled
investments cannot only be valid at home, especially in the case of economies
that are largely dependent on export trade.
The GATT is our most important institution for the maintenance of free world
trade. The successful conclusion of the Tokyo round is certainly a welcome event
that can be entered on the credit side of trade relations. On both sides of the
Atlantic and in Japan there was awareness of the responsibility borne by the
Western industrialized nations for the further development of world trade. The
test of the new arrangement~ will be in their practical application by the
signatories and in the effective functioning of the GATT control mechanisms.
This is not to say that we can re~t on our laurels. Developments in the world
energy market with their adverse effect on the economies of the Western
industrialized nations have increased the risk of countries playing a lone hand in
their foreign trade relations. Even in past years in which there were no drastic
increases in the price of energy the net result was not a positive one. After
repeated attacks on free world trade, GATT estimates show that from 1974 to
1977 some four per cent of the volume of world trade was subjected to fresh
restrictions. This percentage covers trade flows of between $30 and $50 billion.
We know from experience that developments of this kind can easily break out
into an extensive conflagration, as state interventions in the country of one
trading partner not only create a basis for appeals from interest groups in other
countries but also incite demands from subsequently located industries. Import
restrictions that hit textile-producing countries will also affect exports of textile
machinery by industrialized countries.
Much ingenuity has been applied in recent years in adding to classic import
and export restrictions a veritable arsenal of internal political mcawres, such as
bilateral self-restraint arrangements, wrongful administrative rules, fiscal policy
and monetary manipulations. They are even more dangerous than open
protectionism, glossed over as they are with handy phrases such as ''organized
liberalism" or "orderly markets." It is to be hoped that the result~ of the Tokyo
round will also provide a practical remedy here.
This is not the place to embark upon a detailed enumeration of the ~ins
committed in the name of protectionism on both sides of the Atlantic. The
parties concerned are all living in glass houses in which, as the proverb tells us,
one should refrain from throwing stones. Unfortunately, one gains the
impression that the register of sins is growing longer. It is easy to understand
why the U.S. and other major trade partners voice strong objections to EEC
agricultural protectionism in particular, not only because it impedes access to
European markets, but also because European agricultural policy generates
competitive pressure in non-EEC markets. In this context, however, it should not
be forgotten that the U.S. has for years been earning considerable surpluses both
in general trade and in agricultural trade with the European Community.
A most instructive example under the heading of trade re~trictions and
distortions is the current debate on both sides of the Atlantic on trade in
synthetic fibers. The issue in question, at least as ~een by the European side, is as
it were one of second-generation competitive distortion. It is claimed that
84
American price controls on oil and natural gas, resulting in lower energy prices,
are the root cause of a marked increase in synthetic fiber imports by the
European Community.
A defensive approach is now no longer sufficient to deal with protectionism in
its many and varied forms. Even if legitimate social interests are taken into
account, the price of protectionism is too high, both from the macroeconomic
and from the political point of view. The short-lived improvement is achieved at
the cost of solidifying existing market shares and thus initiating a long-term trend
that is out of touch with market requirements, curtailing structural change and
thus in the medium term adversely affecting the international competitiveness of
domestic industries, increasing the risk to employment as a result of reduced
competitiveness of the protected branches of industry, and finally aggravating the
existing lack of confidence in growth resulting from uncertainty about the future
development of trade.
Nor is the development of external trade relations with the centrally-planned
economies of the Eastern bloc a contribution toward liberalization of world
trade. There has been no reduction in the efforts of these countries to promote
their exports by way of barter deals. In isolated instances, transactions of this
kind may well have a positive effect on the development of East-West trade
where there are advantages to be gained for both sides fnm linking up exports
and imports. But they can hardly be expected to cause rejoicing in those for
whom the example of free international trade has lost none of its attractiveness.
Barter deals will be a questionable alternative particularly in cases where the
exporter is offered in return goods which he will be unable to sell in the West in
view of type, volume, or even quality. Small and medium-sized enterprises in
particular are compelled to accept competitive drawbacks, while large-scale
businesses will often have their own trading and distributing companies through
which they can market barter goods. It is difficult to see how there can be any
radical improvement in this situation in the near future. The export structure of
Eastern-bloc trading partners remains unfavorable, and the goods they offer meet
with overcrowded markets. There arc also frequent quality problems.
The freedom of international economic relations is also being called in question
today by developments that are occupying international conferences under the
heading of "new international economic order." There is some reason to doubt
whether this "new international economic order" that is called for by developing
countries with varying degrees of intensity would in fact be a better economic
order. So.me of the key demands made by the developing countries within the
framework of integrated commodity programs are of a blatant
anti-market-economy character. One sometimes gains the impression that the
infamous constructional defects of the European Community's agricultural
market organization must have served as a model at the international leveL In
the current negotiation~ on commodity agreements for ~elected products, old
demands such as price and quantity regulation, purchase commitments by the
user countries, financing of surplu~ production and automatic compensation for
reduction in proceeds have in no way been removed from the agenda. The state
of negotiations at the International Conference on the Law of the Sea also gives
85
cause for concern. Despite the principle of free acce~s also for private enterprises
to the maritime resources, developments arc showing a distinct leaning in favor
of the International Seabed Authority. In the opinion of G-erman industry this
Authority will no longer be competitive once it has been burdened with the
planned high financial expenditure. Quantitative restrictions to production to the
benefit of terrestrial mining will provide an opening for the misuse of the
Authority. Voting procedure and the regulation of influence in the Council of the
Authority are unbalanced. There can be no guarantee of competitive equality
between the Authority and private enterprises, the more so as the parallel system
is to end anyway after 25 months, unless a new arrangement can be reached.
What is becoming apparent here is that this international economic authority
could gain an increasingly powerful monopoly position.There is a twofold danger
in this: firstly, the politicizing of trade, because bodies of this kind take their
decisions on the basis of political weight rather than on rational economic
criteria; and secondly, the proliferation of bureaucracy, as economic decisiom are
shifted from the enterprises concerned to an international amhority. This brings
to mind a pertinent witticism: "What is the difference between a public and a
private monopolist? The private monopolist has a guilty comcience!"
With regard to developing countries the fact is unfortunately often overlooked
that there is a broad range of measures in line with the system which enable the
special situation of structurally weak and underdeveloped countries to be taken
effectively into account. An essential and necessary component of a free
international economic order are subsidiary measures that support the market
mechanism, such as the general system of customs preferences in favor of
developing countries, systems that stabilize proceeds in conformity with the
market, preferential treatment for developing countries, the waiving of
reciprocity in the elimination of barriers to trade, and the transfer of income
through development aid. Above all, however, the readiness to support free
world trade must go hand in hand with the readiness to continue doing so even
when it concerns the liberalization of one's own imports. In this respect the old
conclusion still holds, that opening up the markets for goods that developing
countries can supply on competitive terms will be more effective than much of
the financial aid provided. Unfortunately, this kind of trade assistance is given
less weight in international statistics and at international conferences than
financial aid.
Despite intensive searches by politically interested parties, no worthwhile
alternatives to a liberal world economic order are in sight which have stood the
test in theory and in practice. In contrast, it has been repeatedly shown that
market organizations, quotas, control measures, private or public international
monopolies and cartels, which restrict or even cancel the essential steering and
distributing function of the market, will affect world economic dvelopment to the
detriment of industrialized and developing countries and will lead to highly
undesirable power ~truggles within the framework of international economic
relations.
These are the is~ues in which we must keep the nag of liberal trade policies
flying in the coming years as well. But on the other hand, I fed that the most
86
recent political events give rise to the question of whether we are not being too
liberal in other areas. In other words, could not the liberal stance we support in
respect of trade turn out to be a dangerous political weakne~s in times of acute
political disputes, which the opponents of our free-trade system could all too
easily turn to their own advantage, and one which would make it harder for us to
mount a legitimate defense against their attacks?
As I see it, the countries of the Western alliance will be compelled over the
next few years to rethink and perhaps even to redefine the relationship between
trade and politics. It is in conformity with our political tradition, and also with
the older, nonpolitical tradition, to point out that trade and politics arc two
completely different things which should be kept apart and ought never to be
confounded. It is also correct to say that nobody should light-heartedly hold a
brief for political intervention in the free international exchange of goods. For in
doing so we would depart ever further from the worthwhile ideal of unrestricted
trade to the maximum benefit of all peoples. But one should not ignore the fact
that sound and old-established customs have long since ceased to be current coin
for others. In the centrally-planned economies of the Eastern bloc, foreign trade
and payments has always been an integral part of general politics. The state itself
is a party to foreign trade, and that as a monopolist. And prompted by the
energy crisis in the early seventies, the OPEC countries have declared their
express support for a philosophy of "oil as a political weapon." This means that
both as regards the centrally-planned economies and the OPEC countries the
Western world is concerned with groups of countries for which the primacy of
politics over economics is firmly established both in theory and practice.
The Western alliance will also have to consider possible alternatives. In the
final analysis, what is needed is a graduated set of instruments with which to
meet political challenges at the international level. It is important in this respect
that the means employed should be in proportion to the challenge. If a challenge
must be met, then economic measures are a milder response than military action.
In the difficult situation in which the U.S. is today, it has a legitimate right to
enquire after the solidarity of its Western allies. For years the U.S. has borne
almost exclusively the unpopular burden of defending the West, while Europe
went about its own business protected by the American deterrent. During the
Vietnam war it was possible to argue with pefectly serious motives about whether
this war had anything at all to do with Europe. But the events in the Middle East
touch directly upon the economic life-lines of our continent. To refer to the
responsibility of America in this respect would be no better than outdated
provincialism.
The effectiveness of economic sanctions has always been a subject for heated
debate. Although their efficacy has been disputed by the majority, they have
been used again and again. It is certainly correct to say that economic sanctions
have not as yet proved able to bring about the capitulation of any state. Neither
was Napoleon able to fulfill his ambitious plans with the Continental blockade
against England, nor did the comprehensive embargo and the total blockade set
up by the Allies against the newly-founded Soviet Union after the First World
87
War lead to the desired political result. But it would be wrong to describe these
measures as a complete failure. They left their mark on economic development
and were often the cause of substantial shortfalls in production.
Reference to the failure of the Rhodesia boycott is not a convincing argument.
In South Africa, Rhodesia had a powerful and extremely cooperative neighbor.
Apart from this, neither businessmen nor the Western governments took the
boycott decision very seriously, as Rhodesia was not regarded as a source of
danger.
It is a different matter as far as the Soviet Union is concerned. Moscow is not
independent. Even Stalin was never able to manage without economic aid from
the West, despite his pressing on with a policy of autarky. Khrushchev would not
have been able to realize his policy of industrialization in the late fifties without
Western engineering and Western credits. The ugly technological gap remains
even today one of the major weaknesses in the Soviet economic system. To
imagine what would happen if Western know-how were no longer available one
has only to picture what European industry would look like today if there had
been no inflow of technology from the U.S. after the war. Cutting supplies of
grain from the West to the Soviet Union wi!l surely not be without effect either.
Even if Soviet agriculture brings in a record harvest it will not be enough to meet
the requirements of the 260 million Soviet citizens. This supply gap will be even
greater in the case of a bad harvest, as last year, when the Soviet Union was
forced to buy 30 million tons of grain. The import requirement for 1980 is put at
a similar level.
Nobody would seriously maintain that the Soviet Union could be forced to
withdraw from Afghanistan by means of economic measures. This would be an
exaggerated objective in th_e light of all historical experience of relations with
totalitarian states. But it would be equally incredible to maintain that economic
sanctions against the Soviet Union will have no economic effect whatsoever. The
condition is that the goods affected by an embargo are properly selected and that
the measures adopted are carried in effect by the solidarity of all Western
industrialized countries.
In concluding, I should like once again to place this issue in a broader
perspective. Economic sanctions are only a part of the general issue of trade and
politics. The question can be put in a much more comprehensive form by asking
whether and to what extent the countries of the Western alliance can deploy their
economic strength more effectively in external relations, not only to ward off
aggression and to protect their freedom, but also, on a positive basis, to ensure
the continuity of world peace. To what extent is it worthwhile and indeed feasible
for us to use our economic strength more than we have done up to now in
international relations as a means of ensuring peaceful political cooperation in
the long term?
This will, I suppose, give rise to the objection that deliberations of this kind
are incompatible with a free economy as we understand it. This is a view I do not
share. The economy is just as much part of our system as, for instance, personal
liberty, and we do not regard compulsory military service and personal liberty as
88
incompatible. So I feel that it is perfectly legitimate to expect that the economy
should contribute toward maintaining political systems that are based on
freedom.
• •
•
Canadian Working Paper:
"ECONOMIC RELATIONS BETWEEN NORTH AMERICA
AND EUROPE"
According to almost every economic forecast that has been made, both Europe
and North America face a gloomy economic outlook for at least the early years
of the new decade of the 1980's. The President of the European Economic
Community Commission, Roy Jenkins, has predicted that the EEC's growth rate
could fall well below the mere two per cent forecast only a few months ago. In a
speech prepared for delivery to the European Parliament, he said the crisis was
so severe that "we face no less than the break-up of the established economic
and social order on which postwar Europe was built." In the Common Market,
inflation is expected to reach 11.5 per cent this year, compared with nine per cent
in 1979. In North America, the forecasts are no different. Both Canada and the
U.S. are facing the same problems of high inflation, heavy unemployment, lower
rates of economic growth, as well as the devaluation of their dollars in world
markets. According to the Economic Council of Canada, Canada can expect the
current combination of economic problems to continue for at least the next few
years.
Even at this 25th anniversary of what is a most useful forum for the exchange
of views between North Americans and Europeans, it would be an exercise in
nostalgia to contrast the present situation with the far happier period that ran
from the Marshall Plan roughly to the conclusion of the Kennedy Round in the
early 1960's. We can recall the elements that made that happier period possible:
American leadership and performance, steady growth without significant
inflation, the Bretton Woods monetary system, the universal acceptance of freer
trade and the muting of protectionist pressures, a slow and controllable pace of
structural change, the absence of serious problems with the developing countries,
and perhaps as much as anything else the availabillty of oil at cheap prices and
without political complications. But for more than a decade we have seen on
both sides of the Atlantic how each of these underlying factors has been changing
in an adverse direction. And the impact on the overall relationship between
North America and Europe has already become serious; today, it could threaten
the whole fabric of cooperation among the OECD countries we call the West,
even to the point of impairing cooperation in the political and national security
areas.
89
A distinguished Canadian diplomat whose principal sphere of activity was
economics, Mr. Jack Hamilton Warren, once remarked that the U.S. and
Canada could always cope with two or three significant areas of difference on
economic matters at any one time. However, if the agenda of friction and
disagreement extended to seven or eight serious problems at the same time, there
was a danger that the fabric would break down. Much the same must be true of
Europe and North America. It is not an exaggeration to fear today that this is
just the kind of situation we collectively confront. Each of the adverse trends I
have suggested above creates its own pressure on individual nations and groups
of nations to act selfishly in response to its own public opinion. Each of these
has in fact been doing so in recent years, despite the adoption by OECD and
others of pious (and at times useful) declarations of adherence to the basic
principles of cooperative action that have made the OECD nations an
extraordinary historic model and basic success story for more than 30 years. And
today, in the face of the serious crisis of political instability and Soviet action in
the Middle East, the danger of nationalist economic policies carried out without
regard to the welfare or concerns of others is perhaps at its highest point yet.
By no means are all of the actual or potential divisions between North America
and Europe as entities. My own country, Canada, has significant continuing
differences with the U.S., and there are similar differences among the individual
nations of Europe. But the most useful thing a paper like this may attempt is to
identify the key areas of potential difference and especially those that do tend to
arise on a North American/European fault line. In a paper of bearable length,
one cannot hope to assess any of these problems in depth, much less their
totality. But a listing of the key problem areas and the serious difficulties that
now exist or may arise in each of these may both remind us of the overall gravity
of the situation and serve as a possible guide to discussion.
On this basis, I identify, not necessarily in their order of importance, six
problem areas that were already evident by the beginning of 1980. These are:
1. The mangement of inflation and reduced growth.
2. The monetary system and the future of the dollar.
3. Free trade versus growing protectionism.
4. Structural change and industrial policy.
5. The handling of the energy crisis, especially in respect to oil.
6. Relations with the developing countries.
Next, in the wake of the Iranian hostage crisis and the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, it is necessary to stress two additional area~.
7. The handling of economic sanctions in general.
8. Policies toward trade with the U.S.S.R. and Eastern Europe.
Final!y, it is useful to look ahead at least briefly to two longer-term possibilities
that could affect the economic relationships between Europe and North America
in the 1980's. These are:
90
9. Changes in the population structure of each, and their implications.
10. The possibility, at some point, of something resembling a North
American bloc embracing at least Canada, the U.S. and Mexico.
Let us, then, look at each of these problem areas, where we stand, what
problems already exist, and what may emerge in the future.
I. The management of inflation and reduced growth. Over the past three
years there have been serious frictions in the coordination of national policic~ in
this area. The U.S. pressed in 1977 and 1978 for more expansionist policies by
the Federal Republic of Germany and Japan, while these countries, along with
others, urged that the U.S. itself act more strongly to defend the dollar and to
fight inflation. It may be argued that, despite German protestations, something
resembling the "locomotive theory" as regards Germany and Japan "was
precisely the policy that was adopted in 1978 and given the full sanction of the
Germans at the Bonn Summit of the heads of government in July of that year.'"
Similarly, pressures from Europe undoubtedly played a significant pan in the
anti-intlation actions taken by the U.S. government in November of 1978 and
more decisively in the so-called Volcker package, in October 1979.'
For the moment, however, the problem of coordination appears less serious,
since the steady increase (or re-emergence in some cases) of high intlation rates
throughout the OECD nations has led to general governmental agreement that
the attack on inflation must have top priority. Yet there undoubtedly remain
serious problems as to whether individual countries, especially in Europe, are
likely to regard the anti-inflationary policies of the U.S. in particular as
adequate. (The new Carter package of 1980 is already being criticized on these
grounds.) And, to the extent that the increased severity of the intlation problem
in the U.S. stems from the perception that increased post-Afghanistan defense
budgets are a major contributing factor to inflation, there is plainly a danger that
controversy over inllation policy may re-open long-standing doubts in the U.S. as
to the adequacy of the defense contributions of European allies (and, I might
add, of Canada).
Moreover, it must never be forgotten that in the approach to this set of
problems there is an underlying difference between what might be called the
folklore of many European countries, notably West Germany, and the folklore
of the U.S. and Canada. In the former, historic memories reinforce popular
support for strong anti-inflationary policies, whereas the concern for
unemployment is muted, in part, by the fact that the burden can be to some
extent placed on immigrant workers. In the U.S. and Canada, on the other hand,
unemployment and recession are not only historical bugaboos but in the present
situation, in the U.S. at least, have a totally disproportionate impact on minority
and other groups already dissatisfied with the progress made in bringing them
into the mainstream of national economic life and progress. It wi!l be
extraordinary if the political pressures reflecting these facts do not produce
significant domestic difficulties for a truly "hard-line" American policy against
inllation, and if this in turn does not tend in the next year or two to raise the
level of European criticism once again to serious levels.
'Andrew Shonfield. ""The \\'orld Economy in 1979"'. f-oreign A/fain. "America and the World
t979'", p. liOii.
'Ibid., pt"J.5%-600.
91
2. The monetary system and the future of the dollar. In these same past three
years, there have been periods when there was sharp European criticism of
American passivity toward the decline in value of the dollar. And in the fall of
1979 it was unquestionably the refusal of the Deutsche Bundesbank to continue
supporting the dollar that clinched the case within the American government for
the Volcker package. This specific sensitivity remains potentially acute.
And behind it, of course, lie the wider questions of the continued role of the
dollar as the dominant reserve currency, and of the operation of an overall
system envisaged since 1971 as one of managed floating exchange rates. Many
Europeans feel that the U.S. has done too little managing. And if all the major
OECD nations have avoided the competitive depreciation of their currencies as in
the 1930's, they have been concerned to maintain an exchange rate helpful to
exports, even if that conflicted with broader objectives of a sound monetary
system. There is a built-in conflict here that can too easily become a renewed
source of serious friction.'
The new European Monetary System was in part designed to insulate major
European countries from the perceived vagaries of the dollar, and there are some
Americans who welcome the greater exchange rate discipline of the EMS as
exerting a stiffening influence on U.S. policy toward the dollar.4
In this process,
the Deutsche mark in particular has now emerged as an important reserve
currency in itself as well as being the bellwether of the EMS. Yet the German
authorities do not seem prepared to accept all the responsibilitie~ that go with
such a reserve currency role even as they and other Europeans recognize that the
U.S. cannot continue to discharge all the special responsibilities of the dominant
reserve currency holder, even if it should do better than it has.
In short, we are in a. transition period when the dollar is clearly less effective as
the main reserve currency in world trade, but where no satisfactory replacement
or supplement has yet emerged. As Andrew Shonfield has put it, referring
specifically to the possibility of a "dollar substitution account," it was, as of the
end of 1979, "hard to avoid the impression that the pace of required institutional
change was lagging dangerously far behind changes occurring in the international
marketplace.' The enormous growth in the Eurocurrency markets means that the
level of liquidity available to support world trade is essentially free from official
control; however well-managed individual banking institutions may be, this is a
situation that could cause serious difficulty at some point.
Not all of these matters, by any means, are items of current serious
disagreement between Europeans and North Americans. But they do reflect a
basic economic structure that may be in increasing disarray, a fact which in itself
affects the economic well-being and cooperative spirit on both sides of the
Atlantic.
'For a more extended discussion, sec Marina v. N. Whitman, "A Year of Travail: The United State;
and the International Economy", Foreign Affairs, America and the World 1978".
'See, for example, Harold van B. Cleaveland and Thomas F. Huerta1. "Stagflation: How We Got
Into It - How To Get Out", Foretgn Affwrs, fall, 1979.
'Loc. r:it., p. 261.
92
3. Free trade versus growing prOlectionism. The recently concluded MTN
negotiations were undoubtedly a significant success. It was agreed to cut world
tariffs an average of 33 per cent on approximately 5,700 items over an eight-year
period. The EEC granted tariff cuts on $1 billion worth of products, including
rice, tobacco and beef. The U.S. cut tariffs on $2.8 billion of farm imports. The
average level of tariffs currently used in the U.S. is 8.3 per cent, in the EEC 9.8
per cent and in Canada 15.5 per cent, but these levels will be significantly
reduced by the latest GATT agreements. The second important result of the
GATT was the adoption of six new codes to curtail the increasing use of
non-tariff barriers. A common and over-used non-tariff barrier that was under
fire was the usc of government subsidies to protect inefficient domestic industries
from import competition or, alternatively, to give exporters an unfair price
advantage in world market5. The main objective of the U.S. was not to push for
greater tariff cuts, but rather, to achieve the adoption of codes to dismantle or
curb non-tariff barrier5.
But the continuing success of the MTN agreements in holding protectionist
pressures at bay depends heavily on whether specific negotiations do in fact
succeed in achieving progress on the issues of subsidies, in particular. The
tendency of government to interfere directly in industry is perhaps the strongest
expression of economic nationalism and protectionism. Protectionist trends, or at
the very least the economic nationalist sentiment, can be seen quite readily in
Canada by advertisements and programs for "buying Canadian". The same is
true in many other countries and has been produced largely by the energy crisis,
inflation, and rising unemployment.
Despite awareness of the advantage~ to open and liberal trading systems,
protectionist ~entiments have increased on both sides of the Atlantic. Both North
America and Europe find themselves suddenly strongly challenged, even in their
home markets, by new competitors.
Protectionist trend5 have become significant in the automobile industry,
previously notable for its free-trade views. Chrysler Corporation ended this past
summer with 80,000 cars and trucks left unsold. If domestic cars and trucks are
not selling, there will be greater barriers for imported cars. Imported cars in
North America are more and more prevalent than ever before, which seems to
indicate that a gradual reversal effect is taking place.
In short, the effectiveness of the new ~TN agreements could be undercut at
any time if further progress is not made, not only on the wbsidy issue but on
public procurement policies; in the latter, a particularly semitive issue is whether
Europe is genuinely permitting free competitive bidding in aircraft purchases, or
whether in practice bidders arc being required to place too much of the
production in the buying countries on a "tied" basis. Subsidized European
agricultural exports, and the special problems of steel, petrochemicals and textiles
all remain highly sensitive areas not dealt with under the MTN agreements.
4. Structural change and industrial po/i(y. This difficult and hard-to-grasp
area was addressed at the Bilderberg Conference in Princeton two years ago.
While new production pattern5 in medium- and high-technology products have
been thought of as a problem that is most acute with respect to middle-income
countries and Japan, such problems do exist in certain areas between America
and Europe. And the tendency of European countries to back "chosen
instrument" entities (whether nominally private or public) is a constant
underlying source of friction felt by major sections of North American business.
The problem of handling structured change ha~ come to have a particularly
close relationship to the problem of continued free trade. As times get tougher,
the pressure to defend national industries that may no longer be competitive is
bound to get much more severe. Some of these protectionist pressures are
common to both Europe and North America and may came them to act in
parallel; others, however, arc already matters of confrontation (as in the case of
steel) and the list could multiply. To put it bluntly, although the need to adju~t
to inevitable change is becoming increasingly evident, few of m appear prepared
to contemplate the requirements or face the consequences.
5. The handling of the energy cnsis, especial(r in respecr ro oil. I under~tand
that the problem of energy first appeared as a ~eparate agenda topic at the
Bilderberg Conference held in 1973, when a great deal of the discussion was
devoted to criticism of the energy wastefulness of the U.S., in particular, with
general agreement that the industrialiLed countries needed to develop much more
effective and concerted policies to produce alternative5 to oil and to reduce their
energy consumption growth rates. It is chastening indeed to realize how much the
problem has worsened in the seven years since that time, and how it~ wor~ening
has steadily outpaced the slow development of effective policic~ and respnnse'i.
There is no need here to go over the history of oil price<;; in the 'iecond, or
"post-Iran" price crisis, they have risen from approximately SI3 per barrel at the
beginning of 1979 to a level of roughly $30 per barrel today. And, although spot
prices have now dropped and there appears to be an unca~y equilibrium in the
market, basic changes in the production policies of the leading OPEC countries
undoubtedly mean that the market will remain tight and that real prices will
continue to increase over the next few year'i. Already, at least four OPEC
countries have announced production cutbacks in 1980.
Secondly, internal unrest in every oil-producing country in the Middle East
holds a threat to steady oil availability in oil-importing countrie~. If the Iranian
revolution had left any room for doubt on thi~ point, it must have been dispelled
by the invasion of the Grand Mosque in Mecca in November, in circum~tances
still murky. Libya and the PLO are capable of as~isting or qirring up trouble all
through the oil-producing areas, with few exceptions. And, of course, their
attitudes relate directly to progre~s. or the lack of it, in the negotiations between
Israel and Egypt toward a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Finally, whereas we have become accustomed to thinking of the major
oil-producers as basically supportive of the economic system, the change in Iran
has meant that a very high proportion of the oil of the Middle East is now in the
hands of "hostile" government<; that have no such concern for the economic
welfare of the OFCD countrie~. Thi~ change in the political ~pectrum compound~
the danger> of action affecting both price~ and the availability of supplies.'·
'1'01 d lon~tn 'iillllll<lf\ ot d~,c>Jopmc·nr' during 1Y7'ol. '~l" Roloen SIUh;rugh and D;n1id Yc·rgin.
·-rn~<g_,. An l·nln;•crrc·) Tdc'C·opcd"" f-m·crwr .·!f/ml"l. ""Americ-a am.l rile \\orld 1\17<.1"". pp.
56)-5<.15.
94
Yet, in the face of these basic changes and the drastic price rises of 1979, there
was an almost total lack of effective cooperation among the major European
countries and the U.S. (Canada is, of course, both an exporter and an importer
of oil.) While the future oil-import ceilings adopted at the Tokyo summit in June
were undoubtedly a major step forward for the long term, there is no question
that Europeans still perceive North America as vastly wasteful, especially in its
transportation and heating practices, that Americans in their turn see Europeans
as trying to make their own special deals for oil, with serious effects on Western
solidarity in the Middle East (for example, the recent trip by President Giscard
d'Estaing of France), and that the institutions for cooperation within the OECD
framework, notably the International Energy Agency, have neither been effective
in preventing destructive scrambles for oil in the short term or in producing really
solid programs for action in the long term. If the situation were viewed as a race
between "elements of friction" and "elements of cooperation", one would have
to say that for the last year and a half the former have been growing much more
rapidly that the latter.
As for the longer term, there has probably been some narrowing of the
differences between experts and informed observers on both sides of the Atlantic.
For this, at least, we do owe some debt to the lEA. But, in terms of practical
action, the expanded production and distribution of coal still faces major
problems of scale and political objection within the U.S., and there remain
serious underlying differences in the respective views of the future role of nuclear
power, and especially over the usc to be made of plutonium-producing
technologies.
Thus, any checklist of points of friction and difference between North America
and Europe in the energy field would be a very long one indeed. Many of the
most sensitive of these points of friction relate directly to political policies
concerning the ~iddle East, and may therefore belong in our overall discussions
at this conference. But even if there were greater agreement on political policy,
the prospect of an increasingly tight oil market and only slow reduction in the
oil-import levels of the U.S. is enough, in itself, to present a serious threat to
popular support for the kind of cooperation we have known over the years.
6. Relations with the developing countries. The publication of the Brandt
report has once again highlighted the fairly wide area of agreement among
thoughtful and careful students of this situation as to what needs doing - and
the enormous gap between that perception and the political realities that dictate
the responses of individual governments. In the face of enormous economic
problems and other priorities, there can be no question that the "North" has
steadily fallen short, and in the process is risking what could be in the long term
a desperately serious whirlwind of poverty, violence and disruption.
And, whatever the possibilities for disaster in the longer term - of another
food crisis, for example - there are plainly immensely serious problems to be
handled in the short term. As leading private bankers arc now pointing out, the
enormous increase in the surplu~es of the oil-producing countries must mean a
heavy deficit on the part of the oil-imponing developing countries. And, whereas
it was possible to handle this deficit between 1974 and 1979 by recycling through
95
the private banking system, the capacity of that system seems clearly not
adequate to the present need. New multilateral mechanisms and resources,
notably through the IMF, are plainly going to be required to prevent a collapse
that would have a serious effect on the private banking system as well as the
progress of the developing countries themselves.
None of these problems seems, at the moment, to be a serious cause of
difference as between Europe and North America, viewed as entities. The Lome
Convention between the European Community and a large group of developing
countries seems to North Americans a wholly constructive operation, and in
general the geographical areas of special interest to individual nations and groups
of nations have not prevented the development of a very healthy diversity of
economic relationships. Similarly, it may not be unhealthy that a number of
nations, including Canada, who might be accused of falling short of doing their
share on the military side, have at the same time engaged in substantial economic
assistance programs with the developing countries - so that something like a
division of labor has been developing both on geographic and functional lines
among the industrialized countries. In short, this is not an area of serious friction
on the North American/European axis; it is an area where there are serious
short-term problems and room for grave concern in the long term.
While the positive economic actions now under way in response to the Afghan
invasion hardly belong under the broad heading of relations with the developing
countries, they deserve at least brief mention. The burdens the U.S. has been
carrying in the Middle East, and especially the enormous amounts of aid
extended to Egypt and Israel, have certainly impeded the design of a program for
across-the-board development aid to developing countries. If that burden were
now expanded to include special aid programs on a large scale elsewhere in the
Middle East, the likelihood of a sharp Congressional backlash aimed in part at
Europe would become very great.
Thus, from an American standpoint, the fact that Europe - and West
Germany in particular - has taken a lead in the program to help Turkey has
been not only useful but politically of great importance. And the same now
applies to economic aid to Pakistan, and cooperation with other key countries in
the Middle East. Up to this point, much European activity in this area has been
perceived in the U.S. as selfishly motivated- tied to special deals for oil and the
like; a new perception of serious and constructive parallel action could make a
considerable favorable difference.
• •
•
The catalogue of problem areas we have listed was serious enough as of late
1979. It has now been made much more serious by the Iranian and Afghan crises
and the responses to these by the U.S., with an accompanying effort to enlist
European cooperation in key economic measures. It has been hard enough to
96
avoid really sharp differences when the U.S. has been, and remains, necessarily
to the fore in dealing with the Arab-Israeli conflict, with all its implications for a
Europe totally dependent on Middle Eastern oil. Now we have the U.S. in the
forefront of these two new grave crises, and a growing perception in the U.S.
that Europe is simply not cooperating as it should either in the political or
economic sphere. ("NATO Out to Lunch" was the heading of a recent New
York Times editorial.) And the sense of lack of support could all too readily feed
the fires of nationalist economic policies, protectionism, and all the evils now just
barely held in check. So it is necessary, from the U.S. standpoint at least, to take
a hard look at two additional areas: economic sanctions and East-West trade
policies. On these issues, my own country, Canada, is perhaps more of the
European than the U.S. view, but that hardly diminishes the gravity of the
differences and potential splits.
7. The handling of economic sanctions in general. The issue of economic
sanctions has a long history of breaking up collective action and alliance
structures. Obvious examples were the attempt to apply sanctions to Mussolini's
Italy in the 1930's (undercut by the U.S. and by many in Europe) and the
attempt to bring Jan Smith to heel in what was then Rhodesia in the 1960's and
1970's (undercut by other European countries and by the Byrd Amendment on
the part of the U.S.). No country represented here can lightly cast the first stone
in this area.
The failure to get agreement on economic sanctiom against the Ayatollah's
regime over the ho~tages has probably not had a serious -or lasting impact; when
the Afghan crisis broke, the Caner Admini~tration muted its pressures (perhaps
without adequate notice or consultation), and the quiet cooperation actually
extended to limit Iran's economic dealings has prevented any significant split
from developing. However, the seizures of Iranian assets by the U.S. -
extending to holdings of subsidiaries of American banks located in Europe -
both caused specific problems and lawsuits and raised the specter of diverting the
holdings of the oil producers away from Eurodollar areas., But so far frictions
on the first count have remained bearable, and the fears felt on the second have
not seemed to materialize - though a future case could make the concern even
more active and justified.
The post-Afghan difference~. in the area of economic action, have been much
more grave. Europe (with no execs~ grain to worry about), Canada and Australia
have cooperated in not replacing the grain withheld from the Soviet Union by the
U.S., although it is not clear whether European channeb have been used to divert
grain originating in other area~. And, at the official level, there has apparently
been some progress in tightening the COCOM guidelines for high-technology
exports that may have military applications.
But the most seriou~ problem, already acutely felt in many U.S. business
circles and virtually certain to hit the political fan full force if it keeps up, is the
sense that Europeans have, in many case~. not only not limited their own
high-technology exports to the U.S.S.R. but actually rushed in to pick up
potential deals that were in advanced stages of fruition by American companies.
The American industries affected are, in some case.~. ones already concerned by
97
European state trading and other practice~ addrc~~ed in the ~1TN framn\ork or
elsewhere; it is not hard to forc~ee that they, and their ready allie~. may ~oon
take the line that if European allie~ are not playing ball with the U.S. there i~
every reason for the U.S. to la~h out at the European~ in protcctioni-.t or oth<.'r
directions.
Can the We5t in fact use its vast economic power~ tor political purpose~ ~ a~
has been urged, I under~tand, in thb ,·ery forum on other ocL·asiom? It ma~ be
argued that Iran was a special case where the merit.'> or applying pre~~ure ''ere
arguable. The really senom que~tion has to do with:
8. Policies 10ward rrade wirh the U.S.S.R. and Eastern l:.urofw \\'hate\er the
might-have-beens that go back to 1972 and to the Jackwn-Vanik Amendment,
the fact is that Western Europe and the U.S. ha\e de, eloped raJicall\' different
postures and degrees of involvement in Ea'>I-V.-'e~t indu~trial trade. Its impaL"l on
employment in Europe generally is far greatn than in the U.S. (Or Canad;l), and
for France and We~! Germany it i<; linked, in '>lightly differing ,,·ay~. \\ ith thc
overall concept of detente and even, a'> American., '>CC it, \\ith gnming bilutcral
special relatiomhips with the U.S.S.R.
These difference~ may dimini'>h if the political Lri'>i~ '>hould deepen - for
example, if the Soviet~ put prcs~ure on post-Tito Yugo~laYiu, or hun: an <.'\idem
hand in some new trouble in the ~1iddle [a~t. Hut if the cri~i., '>laY' at the
simmering level - with the So\·iet'> ~t<Jying in Afgha1ti~tan but nothing further
happening for the moment - the gap b<:'l\\een [uropean and American polici~·~
could widen and become inr.::rea~ingly evident. Thi-. dill<.'TCnc<.' in policie-. and
altitude~. and ib truly _-.eriom implicatiom for ~olit.larit~ in ull field-., i'> -.urcl)
one of the mmt important topic'> that n~.:ed-. airing at thi-. Conference.
9. Changes in the population .Hructure (~( mch, und their implications. One
depleting "resource" which l.'.ill affeLL both North Anwri~·a and Europe 11ell inw
the 1980's is the population IC\·els of the \\'e~t~o:rn ~·ounttJe-.. During the !')~(}·-.,
North American countries are expected to ...:ontinue achie1 ing a po-.itiH: net birth
rate, but the rate will be much lower than in prc1iom year'>. Hm\L\Lr, in \llllll.'
European countrie.'>, '>Uch a'> We.,t ticrmany fu1 nampk, the population i-.
actually ~hrinking becau~e of a negati1·e populatton grllWth. ·\., a po.,itilc note,
this will mean that our '>Ocietie\ -.hould becomL more pmductiiL and matur~·. but
it could also mean serious competitiun bcli\CCn countrie'> for immigrant~ from
the Third World countrie~ for increa~ed population. Canada and the U.~. arc no
longer intere~ting ~killed people from Europe, a-. once 1\ih the ca-.c, but thcrc j.,
no indication that the revcr~al i'> happLning.
On the po~itive ~ide, North America \\ill b~·gin to ·'l'l' th<.' maturation of ih
50Ciety, with the majority of the "hab} boom hirth'>" h,·t\ICCil the agc'> of~:; und
44. On both .<,ide<, of the Atlantic, th<.'r<.' 11ill ll<.' klll'T young 1\0rkcr' entering the
labor force, reflecting the low birthrate,, ol the lat~· ~ixti<.'-. and '>CICJJtic.,. Sine<.'
there was no equivaknt of tht: North Am~.:rican baby boom in Europe, Europ<.'an
countrie~ 1\·itl led the effect'> ol -.lm\er population grnwth much -.ooncr than
North America. Although demograph~ I'> a rde1ant factor in JdatiOJl'> b<.'tlll'~·n
North America and Europe, becauw ol" the -.cope of thi-. paper. I nnl~ 1\i-.h to
note the rclation~hip. In fact, thi-. topic dc.,cn~.:-. an entire pap.:r in 1i<:1\ of ih
fundamt:ntaJ o,ignificance for lhC -.hape and Chara._:tcr Of OUt" l.'l"tltltlllliL' fUtUrl".
10. The possibilifl' of somerhing resembling a North America hloc. One
aspect of North American-European economic relations that should be mentioned
is the fact that North America, unlike the European community, has not formed
a united economic bloc. There have been intensified debates concerning that
possibility, especially in the last several years, but as yet, no formal agreements
have been contemplated or proposed. If a North American economic union was
envisaged as a goal similar to the Western Europe Common Market, there could
be three major agreements between the three North America countries. First of
all, free trade would certainly prevail between the three countries, i.e., the
prohibition of all duties on exports and imports across the North American
borders. Secondly, there could be movement in the direction of a customs union,
covering the exchange of goods and a common external tariff in dealings with
other countries. Thirdly, an eventual possibility would be a North American
Common Market, including the free movement of labor and capital between
Canada, the U.S. and Mexico.
On balance, the European Common Market has worked well, and is now in its
twenty-first year of operation. There are several good reasons to believe that a
North American Common Market could work equally as well, if not better. With
the huge reserves of oil in Canada, and to a lesser degree in the U.S. and
Mexico, there is a definite possibility that the North American bloc could become
energy self-sufficient. Also, almost one-quarter of the world's grain production is
grown m North America. In comparison to the nine-nation European
community, North America has a higher population, and also a larger G.N.P.
Besides the belief that North America has the resources to work as an effective
common bloc, a North American Common Market could also effectively increase
the bargaining power for all three countries. With increased competition for
Third World markeb and raw materials, a North American bloc could deal more
effectively with the competition than could the individual countries. It is also
possible that European-North American relations might be greatly improved and
enhanced if the EEC could make agreements with North America as a bloc,
rather than with the individual countries.
However, it is doubtful whether a North American Common Market will be
accomplished in the near future, if one is ever set up at all. Canada and Mexico
have been traditionally unwilling to enter into such agreements with the U.S.
since, as the most powerful nation, the U.S. would be the dominant force.
Mexico is also strongly protectionist, and would be unlikely to agree to free trade
with Canada and the U.S. (Mexico even refused to join the GATT agreements).
Canada, too, is unwilling to enter into a Common Market with the U.S. and
Mexico for fear of being engulfed and overpowered by the U.S. However,
Canada is also hesitant about joining forces with the other two countries for fear
of losing a major portion of her oil reserves to them. The U.S., in particular, has
been accused by Canada of using the Common Market scheme as a means of
obtaining cheap oil from Canada. Despite the fact that a total North America
Common Market is very unlikely, there has been talk about free trade between
Canada and the U.S. However, it has been simply that - talk - and the
likelihood of such an arrangement, at least in the near future, is also doubtful.
99
Conclusion.. If the above discussion of key areas of common interest and
concern is at all reali<>tic, it must at once be apparent that the relationship
between Europe and North America, in the economic area, faces the gravest
difficulties it has encountered for the past 30 years. Undoubtedly, part of the
difficulty lies in inadequate institutions - a subject hardly touched on in this
paper. But we do not lack for machinery of cooperation and consultation, and
the innovations of the 1970's- economic summib, the lEA, etc.- have filled
notable gaps to good effect, up to a point.
Nor can we say that the problems arise from "domestic politics," with the
implication that there is some underlying broad consensus among wel!-informed
groups on both sides of the Atlantic, and that only special interests and regional
and other political pressures prevent that consensus from being carried out. That
may have been true 10 or 15 years ago- and of course there is never any escape
from the political impact of what voters perceive today as issues desperately
affecting their welfare. Part of our object here should be to understand such
concerns, as they exist in our several countries.
The real point of this paper, however, is that today there are serious
differences of viewpoint and policy that extend throughout our respective
nations. As Mr. Jenkins said in the speech I quoted at the outset, the system that
has served us, and the world, well, for a generation, is being pulled part as never
before. "Will the 1980's repeat the experience of the 1930'~?" may be too stark a
formulation, but not by much.
100
DISCUSSION
A. The Management of Our Economies. A Briton Led off the discussion of
the economic topic with a brief sketch of the "golden quarter century" following
the Second World War. This had been a period of exceptionally high growth, low
inflation and low unemployment, due to a combination of free trade, Keynesian
demand management, and fixed exchange parities (the latter two underpinned by
the American readiness to finance the deficits of other countries and to accept an
excessively high dollar exchange rate as the price of an anchor for a fixed parity
regime). This had all come to an end in 1971, and the oil price increase two years
later had hit a world that was already beginning to suffer from high inflation and
stagnating growth. This "stagflation" had subsequently changed all economic
relationships, in different ways in different countries, and in ways that nobody
fully understood. For example, by 1979 the savings ratio in the U.S. had fallen to
under three per cent, while in the U.K. it was 18.5 per cent. This was of course a
major determinant of the amount of effective demand in the economy.
Virtually all of our governments believed in demand management, and every
country was currently running a budget deficit. But monetary policy was proving
no easier to operate than Keynesian demand management, and no more certain in
its effects. Canada, for instance, was about the only country which had
consistently hit its monetary targets, but it had one of the worst inflation records.
Germany had enjoyed low inflation rates, but had repeatedly missed it~ monetary
targets.
So it seemed necessary to seek a mix of fiscal and demand management
measures, monetary control, and - in any country with an organized trade
union movement - a degree of social consensus which led to moderation in wage
settlements. Countries like Austria and Germany had had considerable success
using this combination of methods.
The German budget deficits had run parallel to the British in recent years,
although the German savings ratio was rather smaller, suggesting a stronger case
for cutting the German deficit. At the Bonn Summit of 1978, it had been agreed
that the stronger economics, showing surpluses, should aim to grow faster, while
the weaker ones, with deficits, should concentrate on reducing innation. The
German government had reluctantly agreed to stimulate its economy by about
one per cent, despite misgivings about potential damaging effects on the capital
markets. These had not come to pass, and the German economy last year had
shown the highest growth rate in Europe.
But were the fashionable monetari~t policies right? In exchange for reduced
inflation, we had experienced an appalling ri~e in unemployment (20 million out
of work in the OECD countries), reduced output and living ~tandards, falling
investment, interest rate wars and the threat of trade wars. Would it not be better
to try to reinvest our domestic surpluses and savings in the same sort of way that
we tried internationally to recycle the OPEC surpluses? (It was hard to draw a
moral and economic distinction between the two cases.) Could we not persuade
the countries whose relative economic strength had increased enormously in
recent decades - especially Germany and Japan - to carry greater burdens
commensurate with their strength, especially in the Third World?
101
An Austrian participant shared the viewpoint of the foregoing speaker, but he
pointed out that an incomes policy "or social partnership," which was the means
for holding down inflation during periods of productive development, usually
had some price restrictions bound to it. But in an economy of scarcities such as
we now faced, the cost/price system was impaired, and we could not easily
"fight back" with price restrictions on scarce commodities. Another danger wa~
that some politicians were willing to "sin on incomes policy," producing large
budget deficits which they then tended to fight with monetary policy, or
"competitive appreciation," which made imports ea~y. This, son of policy mix
could lead to dangerous results in investments.
A German speaker said that neither Keynes nor Friedman could give us the
right answer alone. A combination of monetary and fiscal policies was required.
Interest rates of 20 per cent did not indicate that we had taken the wrong road,
only that we had taken it too late. If we had taken those measures earlier, the
rates would not have had to reach that leveL The imperfections of the market
economy did not justify throwing the whole concept overboard.
The Federal Republic was a country with a good income, but a weak base of
equity capital, after two lost wars and two major bouts of inflation. It had done
well to solve its post-1973 problems. The Germans would aim to reduce their
budget deficits, which they saw as fueling inflation. Their current account deficit
was related to their oil import burden, and was not a comequence of a deliberate
governmental decision. The Gcrmam could live with thi~ for perhaps three or
four years, but they were trying to remove it. At the same time, they were
mindful of their obligations in the international field, as exemplified by their
assistance to Turkey.
Another German thought that, from an industrial viewpoint, the past decade
had brought excessive consumption and public spending, and too little
investment. We were caught up in the existing network of the distribution and
use of GNP. This ought to be changed, but that would require political action.
Only then could we gradually increase the ability of private enterprise to carry
greater risks in tackling problems like substitute energies and the improvement of
industrial productivity. The speaker disavowed being a purist on the question of
free enterprise and the market economy, but the seventies had shown that
increased government spending had not enhanced industrial productivity. Unless
we were prepared to take certain risks, we would be sure of getting more and
more governmental intervention and subsidies, which were already excessive in all
of our countries.
According to a Frenchman, though, the market economy was "a phantom ...
one of the greatest illusions of economists." If one had the impression that,
between 1945 and 1970, the economy and politics had been uncoupled, it was
because the international economic system had been protected by a fairly steady
political umbrella. The umbrella had since collapsed, and the economy had
become terribly politicized. We had all been talking about the coordination of
national economic policies for the past 20 years; it was to be hoped that we
would continue to talk about it. But the international system would never have
the supranational capability to impose on all countric~ a regime not willingly
102
agreed to by each of them. It \\Ould be going too far to <;ay there could be no
coordination, hut one should not harbor too many illmiom about thi~. Even if
the political will \\ere there, there was the technical a'ipect. The coordination of
economic policie.<, required that all partie~ shared the ~arne ba~ic analysi., of a
problem. A' we had ~een O\cr the pa~t few year\, thi~ wa~ not the case. We must
not allow too big a gap het\\-een word<, and deed~. We were li\·ing in a time when
our economies were 'iO beset by politic~ that it might be extremely dangerous to
act as if this were not \0.
An International participant dealt at length with macroeconomic demand
management poli..:ie~. While it 5eemed generally agreed that we should give
priority to the fight again5t inflation, had the effectiveness of our policies -
particularly the monetary one\ - been a~ we had hoped? We were indeed
moving into a period of competitive appreciation of e\change rate~. and we had
to be careful not to go too far. The ri'ik of a deepening recession with high
unemploymelll wa~ sub'i!antial.
On the other hand, we were bound to foliO\~ policie., in the direction of
absorbing real income lm~ to the OPEC countrie~ re.,ulting from the huge oil
prke increa<;e, without squee?ing profit<; and productive inve.,tment. The policies
followed so far had opened the perspective that we would do much better this
time than we had done in 1974-75, \\hen wage increa~e<, had cut <,harply into
profits and investment. We could therefore be moderately optimi'ltic that the ne.\t
eighteen months would more likely ~ee a flattening out of the OECD growth rate
than a severe recession.
This optimi'lm wa'i not 'lharcd by an American 'lpcakcr, \\·ho reported that he
had never been more concerned about the economic outlook. The U.S. was
perhaps in a similar pmition to that of 1974, when a domestic "~mnmit" meeting
had been convened to deal with the great problem of inllation, which w·as even
more seriou~ today. American~ now ri'ikcd the probability of the ground of
economic activity falling away under their feet. The admini~tration had no real
choice but to prc~cnt balanced budgct'l, a\ the judgment~ of the financial market~
could simply not be ignored. In the U.S., balanced budget~ had traditionally been
sought by rai<,ing taxe~, but thi'l would not qand Amcricam in good stead over
time. If, a' the speaker bclie\·ed, a ~ub<,tantial recc.,.,ion wa.'> upon us, then the
government would have to ~tand ready to reduce taxes to encourage investment
and increa~e productivity. But thi~ would not in any ~eme help to solve the
inllation problem. The L.S. thm found ihclf in an unhappy 'li1Uation, with no
~et of fully sati~factory policie~ at hand to deal with it.
According to a Canadian participant, no ~inglc factor in the economic '>phcre
was more ~criou., than the inflation which had pervaded our economic'> for 30
years. Nothing \\·a'> more dc.,tructi.,·e to national \\"ell-being nor ~o corrmi..·e to
moral value~. A profound \\"Cakne\'> in all our count ric<, \\a~ the lack of public
education about inflation, trnccahlc to the reluctance of go\·ernmcnts to accept
the blame for inflationary tcndcn..:ie\. Come4uently the publi..: wa~ not prepared
for tough mca'>ure~. but it \\<I\ impm'lihlc to merconw the di.,caw without public
\Upport. The lead in thi\ ~·ampaign had to come from the U.S., but unfortunately
the "Volcker padage" 110uld not \IOrk 11ithout the "Carter package," which
103
seemed imperilled by the defense requirements of the budget. Interest rates could
be pushed up high, but at what cost in output?
B. Monetary Relations. A British speaker observed that exchange rates were
following current account performance and short-term interest rate differentials,
rather than monetary performance. This was leading to great turbulence on the
foreign exchange markets, which was being exacerbated by commodity futures
speculation. The bursting of the "silver bubble" had put severe strains on the
American banking system. Oil prices had doubled again in the preceding 12
months, but governments recognized that their electorates were more worried
about prices than unemployment, and were afraid to make good the demand-
deflecting impact of oil price increases - with the one exception of Germany.
Germany had been right to borrow abroad to finance its deficit, thus maintaining
demand. The world was now engaged in wigespread competitive currency
appreciation to minimize inflation, in contrast to the competitive depreciation of
the fifties and sixties, designed to maximize exports. After nagging the U.S. for
years to strengthen the dol!ar, the Germans - once it had become stronger -
had set about weakening it and cancel!ing a\! its gains for their own reasons.
Interest rate differentiab would not la~t indefinitely, and it \vas important to
try to find alternative reserve asset.'> to the dollar. Ideally, we should have a
mixed system, with the Swiss franc, the Deutsche mark and the yen assuming
some reserve role. It was to be hoped that some form of substitution account
could be arranged, which would mean reserves of some $50 billion to start with.
We now faced an extremely destructive interest rate war, with each country
aimed at having higher rates than the others. How could we hope to foster
increased investment in this situation? The growth of output had hcen falling
steadily around the world, with no commensurate gains against inflation. Studie~
had clearly shown that the application of monetarist policies alone produced a
loss of ninety cents of output for every gain of ten cent5 on the price front.
More and more governinents were anxious to control lending in the
Euromarkets as a way of avoiding domestic monetary controls. The speaker felt
that one of the biggest dangers now was the possibility of a major default by a
Third World country, which could generate international financial difficultie~ on
a scale not seen since the early thirties.
A compatriot said that he was in fairly substantial agreement with the
preceding speaker, except that he wondered whether borrowing abroad had really
been the best way for the indu~trial countries to meet the ~hock of the first oil
price rise. We might in the end conclude that Japan's and Germany's choice of
suitable domestic measures had been the correct course. (Fven better would ha\'e
been a joint negotiation with the OPEC countries at that time.) The continuing
talk of control of the Euromarkets - whether through minimum reserve
requirements, more stringent capital ratios, or the application of capital ratios on
a consoldiated basis- whatever the virtues from another point of \'iew, \\as apt
to cause uncertainty, which would add to the prudential constraints that banks
would be obliged to impo~e.
A French speaker described the international monetary \y~tem a~ the outcome
of a power relationship. The embargoes, blockades and revolutiom sened to
104
remind us that machinery put in place to facilitate the economy could suddenly
be put out of commission. The rescheduling of debt was ultimately a political,
not an economic decision.
A Belgian participant regretted that there had been lillie mention made of the
European Monetary System in these discussions. The EMS had been in being for
14 months, and was giving rise to a zone of relative monetary stability in Europe.
This was a useful thing at the world level as well as the regional one. Decisions
taken by the institutions of the European Community foreshadowed its being
strengthened in the near future. Unless the EMS could be made to work, there
was little chance of world monetary order. The speaker was also convinced that
the existence of the ecu might help to solve problems such as the recycling of
OPEC surpluses.
Another Belgian argued that Atlantic cooperation on monetary matters was
indispensable. Since August of 1971, there had been no end to our competitive
revaluations. We had kept raising interest rates to put a brake on inflation and
save our currencies - but all this had been done without much agreement on
common policy. Until recently, the dollar had been considered undervalued.
When the U.S. had at last braked inflation, the dollar had risen. Considering the
importance of the dollar on world markets, it was not appropriate that our
economic and social structures should resist this sort of process.
C. Energy Considerations and the Impact of the Oil Price Increases. The
foregoing speaker went on to say that energy policy was the second subject on
which Atlantic cooperation was essential. It was unthinkable that, between 1973
and 1980, the U.S. had refused to deregulate oil and gas prices and to let them
find their level in the world market. This was the only way to limit consumption.
Moreover, the present system distorted the prices of raw materials in industry, to
the disadvantage of the free market that we all pretended to espouse. U.S. prices
were catching up with world prices little by little, but the policy of one country in
the alliance nevertheless stood opposed to that of the others. Admittedly, the
Europeans were not a model for energy cooperation; their inefficiency was
frequently embarrassing.
But our joint success or failure in energy would radically affect inflation,
unemployment and internal stability. If we did not resolve this problem - and
the monetary problem- we would be "eaten up from inside." We would lose
any capacity to shape a military or political strategy, or to aid the development
of the Third World. We would just amount to some 600 million relatively poor
people, only ten per cent of the world's population.
A German speaker agreed that market forces should be allowed to shape the
energy sector as much as possible, although his country was going to proceed
cautiously in the development of nuclear fuel for energy purposes. There was a
network of concerned people working together in Europe and the U.S. to stop
the move toward nuclear generation of electricity. The U.K. with its reserves of
oil, gas and coal, could do without nuclear energy, but in the Continental
countries there was already a strong demand for electricity, which would
"explode" in a structural upheaval if oil supplies were cut off. This would have
grave consequences for the balance of payments and exchange rate systems. Some
105
countries would try to cover their deficit by printing money; other-, would right
inflation with high intere~t rates, thu-, tearing the foreign e:-.changc markets to
pieces. World financial markeg could not stand up to much mon: torment,
especially concerning the credit-worthines5 of the exchange market. i\. chain
reaction in the financial community could not be excluded in the e\'<::nt of
something like the blockade of the Per~ian GulL
An American participant made u~e of a fable- ba5ed nonethele~s on the facts
- to illustrate the "helli~hne~s" of our energy ~ituation. Among hi' 'iuggested
measures were (a) non-interest bearing, indexed bonds in which the OPEC
countries could invest their oil revenue~, and (b) an intergovernmental agency of
oil-importing nations to deal with OPFC. A compatriot welcomed the accuracy
of this description of our pre<;ent predicament, but feared that the establishment
of a new state agency would render matters worse instead of better. He also
questioned the forecast of a chronic OPEC surplus, not offset by increased
imports. It was true that evenh in Iran had comtituted a warning about the
danger<; from too-rapid growth, but on balance the OPEC countries could ~till be
expected to ~pend their surplmes c~en faster than the laq time. In real terms,
these surpluses were less now than in 1974, and in relation to GNP they
represented a reduced percentage. Port facilitie.'< had been imprmed, large
bureaucracies were in place, and the military had more cogent arguments for
their budget_r, - all of which indicated continued spending.
Even if the surpluses would therefore not be so large, many people ~till argued
for governmental intervention in the recycling process, on the grounds that it
would be too large for the commercial banks to handle. But for several reasons
the task of the commercial banks might be le~~encd. Oil exporting countries were
more willing to invest at longer term. Investment bankers were becoming more
active. Producers were dealing more directly with corporations and governments.
Moreover, there was the worry that an intergovernmental agency would be
pushed far beyond financial intermediation into ~cnsitive negotiations concerning
the price of oil and other condition~. Such negotiations would then take rlace in
the woN possible political context. Cohesion among the OPEC partners would
be facilitated, and the OPEC rcpre'ientative.r, would be forced, under the public
gaze, to seek the maximum political and economic price.
This sensitized negotiating environment would be particularly unfortunate now
that we seemed to be getting clo~er to those economic conditions conducive to
stability in the energy field. For one thing, it had recently been perceived that
increa~ed prices did cut consumption, and that reductions in oil use were getting
larger. For another, the new oil price levels meant that most forms of synthetic
fuels would now be economic, even if it would take time to get them in
production. Finally, high interest rates and the public aversion to inflation meant
that it was unwise to extrapolate our experience of the last n~c ycar'i, during
which oil exporters had received, in effect, a negative real return.
An International participant, while agreeing that the market mechanism held
out the best hope for energy progress in the medium and longer term, pointed
out that, because of the special characteristics of the oil market, there had been
huge price variation~ in the short run, unrelated to any unilateral deci\ion of
106
OPEC. In future we ~hould aim to manage better the~c ~hart-term fluctuations,
taking into account the considerable changes that had taken place in the market
since 1974-75, when our energy cooperation had been instituted. The attitude of
OPEC, the position of the major oil companies, and overall supply and demand
relations had given rise to a new appraisal of this aspect of energy policy. If we
could maintain a clear, steady, predictable increase of real prices for a ~ignificant
period, this would have a notable impact on energy consumption in the cightie<;,
and would change the supply and demand picture considerably.
The speaker agreed that it wa~ necessary to create some financial instrument 10
induce moderate OPEC countries to continue producing rather than holding oil
in the ground, but he did not see how the substitution account itself would solve
the problem, not being geared to the trade-off between holding paper a<; opposed
to oil reserves. One should also consider whether the proposed indexed bonds
would be helpful or counterproductive.
A German intervened to say that the <;ubstitution account of the lMF would he
a step in the right direction, but it would only be a contribution, not a full
solution to the problem. Besides fearing the effects of a distincdon between
"moderate" and other oil-producing countric~. he was opposed for several
reasons to the indexed bond proposal. We would find ourselves unavoidably in a
disastrous worldwide network of indexation, which would feed inflation. Other
countries would not be ~atisfied to see indexation reserved just for the oil
producers. The bonds could be sold to OPEC countrie~ only on a voluntary
basis, so the OPEC would take all the good credit risb and leave the bad ones to
an international agency, which would not be in a position to lay down
conditions. This system would ease the pressure on OPEC to make its surplus
funds available to the oil-importing LDCs. Finally, the presence of an
international agency would weaken the private financial institutions and capital
markets.
A Dutch participant pointed out that a new instrument for the recycling
problem was almost at hand: the so-called "~afcty net," or Kissinger Plan, for
which the U.S. government had launched the initiative in 1974 in the context of
the OECD. This idea of a $20 billion fund had been grudgingly accepted by
various European countrie~. but then had got buried in the U.S. Congre<;s when
it had come up for ratification. The changed circumstances presented an
opportunity to revive that plan.
A British participant di~cussed the underlying rea~ons for the surprisingly
successful recycling process, and mentioned some problem~ that might hinder it
in the future. To begin with, the macroeconomic environment had been rela!i\'ely
favorable with the OECD countric~ experiencing a deprc~~cd investment demand
and therefore not being ~uch avid competitors for funds in the market. Then the
OPEC countries had proved to have a higher absorptive capacity than expected
- for migrant workers, construction project~. and the import of weapons and
food. Aho\'e all, they had been ready to keep their rapidly accumulating assets
invested in short-term securities and bank dcpo~it~. rinally, the lax monetary
policy of tho~c year~. particularly in the U.S., had ea~ed the recycling process,
whatever might have been it~ undc~irable effects in other respects. Within this
107
favorable environment, the international banking system and capital markets had
devised new forms of lending and intermediation, recycling the surpluses to the
countries in deficit.
The future would be less smooth, for a number of reasons. The OECD
countries would be bigger competitors for available funds as they moved into
current account deficit. Monetary policy was much more restrictive now,
especially in the U.S. The OPEC nations would have less absorptive capacity,
now that their surpluses had begun to reappear. (It looked as if they might reach
$100-120 billion this year.) Finally, the institutional environment was not likely to
be as propitious to the recycling process as before. The large commercial bank~
would need to be more discriminating about potential borrowers. It was easy to
reduce spreads in a highly liquid borrower's market. But it was more difficult to
"enlarge the concertina" to discriminate on the basis of creditworthiness.
An American participant expressed his agreement with the analysis of the
preceding speaker. The commercial banks would continue to play an important
part in the recycling process, but a less significant one than before. The
producing countries were in many cases selling directly to the importing countries
rather than to the major oil companies, and were themselves handling the
financing, which would therefore not pass through the banking system. The
reserve stocks of the importing countries had improved. Finally, the IMF was in
a better position to participate in the recycling, thanh to the resource~ of the
Witteveen facility. While there were adequate resources in the banking system to
deal with deficits of the same magnitude if they continued for two or three year5,
it was time for governments to address themselves to a problem which might
eventually become serious.
Although the IMF would be a principal source of future assistance, one had to
guard against modifying its conditions too radically, lest it become an aid agency
instead of an international monetary agency.
The speaker was less concerned than the pre~s and some government people
that the commercial banks would find themselves in trouble because of LDC
defaults. The banks were being extremely prudent about types of loans, amounts
and borrowers. Some countries would have trouble servicing their debt, but they
were much more likely to renegotiate than to default.
A Frenchman emphasized the politicization of the oil indusltry, and was
skeptical about ncgotiatiom between consuming and producing countrie~. We
had nothing to offer them that they could not obtain by them~elves. If it was just
a matter of indexing prices, why ~hould they give anything in exchange for that,
as they could obtain it unilaterally anyway? The only way to face up to the
energy crisis was to have a workable policy based on supply and demand. There
were signs that we were at la<;t on the right road, but we had lost six or seven
years' time.
Figures provided by an American participant indicated the dimensions of the
energy problem in the longer run. One recent estimate was that by the year 2000
we would still need 33 million barrel<; of oil a day from OPEC. Hut the
production-to~reserve ratio would have declined from 45 year~ to 31 years
worldwide, and to 10 years for most countrie'>. The politi~.:al and physical
108
limitations on OPEC would be such that sufficient oil would just not be
produced, and the sky would be the limit for prices. We could not temporize; we
had to be prepared to act more courageously. The free market concept for a
commodity like oil simply did not operate when it came into short supply. The
spot market would take over at unbelievable prices. OPEC followed the spot
market and, having set a price, would never let it go down again.
A German remarked that, after 30 years of cheap oil, we needed longer than
30 months to adjust our assumptions and ways of thinking. We would have to
realize that higher prices in real terms were unavoidable, and to work hard on
conservation and the development of alternative source~. An American
commented that the need to reduce oil imports in his country made a strong case
for either rationing or increased gasoline taxes.
Western Canadian oil, at nine cents a kilo, was still a cheap commodity in
relation to other ones, according to a Canadian participant. Beef was $9.00 a
kilo, and butter $3.50. An irrational systeffi subsidized the price of oil to keep the
retail level so low that consumers wasted it, while denying oil and gas companies
enough income to replace reserves. Canada subsidized the cost of imported crude
oil, which discouraged refiners from upgrading heavy fuel oil into gasoline and
diesel oil. So one-third more crude than was needed was imported to supply
motor fuels and heating oil, while a glut of heavy fuel oil was created in Eastern
Canada. If the subsidy were removed, the refiner would have to pay $30 a barrel
instead of $14.75. This would discourage heavy fuel oil production, to be
replaced by natural gas (of which Canada had a large surplus), thus cutting back
imports which would be available to countries which had a much greater need.
Conservation was probably the most important factor in solving the fuel crisis,
but so far it was practically non-existent in Canada. Everyone agreed that oil and
gas should be conserved in North America, but this would not happen until it
hurt in the pocketbook. No one cared much if he paid $!.00 a gallon for
gasoline, but if he had to pay $2.50, as in Europe, we would sec more
conservation in North America.
A Swiss participant said that, as a consequence of the oil crisis, economtc
policy would have to be reoriented toward lower growth rates, which were to be
welcomed only insofar as they decreased our dependence on oil. A decline in the
prosperity of industrial nations was the necessary price, but there were political
limits to this policy. We had to rely on the price mechanism, but we should not
be opposed to an artificial increase in fuel prices through new consumption taxes.
Such taxes did not inactivate the regulatory mechanism of the market economy;
they merely accelerated inevitable developments. The application of such a tax
should preferably be done through an international concert of industrialized
nations, as the introduction of it here and there would be difficult politically and
would distort competition. Concerted action of this kind would have a great
psychological effect, and might even cause producers to adopt a more cautious
policy.
Beyond this, we needed alternative energy sources and improved productivity.
Huge investments would be required to achieve these goals, and they should be
financed in as noninflationary a manner as possible. This meant that our
109
consumption-oriented economy of the past had to give way to an economy which
put greater stress on ~avings and productivity. We would need a fundamental
rethinking on social policy and taxation on both sides of the Atlantic.
D. The Less-Developed Countries. Di~cussion of monetary relations and of
the impact of the oil price ri~e led to a consideration of how the oil-importing
developing countries (OIDCs) were affected. One British participant thought that
the outlook for them wa~ deteriorating month by month, with an annual deficit
of $60 billion expected, which the private banking system would be unable or
unwilling to finance. By the summer of 1979, the non-oil Third World had
already owed $190 billion to private banks which had to be repaid or refinanced
by 1982. Many of the Third World countries had grown faster after the first oil
crisis because they had been able to borrow from private banks without accepting
policy restrictions. More official financing of Third World debt was now
mandatory, but this would only work if the IMF wa~ prepared to be more
!lexible about it~ conditions. Germany and Japan should be expected to carry a
greater burden in the Third World, but the Japane~e would have to be appealed
to on practical grounds, as the concept of charity as we thought of it did not
loom large in their system. In fact, Japan's record generally in the foreign
economic field had been deplorable, and it was to be hoped that she would aspire
to the same sort of generosity and imagination that the U.S. had displayed in the
postwar period. Unfortunately, the~e consideration~ had been steadfaqly ignored
by the government~ participating in the Tokyo Round.
Another Briton shared this gloomy outlook about pro~pect~ for the OlDC~.
The World Bank had estimated that the total medium- and long-term
indebtedness of the medium- and lov.-income developing countries was going to
rise from a 1970 figure of $68 billion to a I990 figure of $1 ,278 billion. Of that
enormous twenty-fold increase in 20 years, the bulk of the increased indebtedness
would be for the medium-income countries. The poor countries would ha\·c to
rely mainly on official source~ of finance. But would that be forthcoming? To
paraphrase Abraham Lincoln: How long could our v.orld endure half rich and
half poor?
An American agreed that this v..-as one of the mo~t serious problems we faced.
He did not sec how the private banking system could provide for the immense
needs of the poorer countries, nor could he imagine that many creditor nations
were prepared to grant the concessional terms that they would require.
A German participant pointed out that the increase in the oil bill of the poorer
countries since 1973 had hit their balance of payments for twice the amount of
the aggregate development aid they had received during that time. One could not
help feeling skeptical about all the plan~ for development aid from the
industrialized countries. If the oil price exploded again, that aid would amount to
nothing. One example was Turkey. The German~ had not cut off their military
aid to Turkey, but some others had done so for moral reasom. despite warnings
that it would be a great ~trategic mi~take. They realized it now, but the damage
had been done, and they were ~till not helping Turkey to the extent of their
financial ability.
110
The ~r..:ak.:r went on to say that the leader~ of the L[)(_\ understood that the
oil price e\plosion had hun the Third \Vorld much more than the imlu~trialized
coumries. And they were beginning to ~ec that they did not ha\"C at all the ~arne
intere~t~ as the oil-producing counirie~. What they did not perhaps fully
understand wa~ \\hat a menace the population explmion was to their countrie'>. It
seemed that no one wanted to tell them that - neither the Catholic Church nor
other-;. It \\Otild be nearly impos~ible to feed and employ the future \~orld
population at the rate it wa~ growing. This had to be faced scriou~!y; it could not
be ~ohed by talking about ''gadgets and gimmicks."
For the economic problem<; of the Third \Vorld, ofl"icial aid would never do
the job alone. Private inve~tment had to be encouraged and guarameed if we
\\antcd to get the traml"cr of technical and marketing know-how. The Brandt
Commi~sion had come up with 'ome practical wgge~tions for impro\·ing
Nonh-South relatiom. It was not ~o important to have "nul~~ meetings" too
frequently, whether under the au~pice~ of the \Vorld Uank, UNCTAD or the
J\1F. \·keting..., bdw<:cn middle-level people could be most U'>eful, and there were
many non-gm-crnmcntal organitatiom prepared to help.
Another German ~,hared thi~ view about the importance of the role of private
ent.:rpri\e in th.: Third World. The oil-producing countrie~ were \·ery dependent
on the industrializ.:d countries for components and trained manpower, a fact that
\\a~ not always well understood. The non-oil coumrie~ needed the collaboration
of the pri\atc 'ector to produce and export manufactured produch, and thi' was
a l"ield \\hich offered challenging employment 10 the young people \\ith academic
degrees in the OECD natiom. Southeast A~ia provided r.:cent examples of the
bendih of according a key role in economic deYclopment tO pri\ate enterprise
operating in a free en\ ironment.
Another model in the field of Third World rc!atiom wa.. di'-l'U~\I.'d by a
participant from thl.' Netherland~. Thi\ wa., the l.omC Convention, an agreement
whid1 the European Community had concluded with 58 dC\cloping countrie~.
The countrie., participating accounted for half the world's trad.:. The tendency
nowaday~ wa~ to categorize e\ery problem a.'> a global one, and to C011\Clle a
world conf.:ren..:e to deal with it. The'e meeting,, which ~om.:tim.:.. brought
together as many a~ 4,000 people, '>eemed 10 accompli<,h le" and !e''· For
in~tancc, UNCTAD'~ approach to the raw materia)., problem ill\ohed a huge
common fund and interl"crcncc \\ith the market ~y~t.:m - when no one kne\\
wheth.:r there \\a<, really a substitute for the market mcchani..,m. Thi<, work wa'>
now in ib fourth year, and the re~ulb ~o far \\erc \ery di~appointmg in
compari..on with that of the Lome Comention, under which problem' were
soheJ in a practical \Yay cmering a number of <,p.:cific ra\\ material\. Good
re~ult~ had also been achieH!d in the tran'>l"cr ol technology to the UX\. In
~hart, Lome demomtrated the practical benefits \\hich could be obtained for the
Third World in a le~~-than-global ~ctting.
A German participatH ~aid that one of the mmt important i..,..,uc'> for th.: \\"c,-.r
\\OUld be the American-European dl'aling..., with thl' Thin.! World. By the end ol
1979, the fir-.! ~ign of crack' had alr.:ady app.:ared in what had hitherto been our
common po'>ition in the North-South JialogLto.;. Thl'n, ju..r the wel'k bdorc this
Ill
conference, the U.S. propo~als submitted to another round of negotiations in this
context at the United Nation~ had fallen short of an agreed We<.tcrn position
previously worked out among OECD members in Park
The Third World, organized for negotiating purposes in the "Group of 77,"
ranged from rich oil-exporting countries to the poorest of the poor among the
member states of the U.N. Ever since 1974, when they had introduced their
proposals for a "new economic order," they had been presenting the West with
"shopping lists" of demands which had grown longer from one conference to the
next. The latest examples had been UNCTAlJ V and UNilJO Ill, and now the
global rounds at the U.N. in New York.
While the West had been fairly united on this ~ubject in the pa\t, Europe and
the U.S. now seemed to be moving apart. Faced with a lad.. of American
leadership, or even consistency, the European Community had had to a~\ume the
role of principal, if not \Ole, spokesman for the We~!. Our partner' on the other
side of the conference table were not only the Group of 77, but al\o all of the
nonaligned countrie~ a5 well as the hlamic group of natiom. The nonaligned
movement had, on the questions of Afghanistan and Cambodia at the U.N.,
entered into a "coalition of common interest'" with the We\!. Some of that
same group had ~upported u~ in blocking Cuba from gaining a \cat on the
Security Council. Many of them had reali1ed that So\·iet arm'> and Communi<;!
ideology did not promote their development. Mmt of them found dCtcnte to be
very much in their intere~!. A sizeable number of them prmidcd Europe with raw
materials and large export markets. They were, in \hort, potential partner~ of the
future in many fields: economic, political and security. Their potcnti;:~l 3\
valuable if not vital partner~ would grow - as would their po,~ihk role of
potemial troublemakers.
Although senior officer5 of our govcrnmenb had hccn working for month.\ on
the subject of our relations with the Third World, what wa~ still lacking was a
joint grand dc~ign to answer the Third World'\ propo~al for a nt\\ economic
order. We had so far responded to Third World demands on a piecemeal,
case-by-case basis. This v.'a~ not ~uffieient. In order to turn potential allie~. or
victim~. of the Soviet Union into future partner~ of the Wc~t. we had to abandon
our ultracon~ervativc pmition, which seemed to have a~ yet tal...cn no account of
our security requirement~. Time might be running out for the opportunity to
work out a joint strategy which showed imagination and re,ponsibility.
E. Trade Refarions. i\n International speaker claimed that the functioning of
the European Community a~ a true partner of the U.S. had made po~~ible the
success of the Tokyo Round. It had also provided an e'i\Clllial political element:
the end of the "religious war" between the U.S. and the EC o\·er the Common
Agricultural Policy. It wa~ important to underline this at a time when Europe
was undergoing its own "rcligiom war" about thi~ .'>uhject.
As to defining a future \trategy of economic policy, we were in need of a
period of tranquility during which we could get to know and tru~t one another.
There were bound to he certain economic changes, especially in our relations with
third countrie'>.
112
A Dane obsen·ed that our attempts to find answers to problems in the trade
field were hampered by our unwillingness to redefine and rethink relations
between commerce and politics.
An American participant called "protectionism" a "shibboleth raised by those
who believe in a Hading world that does not exist to silence those who would
point that out." One man's "protectionism" was another man's "exercise of
responsibility," or another's "free market subsidy." Many U.S. trade unionists
had a hard time seeing free trade anywhere in the world, from European
agricultural protection to Japanese explanations of the complexities of their
marketing system. That all wore rather thin when 200,000 American automobile
workers were unemployed. American labor leaders sought fair !Tade on a
reciprocal basis, and the preservation within the U.S. of a balanced
manufacturing economy with strength in all sectors. They rejected the theory of
comparative advantage, as they saw that its achievement often operated unfairly.
The widespread loss of jobs resulting from unfair trading practices made it
difficult to accept the notion that budgets should be balanced at the expense of
employment, especially when other countries were not doing so. In the U.S., a
coalition of some 147 labor, civil rights, consumer and other citizens'
organizations were determined to resist the adoption of a budget which would
make the least affluent people suffer the most. One heard a lot of talk about the
need for limits on growth, but the key question was Whose expectations were to
be reduced? This could not be done without creating enormous pressures for the
redistribution of income within each of our economies. Any reduction in
expectations ought to be in direct proportion to the current distribution of
incomes. Any incomes policy which sought to maintain the current distribution
of wealth was bound to fail.
Another U.S. intervention dealt with East-West economic relations. In the
decade since those relations had begun to increase in scope and intensity, the
West had done badly. If there had been a strategy at all, it had not led to
increased incentives for the USSR to conduct itself with greater restraint in
international affair~. Rather, it had inhibited the capacity of Wc~tcrn countries to
react when the Soviets did nor act with restraint. Standing the issue on its head,
so to speak, we needed to do far better, both nationally and collectively.
Government and business had to interact. Individual firms could not be expected
to devise national strategies. This was especially important in the 1980s, with the
Comecon countries becoming net petroleum importers. We might well find
ourselves with additional prc~~ures on the world petroleum supply and the
financing of it that came from the West. The Soviet Union, with its geopolitical
position in the oil-producing areas, might be able to impose prices on that oil
supply. We still had some time to look at this issue, which was a perfect one for
Western consultation and concertation.
A German speaker thought that we nevertheless might find in the years to
come that the USSR was not only technologically hungry and oil-thirsty, but also
in urgent need of capital. Even the oil price would re~pond to market
mechanism~ once enough substitute energies had been developed. It might turn
out, for one or another of our countries, that industrial productivity took
113
.J
preferenet over full employmenl, bu1 in 1he cycle of ec01oomic ...-.. dlis.,....
only be 1emporary.
• •
•
An hahan par1icipan1 observed that, in these lhr« da)) of very int<rr:stial
discussions, he had heard vinuaDy no words which impaned a sense or urrmcy.
Time was runninc out. The Russians now controlled key points in Africa - with
all lh>l thO! implied for our raw mattrials - and from Aden 10 Bab el Mancki).
They were In a posillon 10 pinch 1he Straits of Hormu>. The future of Yu, osla\ia
was in question. wilh the death of Tito immonrnt. holy whh all los fragility ......
in 1he fron1 line of defense. Against Ibis bock~round, the speaktr was rtminded
of Calo's cxhor1a1ion to the senators engaged in Ions and learned discussions as
Hannibal advanetd through sou1hcas1trn Spain: " While you ar< dtbatinl in
Rome, Saaun1um is falling." ·
An American participant, summing up rom< of lht sali<nt points of 1~
discumon, said !hal ht personally would asJOCiatt himstlf stro!JSIY with the
remarks of 1hc preceding speaker. which reprtstnted on< of 11\• two main
curr<nts runninc in this group. The conuastina virwpoint was thP.i the allianoe
would be ablt somehow to surmount unprtcedenttd nrw dofficultia in mor< or
ltss th< some way that it had ov<rcom< th< diffocuhies of the past quan<r
'
century. r
That conttpr of "busine5S as usual" may ha•• been appropriat';, in the pa.sa,
but 11 was no1 suited 10 a time when we ...,. fadnc simultantOuslr a
fundamen1al chana• in th< balanet of power. basic aeopolitical· chances. an
ener~:y crisis afftcling our economies, and domestic chansa quilc· unrelated to
1he Easi·W«t conOict. And we were facing all this al a lim< when HI< lead<nhip
qualhies needed to exercise high ofnet were rarely in evidence in our
democracies The life s1yle of our societies did not encourage !hose ou1 of offi«
to accumulate ~~~h~r the int<llectual capi1al or 1he moral assurance·needed to act
in the face of rapid change. The lime scale of rolvlnc 1he kinds of problems ....
had doseussed here was much longer than 1ht <ltclooal period. so 1ha1 those in
office were templed 10 dtal w11h symptoms ons1ead of causes. and 1o pass
problems alone 10 1he nex1 gcntra1ion. This 1endency was so pei"UI\e thai it
mi1ht not be aniculaled, or t\cn conscious
On lhc balanct of power queslion, 11 was trU< 1ha1 there was some son of
nuclear paruy. But the lheori<s on which ~<e were operating wer< based on
ma,epc notions or 1h~ l<lle fiflies and arms conuol nolions of the late fiflic:s and
early Sl.'(li~s. It was hard to belie.., they were slill •alld loday. We had a'oided
fac:ong tht consequen~ of our own internal incoMist<ncies. If it "ere r<ally lrut
1ha1 the U.S. nuclear del<rrtnt was infinit<ly valid for Europe. then what was the
purpost or a vrry larg< American con•cmional cs1oblishmen1 in Europe1 In lh<
fifli<s. the answer would have b«n 1ha1 !hey wete there tO mak< the U.S.
response au1oma1ic. Bu1 it could no1 be forcv<r ••fc to r<ly on the threats of
114
I
I
I
J
decision-makers that would be destructive of their own societies. It was probable
that the Europeans would beg the Americans to forego their nuclear commitment
unless the U.S. could articulate some sort of strategy in the light of the certain
circumstances. Certainly the slow-motion rearmament in which we were now
engaged totally falsified the problem, as the critical period would come in the
next five to seven years.
It seemed inevitable that the Soviets would attain a first-strike capability
against our land-based forces. We had other forces, but that would not be
conclusive. We could not obviate the risks of this position by any foreseeable
arms control negotiation. We ought to address intellectually the world that would
be when this Soviet capability had arrived. If it would perhaps make crises less
likely, it would make them infinitely more dangerous.
The rapid rate of geopolitical change in the world might be unrelated to the
East-West confrontation, but it affected it profoundly. The beginning of decline
was to become fascinated by - if not enamored of- your opponent. Was it not
historically true that revolutions occurred more in benevolent authoritarian
regimes than in oppressive totalitarian ones? We had no dear answer to the
problem of political legitimacy. All our experience had been with societies in
which there had been a nation before there had been a state. But almost a!! of
the developing countries had become states before they had been nations. The
only unity they had was the political authority that represented them. So the
concept of a loyal opposition was intellectually inconceivable to those peoples,
and they were therefore apt to be authoritarian and totalitarian. If we assailed
them for this, without knowing how to build political structures different from
anything we knew now, we would risk creating a radical wave which, if not
Communist in origin, would be exploitable by the Communists. The attraction of
the Third World to Communism was based not on its answers to their economic
development problems, but to their need for a theory of authority in their
political development.
The lack of settled views on the energy problem was noteworthy, but it was
apparent that many of the European allies thought that they could defend their
energy policy best by clever diplomacy and skill in economic relations on models
not dissimilar to American corporate enterprises, while relying on the U.S. to
provide the defense of the oil-producing areas while questioning the reliability of
its defense of Europe. In the long run, this was an untenable situation.
In conclusion, the speaker said that someone had to sound the alarm and put
forward programs, not only in the military field, but also in relation to the
developing world. (So far we were accepting the premises of our opponents and
not advancing programs of our own.) If we could do this, there was no reason
we should not master the crisis, given our resources and talents and the real
weaknesses of our adversaries.
Finally, the conference was told by a German participant that "pessimism"
and "optimism" were words that ought to be banned from a politician's
vocabulary. One had always to strive to be as objective as possible.
• •
•
115
During the Conference, a gala dinner was given by the German hosts in
celebration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of Bilderberg, and to mark the
transfer of responsibility for future meetings into the hand5 of a younger
generation. This dinner was the occasion for numerous speeches and toasts, and
for the presentation of a "Festschrift" to Ernst van der Beugel in appreciation of
his many years as Honorary Secretary General of Bilderberg. The invaluable
contributions of many other individuals to the direction of Bilderberg over the
years were evoked on this anniversary, including among others those of H.R.H.
The Prince of the Netherlands, Lord Home, Joseph Johnson and William Bundy.
• •
•
In closing the Conference, Lord Home, the retiring Chairman, reiterated the
thanks due to all those whose generous help had meant so much to the success of
Bilderberg in the past. In addition, he expressed the gratitude of all those present
to the German hosts of the Aachen Meeting, led by Otto Wolff von Amerongen;
to the authors of the working papers; to the interpreters and secretariat; and to
the Quellenhof hotel staff.
116
