BILDERBERG MEETINGS
EVIAN
CONFERENCE
21-24 May 1992
NOT FOR QUOTATION
.........
... f 1
!~ / t'Jr 1
o.,j • ,,.~· • ./• ..,.;-
CONTENTS
NTRODUCTION . . .... . ... . ... . . .. . . ..... . . . . . ... . .... .
'ARTICIPANTS . .. . . ... . . ... . .... . . .... .... . . . . . . . . . .. .
~GENDA
OPENING
I. PROSPECTS FOR lHE FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . .. . ... . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .
Int roductory Remarks. TT L . . . ... . . . ... . .... . . . . . .. . .
Discussion . . . . . .. ........ . . . . .. . . , .. . .... . .
II. WI-L~T SHOULD BE DONE FOR EASTERN EUROPE?
Introductory Remarks, I. .. . .... . .... . .. .. . . . . .... . .. .. .
Introductory Remarks, II. ......... . ... .. . .. . . . . ... . .
D iscussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Til. WHITI-IER AMERICA?
~
.,
~-
ll'
2i'l
21
,:!
::~
) I
,~
Introductory Remarks, I. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , ;::;.;
Introductory Remarks, II. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ;:c:
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. ...
IV. TilE WORLD ECONOMY
Background Paper .... . . . . . .... . . .. ... . ... . .. . .. ... .
Introductory Remarks, I. .. . .. . .... . ..... . .. ...... . . .. . ... . .
Introductory Remarks, II. .. . . ........ . .... .. . . . .. . .
Introductory Remarks, TTL . . .. . . . . . .... . .... . . . . . . .
Discussion ..... ... ... .... .. .... . .. .... .. . . . . . . . . . .
V. WJ-Inl-IER EUROPE?
Introductory Remarks, I. .. . ... ... . . . . . . . ... . .. ... . .. . . .
Introductory Remarks. II. .. . . . . . . ... .. .. .. . .. .. . . . . .
Introductory Remarks. HI. .. .. .... . . . ... .. .. . . . .. . . . . . .
Discussion . . . . . . . . . .... . ........ .. .
"()
.'
'~
1-
';)
q
J 1
1~
...
~
.
•ll
l'll <uU ill Rl:(,\JVOY, Prime Minislcr of Fr:111Le
"' 'OL•uc·tury l<cmarks
lJJ~cussiur.
\ 0ih.:JU'Si~.~n:\
-'>\J\ It:'! Ul\IJON:] ill~ vn~w l·ROJ\t MO.'>CUW
.. . .. . .. . .
lm>ouuctory Remarks, I.
lntroo.Juck)ry Remarks, II.
iJL'>c'US~!OII . . ' ... . .... ..... . .
' <~, '. l.:( •USLt\VIA
,\_
.
'\
l.dr l1 l ·..~nmgtun 's Remarks ...
Ui:-c:u;>lon ,
! 1lL Mlliti.Al!ON !~SUE
futwJuchlry Remarks, I. ... . ... . . .
itllru.Juci,1I"Y Remarks, IL .... ,
Introductory Remarks, III......... . .. .
Drscu~sion ... , . ,
. ..... . .....
....... . ... . .
i HL EVOLVING WEST WEST REI.ATJONSITIP
lmroduuory Remarks, r. .
lntiOductc)ry Remarks, II.
Disc:ussion . . ....... . . . .. . . . .....
. .. . . . . . . . .. . ... .
l'f_0:-,!0.(; . . ..
... . .. . .. .. .
4
..p;
52
S2
53
).j
56 INTRODUCTION
Tite fort ieth 13ilderberg Meeting was held at the Royal Club Evian in Evian-Les-
Bains, France, on May 21-14, 1992. '11tere were 121 participants from 18 European
58 countries, the United States and Canada. Titey represented government, diplomacy,
62 politics, business, law, labor, education, journalism, the military, and institutes specializing
in national and internatio nal studies. All participams spo ke in a personal capacity, not
as representatives of their na tional governments or their org<utizations. As is usual at
Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit fn111 k and open discussion, no public reporting
64 of the conft::rence proceedings took place.
65 lbis booklet is an account of the 1992 13ilderhcrg Meeting and is distributed unly
66 to participants of this and past conferences and to prospective future participants.
67 Introdnctory remarks arc reported essentially as they were presented, with only minor
editing and without referring these texts back to the speakers. Comments and
interventions made in the discussion ses~ions, as well as panelists' closing remarks, are
organized and reported according to subject matter and not necessarily in the order in
70 which they were made, nor in their entirety.
71
72
75
5
PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN
LORD CARRINGTON
Chairman of the Board. Christie's Int ernat ional plc; Former 'kcrr~t:•p· ri<'tJc'r:l l
NATO
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA
VICTOR HALBERSTADT
Professor of Public Economics, Leiden University
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR lJ.S.A.
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.
Dean Emeritus TI1e Fletcher School of Law & Diplorn;J.cv: Fnr•Pe· T._,
Ambassador
I
USA
USA
F
s
GIOVANNI AGNELLI* *
PAUL A. ALLAIRE
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
BERNARD ARNAUD'
ANDERS ASLUND
USA GEORGE W. DAI.L**
P FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO•
S PERCY BARNEVIK
p
USA
F
D
NL
TR
ANTONIO BARRETO
LLOYD M. BENTSEN
PIERRE BEREGOVOY
CHRISTOPH BERTRAM*
ERNST H. VA,l\1 DER BEUGEL**
SELAI-IATTIN BEYAZJT*
C hairman, Fiat S.p A .
Chairman, Xcrnx Coq1Pratinn
Chairman, Archer-Da niel>-'v! ic1h ml
Company, Inc.
Chairman of the Manatcemcn•.
Board, L.V.M.ll.
Professor and Director. T
nstitu tc or
East European FcPnomics.
Stocklwlm Scho0l of Fn' Of'mi··s
f ormer Under-Sccretar\ o! '>t:11<.
Chairman, Soj0nwl snrl: l·<'n ••e r
Prime Minister
President and C.E.O., .1\J Hl /lv· 1
Brown Bovcri l .td.
Professor of Snciologv. l'n ivcr>;'l
nf Lisbon: Former ~i ip ts • n 0
Agriculture
U.S. Senator (Dcmocr:1t, l cx:1s~
Prime Minister
D iplomatic Cnrrespondci' ' . ''Die
Zeit"
Emeritus Pro fc~snr of lnt t.'rn2tic,n;• l
Rclatil•ns, Lcidc n Un iq•r ·
<itv:
Fon ner llnnora ry Secret;'''
Ci eneral of B i ldc rhcn~ \!e• •in·'<
Europe and Canada
D irector of Compan'"'-
D KURT BII:DENKOPF Prime Minister of Saxony GB RONALD H. GRIERSON Former Vice Chairman of General
s CARL BILDT Prime Minister Electric Company
USA JAMES H. BILLINGTON Librarian of Congress BG LORD GRIFFilHS OF FFORESTI~ACI-I Adviser, Goldman Sachs
CDN CONRAD M. BLACK* Chairman, The Daily Telegraph pic International Ltd.; Former Ilead of
NL MAARTEN C. BRANDS Professor of Modern and Prime Minister's Policy Unit
11Jeoretical History, University of s STEN GUSTAFSSON* Chairman of the Board of
Amsterdam Directors, AB Astra
D BIRG IT BREUEL Chairman of the Board, USA PHILIP C. HABIB Senior Research Fellow, Hoover
Treuhandanstalt Institution; Former Under
GB LEON BRITTAN Vice President of the European Secretary of State
Commission GB DENIS W. HEALEY Former Defence Secretary and
p ROBERTO CARNEIRO Former Minister of Education; Finance Ministt:r
Consultant to the World Bank N WESTYE H0EGI-I Shipowner, Leif I-10egh & Co. AS
GR COSTA CARRAS* Director of Companies USA KAREN ELLIOlT HOUSE Vice President/International, Dow
E JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO* Chairman and General Manager, Jones & Co., Inc.
Iberfomento SF JAAKKO ILONIEMI* Managing Director, Centre for
USA JOflN H. CHAFEE U.S. Senator (Republican, Rhode Finnish Business and Policy
Island Studies; Former Ambassador to the
F BERTRAND COLLOMB Chairman and Executive Officer, United States of America
Lafarge Coppee F PHILIPPE JAFFRE Chief Executive Officer, Credit
USA KENNETII W. DAM* Vice President, Law and External Agricole
Relations, IBM C'..orporation; A PETER JANKOWITSCI-1* Member of Parliament; Former
Former Deputy Secretary of State Foreign Minister
B ETIENNE DAVIGNON* Chairman, Societe Generale de USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss,
Belgique; Former Vice Chairman Hauer & Feld (Attorneys-at-Law);
of the Commission of European Former President, National Urban
Communities League
USA ROBERT A. DAY Charrman, Trust Company of the B PAUL DE KEERSMAEKER Former Minister of European
West AJfairs
DK AAGE DELEURAN* Editor-in-Chief, "Berlingske F CLAUDE DE KEMOULARIA Senior Adviser, Groupe Paribas;
Tidende" Former Chief Representative to
CDN MARIE-JOSEE DROUIN* Executive Director, Hudson the United Nations
Institute of Canada USA DONALD M. KENDALL Former Chairman and C.E.O.,
INT AR1HUR DUNKEL Director General, General Pepsico, Inc.
Agreement on Tarifs and Trade USA HENRY A. KISSINGER* Former Secretary of State;
USA WILLIAM T. ESREY Chairman, President and C.E.O., Chairman, Kissinger Associates,
Sprint Inc.
F LOJK LE FLOCH-PRIGENT Chairman, Societe Nationale Elf- GB ANDREW KNIGHT* Executive Chairman, News
Aquitaine International Pic
USA RICHARD M. FURLAUD Director, Bristol-Myers Squibb SF JARL KOHLER President, Central Association of
Company Finnish Forest Industries
lNT JOHN R. GALYIN Supreme Allied Commander !NT MAX KOHNSTAMM* * Former Secretary General, Action
Europe, SHAPE Committee for Europe; Former
USA DAVID R. GERGEN Editor-at-Large, U.S. News and President, European University
World Report Institute
TR EMRE GONENSAY Chic!' Adviser to the Prime D HILMAR KOPPER* Spokesman of the Board of
Minister Managing Directors, Deutsche
ll JOHN J. GOOSSENS Managing Director, AJcatel Bell Bank A.G.
8
9
NL PIETER KORTEWEG* President and C.E.O. of the E RODRIGO DE RATO FIGAREDO Parliamentary Leader of the
Robeco Group; Honorary Minority Group (Partido Popular)
Treasurer of Bilderberg Meetings D WOLFGANG REITZLE Member of the Board, BMW AG
CH ALEX KRAUER* Chairman and Managing Director, r ANTOINE RIBOUD Chairman, Societe B.S.N. - Gervais
Ciba-Geigy Limited Danone
USA HENRY R. KRAVIS Founding Partner, Koblberg Kravi1 USA ROZANNE L. RIDGWAY* President, l11e Atlantic Council of
Roberts & Co. the United States
F MARC LADREJT DE LACHARRIERE* Chairman, FIMILAC USA DAVID ROCKEFE LLER** Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank
F PHILIPPE LAGAYElTE First Deputy Governor, Banque d£ International Advisory Committee
France BG LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN** President, S.G. Warburg Group pic
TNT ALEXANDRE LAMFALUSSY General Manager, Bank for I SERGIO ROMANO Columnist, "La Stampa"; Fonner
International Settlements Ambassador of Italy to U.S.S.R.
F ANDRE LEVY-LANG Chairman of the Board of I RENATO RUGGIERO* Member of the Board, Fiat S.p.A.
Management, Paribas D VOLKER RUBE Minister of Defence
NL RUUD F.M. LUBBERS Prime Minister GR ANDONIS SAMARAS Former Minister of Foreign Affair~
CDN ROY MACLAREN President, CD Media Ltd.; F MICHEL SAPIN Minister of Economy and Finance
Publisher, "Canadian Business"; A RUDOLPH SCHOLTEN Federal Minister for Education and
Member of Parliament; Former Culture
Minister of State (Finance) F ERNEST-ANTOINE SEILLIERE Chairman, Compagnie Gcneralc
USA PHILIP L. MARTIN Professor of Agricultural d'lndustrie et de Participation
Economics, University of California E NARCIS SERRA I SERRA Deputy Prime Minister of the
at Davis Spanish Government
USA CHARLES MCC. MATHIAS* Partner, Jones, Day, Reavis & USA JACK SHEINKMAN President, Amalgamated Clothing
Pogue; Former U.S. Senator and Textile Workers Union AFL-
(Republican, Maryland) CTO-CLC
CH HELMUT 0. MAUCHER Chairman and C.E.O., Nestle S.A. USA SALLY A. SHELTON Senior Fellow, Georgetown
IRL MICHAEL MCDOWELL Chairman of the Progressive University; Former U.S.
Democrat Party Ambassador to Grenada and the
F THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of Eastern Caribbean
International Relations; Professor CDN JEFFREY SIMPSON Nationa! Affairs Columnist, ll1e
of Economics, Ecole Polytechnique Globe and Mail
MARIO MONTI* Rector and Professor of D THEO SOMMER Editor-in-Chief, "Die Zeit"
Economics, Bocconi University, E H.M. TI-lE QUEEN OF SPAIN
Milan CON NORMAN SPECTOR Former Chief of Staff, Office of
F PIERRE MOREL Diplomatic Adviser, Presidency of the Prime Minister
the Republic JNT HELGA STEEG Executive Director, International
A HEINRICH NEJSSER Chairman, Parliamentary Group of Energy Agency
the Austrian People's Party (OVP) USA ROBERT S. STRAUSS U.S. Ambassador to the Russian
in the Austrian National Assembly Federation
NL H.M. H-IE QUEEN OF HIE NElHERLANDS SF ULF L. SUNDQVIST Chairman, Social Democratic Party
ICE DAVID ODDSSON Prime Minister IRL PETER D. SU-IllERLAND* Former Member, Commission of
CDN JAMES PATTISON Chairman, President and C.E.O., the European Communities;
Jim Pattison Group inc. Chairman, Allied Irish Banks plc
USA CLAIBORNE PELL Senator (Democrat, Rhode Island) F JACQUES TOUI30N Member of Parliament; Former
CH DAVID DE PURY Chairman of the Board of BDC General Secretary of the R.P.R
Brown Boveri Ltd. and Co-
Chairman of ABB Asea Drown
Doveri Group
10 11
GR
F
F
USA
GB
N
LOUKAS TSOUKALIS
HUBERT VEDRINE
PHILIPPE VILLIN
PAUL A. VOLCKER
LORD WEIDENFELD
NIELS WERRING, JR.*
USA JOHN C. WHITEHEAD*
DK NILS WILHJELM
USA LYNN R. WILLIAMS*
USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN*
D OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN**
INT MANFRED WORNER
PAOLO ZANNONI
*Member of the Steering Committee
u Membcr of the Advisory Group
OBSERVER
B H.R.I-1. Prince Philippe
RAPPORTEUR
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
USA ALICE VICfOR
Jean Monnet Professor, University
of Athens; President, Hellenic
Centre for European Studies
(EKEM)
Secretary General and Spokesman,
Presidency of the Republic
Vice President, "Figaro"
Chairman, James D. Wolfensohn,
Inc.; Former Chairman, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve
System
Publisher
Chairman of the Board, WillJ.
Wilhelmsen Limited NS
Chairman, AEA Investors, Inc.;
Former Deputy Secretary of State
Managing Director, The Industrial
Mortgage Fund; Former Minister
of Industry
International President, United
Steelworkers of America
Presidem, James D. Wolfensohn,
Inc.
Chairman and C.E.O. of Otto
Wolff Industrieberatung und
Beteiligungen GmbH
Secretary General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organisation
Vice President International
Activities; Representative for Fiat
S.p.A. in the Russian Federation
Partner, Milbank Wilson Winthrop,
Inc.
IN ATTENDANCE
NL MAJA BANCK
F FELICIA CAVASSE
GR S'IEPHEN FARRANT
USA CHARLES MULLER
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
A Austria
B Belgium
CDN Canada
CH Switzerland
D Germany
DK Denmark
E Spain
F France
GB Great Britain
GR Greece
I Italy
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg
Meetings
LPF Communication; Local
Organizer 1992
Managing Director, Newsfront
Naftiliaki; Local Organizer 1993
President, Murden and Company;
Adviser, American Friends of
Bilderberg, Inc.
ICE Iceland
INT International
IRL Ireland
N Norway
NL Netherlands
p Portugal
s Sweden
Sf Finland
TR Turkey
USA United States of America
12 13
AGENDA
I. PROSPECTS l<'OR THE FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS
Moderator:
Panelists:
Marie-Josee Drouin
James Billington
Anders Aslund
Dwayne 0. Andreas
IT. WHAT SHOULD BE DONE FOR EASTERN EUROPE?
Moderator:
Panelists:
Francisco Pinto Balsemao
Philippe Lagayette
Birgit Breuel
ill. WHITHER THE UNITED STATES?
Moderator:
Panelists:
James D. Wolfensohn
David R. Gergen
Philip C. Habib
IV. THE WORLD ECONOMY
Moderator:
Panelists:
Denis W. Healey
Alexandre Lamfalussy
Hilmar Kopper
Paul Volcker
V. WHITHER EUROPE?
Moderator:
Panelists:
Thierry de Montbrial
Michel Sapin
Leon Brittan
Theo Sommer
VI. Remarks of PIERRE BEREGOVOY, Prime Minister of France
Moderator: Lord Carrington
VII. SOVIET UNION: THE VIEW FROM MOSCOW
Moderator:
Panelists:
Henry A. Kissinger
Robert S. Strauss
Paolo Zannoni
, ,
1.
VUI. CURRENT EVENTS: YUGOSLAVIA
Moderator:
Panelist:
Jaakko Iloniemi
Lord Carrington
IX. THE MIGRATION ISSUE
X.
16
Moderator:
Panelists:
Christoph Bertram
Philip Martin
Jacques Toubon
Volker Riihe
THE EVOLVING WEST/WEST RELATIONSHIP
Moderator:
Panelists:
Lord Carrington
Henry Kissinger
Etienne Davignon
OPENING
The Chairman of the Bilderberg Meetings, Lord Carrington, opened the Evian-
Les-Bains Conference with a note that this is the 40th conference for Bildcrberg. He
extended a cordial welcome to everyone present, and thanked the French hosts for their
selection of location, as well as extensive arrangements.
Lord Carrington reviewed the conference schedule and agenda, as well as the
ground rules and procedures for participation in the discussions. After underscoring the
importance of observing the private, off-the-record nature of the conference, he
introduced the moderator of the first session.
17
I. PROSPECTS FOR THE FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS
Introductory Remarh
I.
An unpredicted, unprecedented series of changes occurred in Eastern Europe in
1989 and moved to the western parts of the Soviet Union in 1990 and to the heart of the
Soviet Empire -- Moscow -- in 1991. llte transformation that has happened is not a
revolution, because revolutions are generally violent, Jed by intellectuals from above in
the name of a political program. What has been happening in the Soviet Union has \'ecn
-non-violent, with few leaders and no political program.
The Soviet Union lost the cold war and is now seeking to become a normal
society and a member of the civilized world. The number one question is whether Russia,
the current dominating survivor state, is going to be a Weimar Republic or a Federal
Republic.
Right now, it looks much like a Weimar Republic, with widespread discontent,
inflation, masses of demobilized soldiers, and a general feeling of humiliation. The
former Communists are rapidly becoming radical nationalists.
Yet Russia could prove to be a Federal Republic if it can get through the next
two or three years, because the Russians have acquired a new sense of pride, energy. :md
destiny. It was they, after all, who overthrew the Soviet regime and the Communist
Party, while other republics hesitated. Also, the Russians forme d, in the eyes of the
people, the first legitimate government in at least 30, and more likely, 75 years.
There are at least three elements of transformation in this new government.
First, there is a new generation of Russians who have been exposed to the west and,
hence, have different expectations and behavior patterns. Second, there is the influence
of the Siberians -- the sons and daughters of the gulag, the repressed minorities, the
entrepreneurial types who have returned and now form the base of the Ycltsin movement.
And third, there has been a recovery of the religious and moral values, the deeper
traditions, of the Russian people.
Is Russia as a nation, with its long history of authoritarianism, really capable ol
a transformation to democracy and a free market system? It is a great time of u nre~t fo1
Russia, in which authority has been delegitimized and where social confusion reigns a!
it did in the beginning of the 17th Century and in the beginning of the 20th Century, a
the time of the revolution. llte big difference is that there is no foreign invasion thi:
time. On the contrary, foreign countries are supporting the changes. Tbe educated youtl
of Russia, having lived through the catharsis of last August, have rediscovered the valw
and mobilizing power of moral choice.
Can the Russians build an administrative and economic infrastructure to get th;;n
through the next two or three years? Essentially, there are three layers of political acton
the reformers at the top; the 20 million or so former Communists who have som
administrative experience; and a new civil society consisting of some 3,000 organizat ion
that publish newspapers and such things. What is needed is for the top layer c
committed reformers to bring into administrative positions members of this third laye1
replacing the second layer of former Communists who have the ability but not th
inclination to carry out the reform policies.
Finally, will the ethnic violence among the nationalities of the former Sovi<
Union cause regional instability that will lead to a Yugoslavia-type sit uation? ·n1erc h:
···-;y
so far been no ethnic violence involving Russians versus other nationalities. 1l1cre is the
current question of relations with Ukraine. If this can be worked out, Ukraine could
reinforce the democratic movement because it has the best democratic structure jusl
beneath the top. The more serious, longer-term problem is that of the Muslim republics,
which could be ignited by Azerbaijan.
The United States has a special role to play in the transformation of the former
Soviet Union as a model for the continental-scale, multi-ethnic, pluralistic democracy thai
Russia could become. The United States needs to educate and train the lower-echelon
Russians who must replace the old cadres if democracy is to take hold in Russia and then
in the other republics.
Russia and the other republics arc in a very vulnerable situation, and a vigorous,
supportive response is needed from the West in general if the danger of disillusionmcm
with Western models is to be avoided.
lnJroductory Remarks
II.
Tt is important to realize that it was Russia that ended the Soviet Union. Ycltsin
and his young economics ministers did not want the republics; they wanted to get them
out. This is a fact that is not often recognized.
As far as economic development goes, the former Soviet Union falls neatly into
th ree categories: the most well off, the Baltic states, Armenia, and Georgia; then Russia,
Ukraine, and Belarus; finally the Moslem republics, which are much worse off.
True democratization -- ~)'Stemic change-- is essential for economic development.
Only in Lithuania and Albania have the Communists really been thrown out of high
office. Russia, Estonia, and Latvia are democratic, but there are still many senior former
Communists in high offices. In Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova, the Communist
establishment merely changed its name, as in the former Yugoslav republics. In central
Asia, the governments are mainly authoritarian. As for Georgia and Azerbaijan, it is
unclear what will emerge.
In three states -- Georgia, Moldova, and Tajikistan, there are civil wars. Two
states -- Azerbaijan and Armenia -- are at war. In these states, where there is no basic
security, there is not much hope for reform.
Outside of Russia, the situation looks much like Africa in 1960. All major
decisions were made in an imperial capital far away. Now, there are no policy makers,
which is causing a major bottleneck. Also, there are many former Communists in high
offices who are alienated and are auempting to grab what they can before they are
thrown from office.
Only Russia has the human capital to formula te a reform program on its own.
Contrary to expectations, the Baltics have not done so yet. They arc likely to follow, but
they need much foreign assistance. Ukraine has gone nowhere, and here, as elsewhere,
much more Western assistance is needed if reform programs are to get going.
As regards currency, it is important that the situation gets sorted out. It appears
that the three Baltic states, Ukraine and Moldova will opt out of the ruble area, and they
should be asked to do so quickly. The ruble area must then be managed by one
monetary agency, as with the West African Monetary Agency. The IMF is currently
being too soft by allowing each central bank to issue currency with restrictions.
0
There will be significant adjustments i.n trade among the former Soviet republics
which will hit the very trade-dependent smaller countries especially hard. Inter-republic
trade will increase, as COMECON trade sharply declines.
All this suggests that much more Western involvement is needed. The IMF
should be much tougher on the currency issue. Western experts should get more involved
in all the republics, not just Russia. Heavy financial assistance is required, and the G-7
decision in April regarding support for Russia was a good one.
/nJroductory Remarks
Ill.
Gorbachev initially aimed for a twelve-year program to move toward a market
economy. He intended to do it by reforming the Communist party. It took several years
to realize he could not reform the Communist party, and he was frustrated in trying to
bring about many of his reforms. Yeltsin is aiming to move to a market economy in two
years or less. He is far less fearful of public opinion than Gorbachev was.
From a business point of view, it is important not to think of Russia as a third
world country. It is not. It has many very good engineers, many well-educated people,
and aircraft, space, and defense industries which are, in part, ahead of the West's. Russia
has the resources; it is a question of organizing them.
Each of the republics wants to establish its sovereignty, but they are entirely
interdependent and,can't exist without each other. Once they have established their
sovereignty, they will quickly enter into trade agreements with each other, out of
necessity. This process will take some time, and things will get worse before they get
better.
Yet it is a good time to get into business in the former Soviet Union. Everything
is cheap and can only go up from here. But those planning to do business in the former
Soviet Union must realize that the situation there is one of anarchy and chaos. Order
will not come from the top down, but from the local level, from newly active and
influential churches, from the black marketeers, who will become the businessmen.
The biggest risk facing the West is that the countries of the former Soviet Empire
will one day say that they tried capitalism and it did not work. Tbe West cannot afford
to have that happen and should help in every possible way. lltere is a limit to what can
be done with foreign aid, but new investment can help a great deal.
Discussion
A considerable degree of pessimism about the future of Russia and the other
former Soviet republics characterized the discussion. Concerning Russia, a French
participant expressed concern about corruption, unemployment, skilled workers fleeing
a collapsing industrial base, and the political deadlock in Moscow, the seeming paralysis
of Yeltsin, who, the speaker felt, would lose an election if were held tomorrow.
A speaker from Finland agreed that the picture inside Russia is gloomy, pointing
to such problems as a population not used to hard work and with few incentives to work
hard, a demoralized army, a lack of civil servants to carry out reform policies, and an
unreliable banking system.
21
Another Frenchman noted that 13 of the 15 former Soviet republics are still being
run by people who were Communists. As long as these nomenclatura are in power, it is
unlikely that positive change can occur.
Yeltsin's apparent success as the result of the August coup attempt was a matte!
of some skepticism on the part of an Italian speaker. His view was that the coup was not
really a coup, but an effort on the part of those who had been in power to reclaim it
Their effort failed because the nomenclatura waited, in the Russian tradition. They are
still waiting, as is the population at large, to see if Yeltsin's programs work. Yeltsin has
undertaken a series of overly ambitious programs with little public support, and now
people are waiting to see the result.
Looking beyond Russia to the other members of the CIS, the prevailing view or
speakers was also uncertainty. An International participant spoke of the total Jack o[
stability -- economic, political, and social -- which leads in turn to a lack of predictability.
Among the republics there is a thirst for independence at the same time as a growing
sense of interdependence. One unifying sentiment among the non-Russian republics is
a distrust of Russia and a fear that Russia might once again become expansionist. Yet
the republics know that they and Russia need each other, and, hence, the CIS has a
chance at least as a transitional entity.
An Italian who had recently visited Kazhakistan reported that the view from there
is that Russia is in a state of chaos, with no true leader. Yeltsin's position is seen as very
weak. 1l1ere is no confidence in the future of the CIS, but there is a strong inclination
in Kazhakistan to moderate conflicts between republics and to cooperate with Russia.
Rich in resources and relatively stable, Kazhakistan has a good chance of success. Its
leader, Nazarbayev, is opposed to Islamic fundamentalism and looks to Turkey rathe1
than Iran.
Regarding relations between Russia and the other republics, a Briton expressed
concern that, if Russia moves forward with economic and political reforms ahead of the
other republics, there might be contlict between Russia and western republics, such as
Belarus and Ukraine, and central Asian republics.
Another concern voiced by this speaker was the possibility of nationalism arising
in some of the many autonomous republics and regions within Russia. In particular,
there seems to be a strong possibility of a Siberian break-away unless Russian aid to
Siberia is forthcoming.
Turning to the question of what the West should do, a Belgian speaker worried
about the Jack of an institutional framework to organize the Western response. What is
needed is something like the Marshall Plan to establish rules and procedures, to set goals
and priorities, and to monitor and respond to changing conditions. To bring order to the
chaos in the former Soviet Union, the West must respond in an orderly fashion, and this
has not been the case so far.
The former Soviet countries, said an International speaker, have no alternative
but to look to the West for the kind of assistance they need. 1l1ey look in particular to
two Western institutions, the EC and NATO. On the other hand, there is a growing
disenchantment with the West and a realization that the destiny of these countries
depends on themselves. And while the West should seize the opportunity to assist the
process of change, the possibilities are limited. Certainly the former Soviet countries
cannot yet be accepted as members of the EC or of NATO, nor can they be given
security guarantees. In the last analysis, success or failure of the reforms depends on the
countries themselves.
22
A German expressed concern that the need for Western assistance greatly exceeds
the means. The West must focus assistance where it is most needed, rather than
attempting to bail out all the former Soviet countries. A Briton agreed with thi~
assessment, and wondered where the money would come from. 1ne US has shown no
inclination to increase funds to the IMF, and the UK and Germany are opposed to
increasing the budget of the EC. Germany is overcommitted as it is. Only massive cuts
in Western defense budgets could free up the funds required.
Speakers listed a number of priorities for Western economic assistance, among
them: stop capital outflows, achieve convertibility of the ruble, aid introduction of mnrket
economies, and provide educational assistance.
Panelists' Conclusions
In response to the discussion, the following points were made by the panelists:
-- the process of change will come largely from the local level.
-- maldistribution of food poses a serious challenge to Yeltsin.
-- private investment, which will be stimulated by convertibility, will he more
important than foreign nid.
Yeltsin's popularity is reasonably secure because there is no strong alternative.
unemployment is not yet a serious problem, but will be in two or three years.
enormous entrepreneurial activity is springing up in Russia, and a new civil
society is emerging.
-- the August coup represented a moral mobilizntion, the rise of a new generation
who will not blindly follow their elders.
-- an important form of Western aid will be to bring memhers of this new
generation of leaders to the West to see how the institutions of a free society
function.
Russia is the key to change in the former Soviet Union because it is the
farthest along in the process.
23
II. WHAT SHOULD BE DONE FOR EASTERN EUROPE?
Introductory Remarks
I.
A legal framework is a precondition for success, but the laws in the West have
become much too complicated and can be a hindrance. Simple and practical regulations
should be developed for Eastern Europe. Rather than perfection, speed should be
emphasized during the time of transition.
Eastern Europe should start with the privatization of small businesses. 'nwy
For both political and economic reasons, there must be a clean break with the should preferably be sold to the old managers, as long as they did not have major roles
command economy. There is no acceptable ground between a command and a markel in the old governments. Also important is development of business plans and cooperation
system. The Eastern European countries are not all exactly the same, so there is no between management and workers.
single model that can be applied to all of them. For larger businesses, foreign investors are needed, to bring in capital and
Any progress toward steady growth depends on the acceptance of the ground technology as well as international experience, which has been lacking for many years in
rules for a market economy: freedom of enterprise, freedom to set prices, freedom to Eastern European companies. . ..
trade, convertibility, a basic legal and institutional framework, accounting rules, and a East Germany has had a great deal of experience in this kmd of transition, and
banking system. Economic inequality, which undermines popular support for reforms and privatization will be completed there in the next two or three years. The Tre~hand h~s
for business, must be minimized to avoid social and political unrest. There must also be begun to send some of its managers to Russia to help in privatization of retail shops m
reduced inflation, limited government deficits, and limited trade deficits. and around Moscow. This is something that it can do also in Eastern Europe.
Implement~tion of these measures (which the IMF has insisted upon) has caused To organize a successful transition to a market e'?no~1~ in ~astern Europe i_s a
sharp contracl!ons rn the economies. The reduction in GNP is about the same as the us tremendous challenge for the West, and we should organiZe 11 mtelltgently. Otherw1se,
experienced in the Great Depression -- about 30 percent . This harsh impact is due in we will all be losers.
pan to the necessary elimination of certain economic activities and structures, and also
to the contraction in trade between the countries of Eastern Europe.
~· A number of ~hi~gs can be done to soften the harshness of the process of change.
hrst, the_o~~ econormc u_
es between these countries should not be destroyed too hastily.
The poss!b1ltty of a multtlateral payment system, which might be accomplished through
commerctal banks, should be studied. New economic structures must be built.
Monopolies must be broken up, and privatization must ultimately occur, though gradually.
Infras_
tructure must be rebuilt, and a sound banking system created. Efficient government
agencies must be created, especially in the area of tax collection. TI1e West can basically
do two _
things.. One is.to open its markets; trade is better than aid. TI1e second thing is
to provtde assistance, Ill the form of long-term investment and educational assistance in
the area of management.
Two fundamental questions arise. One concerns links with the EC. These
countries are not ready to join the community, but there is a political need for some kind
of link. ·nw second question concerns measures to make the process of change less harsh
and less prot_
racted. Whatever is done here should only facilitate and accelerate change,
not prevent H.
Introductory Remarks
II.
The leaders of Eastern Europe have little time to find solutions to their
economic, social, and political problems, and the West must help them. We in the West
must organize our assistance and explain to our people why we must help the Eastern
European countries. In this effort we need to have international cooperation and
coordination under one single international organization.
Financial help is important, but it is more important to have help from
experienced managers, administrators, and bankers. Managerial and technological
assistance are the keys to the transition. Every Westem corporation should send
managers to Eastern Europe.
24
Discussion
An American led off the discussion by emphasizing the importance of Western
involvement in the conversion of the Eastern European economies to free market
economics. lbe West should concentrate first on the Eastern European countries before
taking on the more difficult problems of former Soviet republics. If the Eastern
European countries fail in their attempt to convert to free market economics, a very
discouraging signal will be sent to the former Soviet countries.
There are five fundamental forms of assistance the West can render. First, the
Eastern European countries must be assured that they will ultimately be welcomed into
the West's institutions, such as the World Bank, the IMF, OECD, GA'n ', and even the
EC itself. Second, the West must provide desperately needed technical assistance. 111ird,
these countries need training in management, accounting, and other aspects of how
business operates. Fourth, they need to be able to trade with the West, and we can help
them do this by lowering our trade barriers. Finally, capital investment is needed both
from government institutions and the private sector.
On the issue of training, another American said that this requirement could be
assisted if Western governments would provide credits for small and medium-sized
companies to enter into joint ventures in Eastem Europe. In addition, Western
governments should provide political risk insurance as an added incentive.
A Dutchman spoke about the need for capital for infrastructure and suggested
that the European Investment Bank could be utilized. In addition, public utilities,
occupying a place between the public and private sectors, have a special role to play in
providing training and organizational know-how.
As well as privatization, competition, a legal framework, and all the other
elements of a free market economy, it is, said a Briton, important to encourage the
development of shared values. This involves a corporation dealing with its work force in
such a way as not to invite increased government regulation. As we import capitalism to
the East, we must avoid also importing the quick profit mentality.
25
The issue of trade and open markets was one of concern to several participants.
An Irish speaker pointed out that the Association Agreements reached with the EC were
limited in the areas of agriculture and textiles, the very industries in which Eastern
European countries have the best chance of competing. The EC has to be more open,
but is further opening in these areas, particularly in agriculture, politically possible?
A speaker from the UK suggested a scheme for replacing the markets and trading
links severed by the break-up of the Soviet Union and COMECON. A triangular trade
could be created wherein assistance given to the former Soviet countries could be used
to purchase needed, but heretofore unaffordable, goods from the Eastern European
countries. As for opening Western markets further, this is fine, but there should be no
subsidies which make the competition unfair.
Speaking in favor of more open markets, a Dutchman argued that open markets
will encourage capital to flow into the Eastern European markets. An Austrian
advocated the admission of the most advanced Eastern European countries, Poland,
Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, into EFTA as a means of integration.
Implicit in the discussion of open markets is the issue of the Eastern European
countries' ultimate membership in the EC. An Italian acknowledged that this is the
fundamental objective of these countries. The West cannot build a new wall, but must
declare its objective of building a larger community. This will take time and requires a
transitional period of defining a new structure and building institutional and political links
with these countries. A Portuguese speaker suggested that some kind of special
membership status, short of full economic membership, might be established for this
interim period. No matter what, the EC should not send the message that these
countries would not be welcome in the community.
A point strongly made by several speakers was that, in addition to economic
assistance, the West must give political assistance to the countries of Eastern Europe.
There is, said an Austrian, an obvious lack of political culture in Eastern Europe, and the
West must help create a political culture that is capable of solving conflict and providing
stable democratic government. Without political stability, the chances of economic
progress are greatly diminished.
Among the necessary political reforms listed by a Portuguese participant are
streamlining budgetary procedures, introducing new mechanisms of social consultation,
sharpening the focus of legislation, and coordinating external aid. The West must help
public policy makers create new standards and streamline administrations. Otherwise,
there is a danger of economic reforms moving ahead of government reforms.
A Briton called for parliaments, political parties, and trade unions to intensify
their contacts with the countries of Eastern Europe. The need is urgent because the
danger of increasing conflict is great. Besides the cataclysm in Yugoslavia, there is the
threat of Hungarian nationalism, the real possibility of the breakup of·Czechoslovakia, the
political paralysis in Poland, to mention a few of the threats to stability in the region.
26
Panelists' Conclusions
The German panelist emphasized the immediate need for human capitaL the
need for a single organization to coordinate Western assistance to Eastern Europe, the
rationale for concentrating aid initially in Poland, Hungary, and Czechoslovakia, but no
at the exclusion of Russia, and the definition of a simple legal framework for these
countries.
The French panelist agreed that assistance needed to be coordinated, but did not
feel that it could appropriately be done by one organization. In the days of the Marshall
Plan, the situation was different. There were no international organizations and only one
country in a position to give aid. Today there are many international organizations :md
many countries able to help. All their efforts must be coordinated.
The EC must be open to membership for the Eastern European countries, but
it is too early to make a timetable. In answer to the question of where the capital will
come from, it must come from all of the Western countries, and they must be prepared
to increase savings and cut budget deficits to provide it.
21
Ill. WHITHER AMI:RICA?
Introductory Remarks
I.
the UN or the European Community, but they will no longer take the lead. On the other
hand, they do maintain interests in countries which are important to their well being, such
as the Middle East -- both because of oil and their relationship with Israel -- and in Latin
America, which is next door and where they have a tremendous economic interest.
Americans are so concerned with problems closer to home, including economic
The Presidential elections in America are unusual this year because a thii growth, education, drugs, crime, environmental issues, and population problems, that they
candidate, as yet not officially announced, has joined the race. He, Mr. Perot, h< almost don't pay attention to foreign policy. They don't listen to a candidate's speech on
captured the interest of the American voter for a number of reasons, most particular! foreign policy, and they are not even aware of an important election in Israel about to
because Americans are frustrated and angry with the President, the politill' take place. This does not reflect a nco-isolationism. Americans do recognize and enjoy
establishment, their own standards of living, and tbe outlook for their future. the position the United States holds in the world, especially since the end of the Cold
President Bush, although very successful on the side of foreign policy, has bee War. But even there, the American public is more interested in tackling world-wide
weak in his domestic programs and has lost the confidence and trust of many of th problems in the environment or population control, for example, than helping Yugoslavia
voters. The American voters were supportive of his leadership through the Gulf crisi work out its border problems.
but are angry with his lack of response to domestic issues, such as the Los Angeles rio\ An1ericans are looking at their relationships with other coulllries in a new light,
and the state of the economy. ' and that is with less of a geo-political interest and more of a concern for human rights.
At the same time, his Democratic opponent, Bill Clinton, although initiaU In the future, An1ericans will want their foreign policy to be based on coordination,
impressive as a candidate with a demonstrated knowledge of both domestic and worl cooperation, moderation, and stability, as well as some progress in the quality of life and
affairs, has portrayed a weak character which has placed him, as well, in low esteer the well-being of the individual.
among the voters. This has overshadowed his own commendable record as governor (
Arkansas, and his well-informed stands on education, racial issues and other vital volt
concerns. Discussion
The overall lack of confidence in the current le&ders, and the political system i
general, has proven ideal for a third candidate to join the race. Ross Perot, a Texan, , The discussion began with an American giving his evaluation of the recent riots
a busuwssman with no political experience but enough money to cover his own expensCi in Los Angeles. He represented a view widely held by a large segment of America which
at least for the initial phase of his campaign. At another time such a candidatt is discouraged by not only the Administration's lack of response to the riots, but its
especially one with no political background, would not be taken seriously, no matter lw unwillingness to recognize -- and address -- the underlying causes behind the outbreak.
much money he had at his disposal. But that limitation seems to be more th~ Several participants agreed with this criticism of the current Administration. 0~1e
compensated by a solid self-confidence and a convincing rhetoric of solutions for tb American attributed the unrest to the economic illness which pervades the industnal
nation's problems. He is a proven, successful businessman, and his speeches reflect th' community. There has been no governmental effort to alter the nation's economic
thinking of a large portion of the American voters. cn1ey see in him what they belie\' course, and the workers are being rewarded for short term benefits, rather than long term
is not visible in either Bush or Clinton: someone who is strong, direct, and candid -- trail gains. Another American added that while other nations have devoted their best scientists
they feel have been lacking in politicians in recent years. The fact that he is weak o and engineers to building competitive civilian products, the US government has devoted
issues is not important to these An~ericans. What is important is that he represents , theirs to military consumption. There is even a cynicism towards the college graduate
refreshing change. who chooses to become a teacher rather than a bankruptcy lawyer, or the worker who
In the final analysis Bush is likely to win. But we should take seriously the Pen strives for high quality rather than quantity. Only with increased cooperation between
candidacy and, further, we should view it as a refreshing change to the voting process an, government, labor, and management, will there be an upswing in the American economy.
one which may well bring the voters together as never before. Only when Washington gives the problems at home the same amount of energy it gave
to the Persian Gulf, will there be a chance for hope. ll1e direction of this process will
Introductory Remarks
II.
be determined in the November elections.
An Irishman suggested that th~: weakening of the relationship between An1erica
and Europe was due to a decline of cohesion which had existed throughout the mutual
battle against Communism. Only by strengthening the relationship in the areas of trade
The events i11 the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have had a tremendm and economic policy, and a sharing of sovereignty between the US and Europe, will there
in1pact on the American people from many angles. ll1e end of the cold war, and th emerge a constructive and mutually beneficial program for the two continents. He went
concurrent joint efforts with Europe to fight communism, have cansed the America on to say that the US must be convincing in its support of a multilateral system in the
people to shift priorities from foreign affairs to problems more related to domestic issue. areas of trade and economic policy, and move away from the perceived ambivalence i11
For instance, America is no longer interested in playing a major role in a Europea, its evolving relationship with Europe. lbis view was shared by a number of Europeans,
problem such as Yugoslavia. This is not to say An1erica wouldn't support the efforts \ one of whom went further to imply that Europe would have to take up some of the
28 29
responsibilities heretofore held by America. An important example of this was, the past. 'Ibis leaves more room to focus on coming to grips with the needs of the
paraphrase the second panelist, the unwillingness of the United States to continue !American public. Where we might see frustration and anger in the presidential election,
primary defense responsibilities for a country such as Yugoslavia. One Canadian sound:there are encouraging signs of a grassroots effort permeating the population throughout:
a positive note on America's important role in the end of the cold war, and noted ti1American manufacturing is stronger, the quality of goods is better; productivity is up;
it was a victory without any gloating from anyone -- the President, Congress, or tlexports are up. The Los Angeles riots have led to a real focusing on this problem and
American public. a coalition is building. The members of the business community are taking a stronger
Several participants elaborated on the first panelist's discussion of the president!look at how they can help to improve education. If one were to look at the presidential
race, including the frustration and cynicism felt toward political incumbents. Ot elections alone, one could become very discouraged. It is much more encouraging to
American said that President Bush's basic weakness is that he is not trusted by his publlook at what is going on underneath.
that his stated commitments are not convincing. There was also a widespre1
concurrence on Mr. Perot's limited qualifications for the presidency and the feeling tl1
his popularity would wear thinner and thinner as Americans would eventually focus i
the real issues rather than his superficial ideas for improvements. Another Americi
phrased this differently; Americans are listening to Perot now because they are frustrat1
and sensible. They are also sensible enough to get frustrated with Perot, which will me
likely happen. At the same time, Perot has proved to be a valued outlet for tl
frustration in the American voter, and this is probably very healthy.
The relationship within the Atlantic alliance was the subject of sever
interventions, beginning with an American's analysis of the difference between ;
American and a European view of foreign polk')'. The US has never had forei1
occupation, and any American involvement in a war has taken place far from its shon
Americans are, most likely, Jess familiar with the difficulty of establishing democracy !
a country with a different history and culture, such as Russia and other members of tl
former Soviet Union. A Dutchman asked if the panel would comment on Americ~
potential role in the Ukranian/Russian conflict as an example of its role in world affai1
'Ibis concern was also expressed by an American who suggested that the same problen
could spread to other areas in the former Soviet Union.
Panelists' Conclusions
Tbe panelist who spoke on American foreign policy addressed an underlyir,
theme of the discussion, namely America's ability to refocus its foreign policy in relatic
to domestic issues which were becoming increasingly important: the economic situatio;
environmental issues, human rights, and others. He was optimistic about progress in th
area, because the Americans are better able to prioritize their responsibilities 1
themselves and to their friends abroad. He used Yugoslavia as an example, saying th1
the US was not disregarding Yugoslavia, but felt that it should no longer play a leadir
role in solving this conflict. Yugoslavia is a European country and its Europea
neighbors should be the first to determine whatever international involvement should tal.
place.
Responding to a question as to whether the US is led by the elite, this panel[
felt that if at all, this is certainly less true than in earlier years.
The other American panelist elaborated on the previous speaker's remarks h
underscoring his encouragement with the depth of American involvement in currct
domestic issues. He said that Americans spend too much time debating the merits(
Presidents, when they should focus more on the body politic overalL TI1e US shoul
remain engaged in Europe, both militarily and otherwise, but not to the degree it has i
30 31
IV. THE WORLD ECONOMY
Background Paper
Global Savings
Is there a global shortage of savings? If the answer is yes, what are its potentia
consequences? Are they aggravated by a "credit crunch"? What can be done about thi
state of affairs? These are some of the questions I shall try to answer in this paper.
Saving Rates: The Statistics And Their Interpretation
Tl1e attached table shows various saving rates from 1960 to 1990 in the G-:
countries. Let me make a few observa tions prompted hy the figures, starting with the
obvious and moving on to the controversial.
L There has clearly been a downward trend in gross national saving expressec
.
as a percentage of GNP, particularly since 1970. TI1ere have of course been difference1
between countries and between sub-periods, but the trend seems to have been quit<
general, albeit with some cyclical variations. Preliminary figures for 1991 do no:
contradict this statement.
2. The downward trend in net saving rates has been more pronounced. One has
to bear in mind, however, that the netting-out procedure is somewhat unreliable, both
for conceptual and for statistical reasons. But the figures are too consistent to be
dismissed as irrelevant.
3. Arithmetically speaking, the responsibility for the decline in global saving
rates rests with the public sector, which has moved from positive net saving towards
dissaving. The striking exception to this general rule has been Japan, where public sector
saving remained positive throughout the period and even reached a peak in 1990. TI1c
turnaround in the United Kingdom was another, albeit less striking exception. It is,'
however, unlikely to last. Figures relating to general government net lending as a
percentage of GNP broadly confirm these observations.
4. Statistical coincidence does not, of comse, amount to causality. Some
economists have made much of the so-called "Ricardo equivalence" -- which states,
roughly speaking, that changes in public sector saving ratios are offset by changes in,
private saving ratios. My impression is that such equivalence may have been at work in i
some countries and in some sub-periods (for instance, more recently in the United
Kingdom), but does not hold for the majority of the countries and certainly not for tile'
whole of the period covered by the trend. The acceptance or rejection of this statement
has obvious implications for policy recommendations. ,
More Recent Developments
Several recent developments within and outside th.: G-7 area suggest that (a) the
global trend displayed in the table has continued and may even have accelerated, and that
(b) its implications should be taken seriously.
L Germany's public sector borrowing requirement now amounts to something
between 3 1/2 to 5% of GNP (depending on how it is measured). TI1is represents one
of the most dramatic shifts into red that has taken place in contemporary economic
history in any large country. As a result, the German current account has moved from
32
a sizable surplus to a small deficit. In other words, western Germany's saving surplus has
been siphoned off by eastern Germany and has therefore ceased to be available for the
rest of the world.
2. Almost at the same time, as a result of the Gulf war, the Gulf area has
turned from net capital exporter into a net capital importing area.
3. Some would add the emergence of massive investment needs in central and
eastern Europe. However, the impact of this development on the global capital market
imbalance should not be overstated, for the simple reason that credit worthy (as opposed
to potential) investment needs emerging in this part of the world are relatively limited.
Tbe total will certainly be much smaller than the financial transfer flows from western to
eastern Germany.
Assessment OJ Consequences
To the extent that the developments I have just outlined are not reversed, and
reversed quite rapidly, they will have a strongly negative influence on the growth
prospects of the world as a whole. This influence, I believe, is already being felt since G-
7 saving is a predominant part of world saving. Declining saving rates limit the potential
for real growth in the world's capital stock. The mechanics through which this dampening
influence exerts itself is the persistence, for a time, of higher-than-normal real interest
rates. This would have two kinds of damaging affect. On the one hand, it would tend
to change the structure of investment, away from the riskier capital outlays and from
those expected to yield a return only in the longer run (such as infrastructure
investments) towards spending on projects with a high retum within a short horizon. On
the other, it would put a brake on the total volume of investment. After a period of
adjustment, the world economy would settle down to a much lower growth rate than that
experienced until now. Real interest rates would then decline, but too late to stimulate
growth.
The slowdown in world growth would have highly damaging effects on the Tl1ird
World as well as on the CIS countries and central Europe not so much by making savings
" unavailable" to finance their investment needs, but rather by making it unprofitable to
invest in these countries. This is not just a question of semantics, it has also a bearing
on policy prescriptions. I have some doubts about the wisdom of providing massive
credits to LDCs and eastern Europe in a slow-growth world, for in such a world these
credits cannot yield real returns on investment. To put this proposition in a different
form, faster non-inflationary real growth in the western world, for which the prerequisite
is higher western saving rates, can provide a more powerful and more lasting stimulus to
world development than the provision of funds to these countries in a slow-growth
environment. Export markets are more important for them than finance, or even aid.
What About The Credit Crunch?
TI1ere is the additional question conceming the potentially aggravating role played
by the so-called "credit crunch".
There is probably no credit crunch, not even in the United States or in the
United Kingdom, in the narrow technical sense used by economists, who define a credit
crunch as a situation in which the market does not clear a credit demand at prevailing
interest rates. But I believe that it is meaningful to talk about a credit crunch in a
broader sense. In a number of large countries, until about two years ago banks enjoyed
a very fast expansion, with a correspondingly rapid accumulation of non-performing loans.
33
lbe process started in the 1970s, with the boom in sovereign lending to Latin Arneric1
and some eastern European countries. It shifted in the 1980s towards real estate lending
,
or just plain excessive lending to domestic customers. Understandably, banks are nov
adjusting their policies away from the growth of assets towards improving profitabilit)
through cost-cutting and retrenchment. Some also argue that this policy of retrenchment
is accelerated by the implementation of the Basic capital ratios. I have some doubts as
to the significance of this additional factor, but I shall come back to this point in m)
policy conclusions.
This change in banks' policies has no effect on the level of real interest rates in
the world economy, since this level is governed by developments in the "real" economy
,
such as the flow of saving and the profitability of investment. It has, however, quite a
strong distributional impact on credit flows, since banks are a dominant group of financial
intermediaries which are responsible for channelling a sizable part of financial surpluses
towards sectors and countries with financing needs. For the reasons I have just
mentioned, many hanks have opted out of the business of sovereign lending, especially
to LDCs and eastern Europe. To the extent that only a very few of these countries have
access to alternative sources of funds, i.e. to capital market financing, the shift in banks'
policies may amount to a kind of credit rationing to their disadvantage. Such a new bim
in intermediation aggravates the concern for developing, or would-be developing
countries, since it adds its paralyzing impact to that of high real interest rates and slower
world growth.
More recently, however, there have been encouraging signs of a revival of direct
investment or equity flows especially to Latin America, but also on a more modest scale
to central Europe (Hungary and Czechoslovakia). But the continuation and, a fortiori,
the expansion of these flows hinges critically on the export prospects of these countries'
which, again, highlights the crucial importance for the world as a whole of real growth
in the western world.
Policy Responses
Now let me turn to possible policy responses. I may perhaps start by saying what
in my view we should not do:
1. We should not undertake a global relaxation of monetary policies, on two
grounds. Firstly, because such a relaxation will have no lasting effect on the level of real
interes! rates. On the contrary, it could backfire on rates at the long end, by steepening
the yield curve. It is interesting to compare the US and German experiences in this
respect. Secondly, we should quite specifically refrain from suggesting that relaxatiOIJ
should start in Germany. With the emergence of Germany's massive public sector
borrowing requirement, the quite visible signs of overheating in the labour market, and
the fast growth of M, and credit demand, this would only accelerate domestic inflation.·
I would also have doubts about the wisdom of any large-scale further relaxation of
monetary policy in Japan. As for the United States, monetary policy should take into
account the course of the current recovery. In any event, there is no justification for
global monetary policy relaxation in a cyclically desynchronized world.
2. I would also refrain from tinkering with banks' minimum capital ratios. 1l1e
real, and justified, reason for banks' prudence is the lessons they wish to draw from their
past polic_-y mistakes. The Basic capital ratios may have acted as a timely reminder of the
need to return to prudent policies, but the change of policy was overdue, and would have
happened anyhow, probably even more violently if it had been delayed further. The
34
relaxation of the capital rules would store up problems for the future without really
solving the current ones. In short, prudential tools should not be used for anti-cyclical
macro-policy purposes.
What, then, are the desirable policy options?
I have no doubt in my mind that in a longer perspective the optimal policies
would be policies designed to raise saving rates, in both the public and the private sectors.
For the public sector, the emphasis should be on cutting expenditure rather than on
increasing taxes. As for the saving rates of the private sector, our ability to affect them
will depend crucially on a reform of our fiscal and social security systems.
The realization of thes'.! longer-run objectives has of course to he carefully
adjusted to the cyclical situation in which countries find themselves. Cutting the public
sector borrowing requirement in countries which are in, or which are just about to get out
of, a major recession would clearly be counterproductive. Titese countries will have tG
wait until their recovery is clearly confirmed. l am thinking in this respect in particular
of the United States. In the case of Japan, given the sharp current weakening of
economic activity and the high rate of net saving by the public sector, there arc even
good grounds for a more expansionary fiscal poliL-y stance --but only to the extent that.
there are no visible signs of an economic upturn.
Germany, on the other hand, is in quite the opposite situation. Fiscal
retrenchment, in particular hy cutting subsidies and certain other types of public spending,
would be fully justified now. I do not think that this could at present have any damaging
effect on economic development:; outside Germany and it would certainly help to achieve
a better macroeconomic balance inside the country. Tt is true that initially the shift in the
German macroeconomic policy mix after unification had a globally stimulating impact on
the rest of the world: fiscal expansion, via import growth, more than offset the interest
rate effect. Now, however, with the gradual exhaustion of the net fiscal impact, the
higher real interest rates arc asserting their globally depressing influence on the European
economy. l-Ienee the justification for an urgent change in the German policy mix.
One last word on the bi:1s introduced against developing countries by the change
in banks' policies. The way to escape this is to imitate the example of those countries
which are now attracting a genuine inflow of risk capital-- an inflow which, incidentally,
opens up the possibility for other capital market operations. Jn practically all cases, this
was made possible by a radical shift in policies towards fiscal and monetary orthodoxy,
accompanied by the opening-up of markets and privatization, within the framework of
JMF-led macroeconomic and structural adjustment programmes.
35
National savings rates in major industrial countries
Countries and Gross Net of which Memo:
periods national national General
saving' saving Public2
Private govern-
ment net
Total House- Business lending'
holds enter-
prises3
as a percentage of national income
United States
1960- 69 19.7 10.8 0.8 10.0 6.2 3.8 -0.4
1970- 79 19.4 9.1 - 1.2 10.3 7.6 2.6 - 1.2
19~0-89 16.3 4.0 - 3.8 7.8 6.0 1.9 - 3.4
1990 14.3 2.2 -3.1 5.6 4.6 1.1 - 2.6
Japan
1960- 69 34.5 25.2 6.6 13.6 11.9 6.6 1.0
1970- 79 35.3 25.6 5.0 20.6 16.5 4.1 - 1.7
1980-~9 31.6 20.9 4.9 16.0 12.9 3.1 - 1.4
1990 34.7 20.3 9.4 13.6 10.8 2.8 0.8
Germany
I
1960- 69 27.3 19.9 6.3 Ll.5 7.6 6.0 0.7
1970- 79 24.3 15.2 3.7 11.5 9.7 1.7 - 1.7
1980- 89 22.5 11.6 1.5 10.1
I 8.9 1.2 - 2.0
1990 25.0 12.6 -0.5 14.7 8.4 6.3 - 1.9
France
1960- 694
24.7 16.6 4.6 1:!.1 9.4 2.7 0.4
1970- 79 25.8 17.0 2.7 14.4 11.9 2.5 -0.4
1980- 89 20.4 8.9 -0.4 9.3 7.9 1.4 - 2.1
1990 21.0 8.5 -0.3 9.5 5.4 4.1 - 1.7
United Kingdom
1960- 69 18.4 10.9 2.7 !>.2 4.3 3.9 - 1.0
1
970- 79 17.9 8.3 1.4 &.8 4.3 2.5 -2.6
1980- 89 16.6 5.5 -0.8 6.3 3.7 2.6 - 2.4
1990 15.6 4.5 2.4 5.0 4.7 0.9 0.1
ltaly
I 1960-694
24.2 17.6 1.4 16.2 14.1 2.0 -2.0
1970 -794
22.3 14.4 -4.6 19.0 18.9 0.1 - 7.8
1980-89 2 1.9 11.2 - 7.6 1!i.7 15.9 2.8 - 11.1
1990 19.5 7.5 - 6.2 14.7 12.6 2.1 - 11.3
Canada
1960- 69 21.9 11.3 2.6 8.7 4.0 4.8 -0.4
1970- 79 22.9 13.1 1.4 11.7 6.0 5.6 -0.9
1980- 89 20.7 9.9 - 3.4 13.3 9.2 4.2 -4.8
1990 18.0 6. 1 - 3.3 10.3 8.3 2.0 - 3.8
Average<
1960-69 22.0 13.5 2.3 11.2 7.2 4.0 -0.3 I
1970- 79 23.2 13.5 0.8 12.7 10.0 2.7 - 1.7
1980- 89 21.5 10.0 -0.9 11.0 8.8 2.3 - 3.2
1990 2 1.2 8.6 0.6 9.5 7.2 2.4 - 2.1
1
A!\ a percemage of GN P. 2
General government. Jlncludes public enterprises. 4 8ascd on old system of
I
national accounts. 'Calculated using GDP weights and exchange rates in 1963 for the 1960- 69 period.
in 1975 for the 1970 79 period and in 1988 for the 1980- 90 period.
I
Source: OECD Na1ional Accounts.
()
Introductory Remarks
I.
The main worry concerning declining savings rates is their impact upon the non-
inflationary potential of the industrial world. As the trend in savings rates continues to
decline, there is going to be a resulting slowdown in world growth. Indeed, we are seeing
this already.
A decline in growth will impact world trade because a more slowly growing
industrial world will import less. Worse, there will be a rise in protectionism, which we
are also beginning to see. This will complicate our goal of helping the countries of the
former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe by opening up our markets to their exports.
It is hard to imagine liberalized trade in a stagnating Western world.
Tbe second major impact of declining savings rates is that, if there is growth, it
will be inflationary. Governments will have to deal with periods of inflation by pushing
up interest rates, and we will then find ourselves back in the same situation as in the late
1970's and early 1980's, which would not be good.
1
We have very little scope for fine-tuning cyclical developments, very little
possibility to speed up the basic recovery by using global demand-management policies.
Some countries, such as Japan, have managed to accomplish a little, but, by and large,
fiscal policy is in a state of paralysis.
There are also limitations as to what extent monetary policy should be used. It
can be used sparingly, but there are real limits. For example, the yield curve in the US
is extremely steep. In spite of the spectacular decline in short-term rates, long-term rates
have not declined much, and that is nol promising in terms of inflationary expectations.
Instead of trying to fine-tune demand management, governments should work out
medium to long term strategies, and accept that there will be cyclical fluctuations. lbere
really have to be occasional cyclical breaks. Tbere are five basic actions governments can
take. First, in terms of fiscal policy, the size of public sector deficits should be limited
to the amount of capital formation by the public sector. Second, monetary policy should
aim across the cycle for price stability, meaning not zero inflation, but a rate of price
increases that does not enter into the economic calculations of enterprises and private
households. Third, various domestic restrictive practices and other obstacles to growth
and mobility should be removed. Fourth, we must maintain an open trading system and
gradually integrate into this system countries of the former communist world. Finally,
monetary authorities, central banks, and governments have a duty to preserve the stability
of the financial system. In this regard, particular focus on the payments system is
required.
Introductory Remarks
II.
Reconstructing the economies of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union
is going to require time, patience, and sacrifice. 'Dtis is true for the recipient countries
as well as those providing the aid. We in the West should not be too demanding in
terms of preconditions; some Western standards and patterns will be difficult to
introduce. What we need is something simple, that those in the East can understand and
37
h
implement. In the case of Germany, perhaps it would have been better if East German; three years, it would not be surprising to see a rate of growth in the world economy of
could have started out with the kind of legislative and administrative framework tha' not much more than two percent, an exceedingly slow rate for an economy with a
existed in the Federal Republic in 1950. relatively high rate of unemployment. TI1e reasons include problems in real estate, the
What is especially disappointing is the lack of a common vision among many 0: fact that consumption is already very high, reduced defense expenditures, etc. All add
the political leaders in the East. In spite of the need to create some kind of integrate/ up to a restrained growth around the world, as exports cease rising. The rest of the
framework, we are seeing divisions based on geography and ethnicity, some leading tc world will be sadly disappointed if it looks to the US as the engine of grov.1h in the next
war. few years.
Turning to the EC, Maastricht is a very important step in our future economi1 • Of course, the picture is not all bad in the US. There will be some grov.1h.
development. A single European currency is the logical consequence of a single Inflation seems to be under control. Interest rates will tend to go down, rather than up,
economic area; it is necessary to reinforce the single market. The EC has to find wav; and this may sustain the stock market. All of this can potentially create a better climate
to achieve the goal of enlarging and deepening that go beyond meeting the criteria ~~ for growth in the second half of the decade. Looking at the world economy, there is
convergence and extend to fiscal policies and decision making structures. An increased enormous potential in Eastern Europe and the CIS, in Latin America, China, and East
informed public debate is needed to prepare populations to gradually accept the idea ol Asia, generally, except for Japan.
giving up national sovereignty. The question is how do we get over this period of sluggish growth so that we can
In order to achieve a single currency, we must focus on fiscal policy. In the take advantage of future opportunities. It really comes down to fiscal policy. Restraint
1980's we failed to put public sector deficits in order. Now the coffers are empty, deb:' of spending can help, but it will not suffice to achieve budgetary balance, especially in the
cannot be increased, and the expected peace dividends have not occurred and probabh US. Domestic problems will not be solved by throwing money at them, but there will
never will. Monetary polic-y has been blunted as a weapon in the US and Japan, bank1 have to be some spending in the US, on things like infrastructure and other non-defensR
have been restrained in lending, and entrepreneurs and consumers lack the confidence areas. This raises the issue of taxes, which has paralyzed American politics for many
to invest or spend. We must continue to ask politicians to deal with longer term issue& years. We can leave taxes alone and limp along with slow growth, but that will not
including such things as education, research and development, and the environment. provide the economic foundation for the US to play a constructive role in the world
Finally, concerning unemployment, it should he noted that, in Germany, more economy. So some kinds of tax increases or new taxes will have to be considered. Among
than two million new jobs were created in the past four years. ll1ese have been taken the options are an energy tax, a value-added tax, and various kinds of consumption taxes.
mainly by immigrants, primarily from the former Soviet Union, Poland, and other Eastern Miscellaneous tax incentives fN investment will not do the job. A capital gains tax
European countries. But the unemployment rate in Germany has not changed much. reduction may be more effective, but still will not cure all the world's problems.
One reason is that our unemployment benefits are too generous and do not force 3 Turning to world developments more generally, there is a trend toward more
person to go out and look for a job. Another is that we have had no basic rethinking in regionalism in the world economy. It is happening in Europe. It can be seen in North
industrialized Western European countries about wage negotiations, from which the America. It is possible there will be a Yen Zone in A~ia. This creates opportunities, but
unemployed derive no benefit. Indeed, if wages go too high, as has been the trend, more also problems in the trading area, unless we persist in multilateral efforts to keep trading
people will become unemployed. CD1is is a problem that must be tackled. barriers down between these zones. This adds an urgenc-y to successfully completing the
Introductory Remarks
ll/.
111Cre are figures that suggest that real wages in the US have declined by more
than ten percent over the past 20 years. It is not likely that there has been any other,
time in American history when real wages have declined over almost a generation. TI1is
explains much of the feeling of unhappiness in the US over the political and economic
system.
The poor economic performance is not entirely due to a lack of savings and
investment. In fact, there has been relatively high productivity growth in manufacturing
over the past few years. Bnt this has not been obtained as a result of particularly high
investment in manufacturing. It is more a reflection of greater efficiency from reducing
employment.
Productivity in the US has been rising on the order of just over one percent in..
the past 20 years -- less than half the rate of the earlier post-war years. These same
1
trends are becoming evident in Europe and conceivably in Japan. Over the next two to
38
Uruguay Round. These emerging trading areas could turn inward in an atmosphere of
slow growth and a failure to strengthen international rules for freer trade.
Discussion
An American initiated the discussion by seeking to answer what he found was a
recurring question: is the US turning inward? His answer was a qualified no. True, the
US has considerable internal concerns and domestic problems, such as a $400 billion
deficit -- five percent of gross domestic product. But the US is still the most productive
nation in the world and will continue to be so. Competition with countries like Germany
and Japan has helped the US in terms of improving the quality of its goods and
increasing productivity. And the US, even as it reduces its military forces, will remain the
major military force in the world, and will remain very much engaged, especially in
Europe.
On the domestic side, the US is slowly coming out of a recession. Most
economists forecast a 2 1/2 percent growth rate by the end of the year, which is
comparable to that of several European countries. It is unlikely that the US will have an
energy tax because of its political unpopularity, but a value added tax is a possibility.
:w
The US is still highly supportive of European unification, perhaps even more than in general. The bulk of private investment in the former communist world relies heavily
some European countries have been lately. Meanwhile, the US is pushing to complete ' on government funding, refunding, or guarantees. Titese investments are not so strictly
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico. The US is also , dependent on credit-worthiness as would be the case with a corporation investing its own
focusing on the tremendous economic growth and general improvement in Latin America, ' money. The capital inflow expectations of developing and restructuring countries are
which will benefit the world economy. 1
based on the no longer valid view that there is surplus capital in Western countries
The US is committed to achieving a multilateral trading agreement through seeking higher investment returns elsewhere. Companies invest today in these countries
GATT. To fail will not necessarily mean the unravelling of world trade, but would be a to consolidate markets, to keep out competitors, or for management fees. They try to
missed opportunity. In the area of trade and in all other areas, the US is determined to 1
· shift the burden of actually coming up with the capital to governments and governmental
remain part of the international community. organizations.
A contrary view on NAFTA was expressed by another American who reported . A point was made by an Italian concerning the need to confine public sector
that labor is opposed to it because of the competitive problems posed by the much lower I deficits to the amount of capital formation by the public sector. A country with a large
wage and benefit levels in Mexico. Labor fears this will result in a loss of jobs in the US 1 deficit would not be in violation of this rule if it was due to capital formation, while a
and in pressure to lower wages. '01is speaker, joined by a Dutchman, argued in favor of country with a smaller deficit would be in violation if the deficit was due to curr~nt
the US taking a leaf out of the European book by spending more on infrastructure and spending. The Maastricht Treaty should have incorporated the rule preventmg
on quality of life. governments from having current deficits in their budgets. Italy is the prime offender in
A Briton issued a plea to the Americans present to urge the administration to this regard, its public sector deficit alone accounting for over 40 percent of the aggregate
consider an energy tax. The EC proposal for the development of an ener&ry tax, which l EC public sector deficit. Greater EC surveillance of deficits is required, as well as great~r
would be beneficial to both the environment and the economy, is conditional upon the I and more visible EC pressure on countries like Italy, to strengthen the case of those 111
enactment of the same tax by the EC's main trading partners, Japan and the US. Japan, l favor of fiscal discipline.
at least, seems to be open-minded, so now it depends on the US. I The general consensus of participants in this discussion was that long-rai~ge
The issue of trade was taken up at some length by an International participant. 1
thinking and planning is necessary if there is going to be growth, and that the mynad
He regarde~ ~he recent refor~s agn::ed t·o .
in the Com~1~n Agricultural Policy in the EC I' problems and chall~nges fa~ing the ~orld economy can only be addressed and dealt with
to be a decisive step 111 the nght direction and hopea It would serve as a catalyst for effectively through mternational act1on.
further progress. To achieve a trade agreement requires joint effort by government and
business. !
Irouically, trade liberalization has been taking place in some of the newer I
economies more readily than in some of the older ones. It is a challenge to the Western ,
economics not to set the wrong example for these developing economies, nor to put 1
additional demands on them beyond the difficult adjustments they are already going f
through.
A Dutchman agreed with the call for government and business to work together.
An alliance of business and government is important not only in the trade area, but also !
in dealing with the environment and in combatting international crime. !
A number o.f comme.nts. were made concerning. st.ru~tu~al issues in the world 1
economy. An An1encan was mclmed to take a more oplimJsllc v1ew of future economic '
performance based upon two considerations. First, he said that the growth rate in the ,
1990's would be higher than it was in the 1980's because, with the drying up of sovereign I
credit, borrowing would have to be in the private sector. And when the private sector
expands, the economy grows faster than when the state sector expands. Concerning
inflation, one of the big factors in the 1980's was the re<tl estate boom that resulted from I
the huge expansion in government and also private sector credit. With real estate out of
the inflation picture in the US, Japan, and Europe in the 1990's, inflationary pressures
should be substantially lower.
A Briton addressed the notion that there may not be enough capital available for
the needs of the developing countries and the restructuring of the former communist
countries. First, he pointed out that the post-war reconstruction of Japanese and German
industry was conducted at a time of very high relative interest rates. Second, the working
paper made an important distinction between credit-worthy investment and investment
40
Panelists' Conclusions
The American panelist conducted by ex-pressing his view that the US !!! turning
inward. For example, there were more restraints on trade at the end of the 1980's than
at the beginning. The US is more reluctant to participate in world organizations than it
used to be. It is less willing to finance organizations like the IMF and World Bank.
Many of the supporters of NAFTA also favor restricting cheap Asian imports. And there
has been a relative retreat of American industry and companies from worldwide
investment. The US is no longer the leader in making foreign investments. None of
these trends is irreversible, but they arc ~-ymptomatic of the US's domestic problems and
they must be addressed sooner rather than later.
A series of responses to points raised in the discussion was offered by the German
panelist:
inflation rates in the 1990's should be lower in Europe.
the role of interest rates in investments is overestin1ated.
there are government guarantees, mainly for sovereign risk, on many of the
investments in Eastern Europe.
-- Germany is in a special category regarding its public deficit, because of the
integration of East Germany. 111is will continue for another couple of years,
as GDP expands.
The working paper author focused his closing comments on the matter of capital
flows to Eastern Europe. 'The Eastern European countries can influence how much
capital they get by dealing with such issues as institutional structure, external and internal
41
convertibility, political stability, etc. Another essential ingredient for capital flows is tradt
integration of these countries into Europe and the rest of the world. Massive capital
flows into Spain and Portugal began when it became evident these countries were going
to become part of the EC.
Regarding growth prospects for the 1990's, the fact that inflation seems to bt
under control will certainly help. But there are many impediments to growth, aside from
the question of savings rates, such as the relatively high indebtedness of many countrie~
corporations, and private households. There is still a general financial fragility which il
not the best possible stimulus for worldwide growth.
V. WHITHER EUROPE?
Introductory Remarks
I.
The significance of the Maastricht Agreements was illustrated by the response of
a classroom of French schoolchildren who, when asked "What is Europe?", responded
that it meant to them peace and a single currenc)'. For these children, a single currency
meant greater freedom -- to use this money beyond the borders of their country. 111e
creation of economic and monetary union is one of the key elements of Maastricht. -nle
single currency should be a reflection of solidarity, unity, and economic stability. It
should also be a fundamental instrument of non-inflationary growth.
11Je creation of the Eurocorps is another basic component of political and
economic stability. With the upheavals and changes in the East, the objectives 0f our
armed forces are not the same today as they were yesterday. 11Je Eurocorps is an
important element of our credibility.
When we speak of the enlargement of the EC, we recognize that there are two
categories of countries. The first are those with market economies that have applied for
membership. Even though there may be some difficulties in certain sectors, the spirit of
Maastricht is to welcome them. 111e other countries are those of Eastern Europe, which
will experience many ups and downs on the road to developing democracy and market
economies. For them there will be a long transition period.
Progress is being made toward full acceptance of the principals embodied in the
Maastricht Agreement, but there is still much to be done.
introductory Remarks
l/.
Those in the Anglo-Saxon world must realize that, contrary to suggestions iu the
English-language press that perhaps European unification is not going to happen, it i§
going to happen. Maastricht transformed what had been an idea and a blueprint into a
firm political and legal commitment. It is also important to realize that monetary union
is entered into because of its positive benefits of removing currency changes within
Europe and the costs of converting currencies. Even with no economic and monetary
union, the requirements of convergence would be desirable for the European economy.
On enlargement of the EC, the community is committed to the acceptance of
, European countries that are willing and able to accept the obligations of membership and
to the belief that the community will become much larger over time. Every previous
enlargement of the EC has led to a deepening because those who joined it did so not to
slow it down but to participate in an acceleration.
42
But we should not at present consider institutional changes in the community.
We should begin negotiations with those countries that have applied for membership, tha
can be accommodated with nothing more than mechanical changes. At the same time we
need to be prepared to consider, at the conference planned for 1996, what ehang.es will
be necessary to accommodate a substantially larger number of members without
weakening the community's dynamism.
43
In the area of defense, it is in Europe's interest to play a larger role, while
maintaining the link with the US and Canada through NATO. NATO cannot be
dispensed with, yet it should still be possible to devise a solution to the problem ol
European defense unity. A European pillar within NATO could be organized around
WEU, prepared to act when NATO is not inclined to, but very much a part of the
alliance. If there is to be a true European defense entity, then it should not be the
creation of two member states acting unilaterally, as France and Germany have done in
the case of the Eurocorps. 11JC time has come for us to cooperatively resolve this matterl
lnJroductory Remarks
Ill.
After World War II, de Tocqueville's prediction that the US and Russia would
each come to dominate half the world came true. 1l1at situation has now changed; the
Soviet Union has dissolved and imperial America is a thing of the past. 1l1e US is now
a coalition leader, and Europe is once again taking its destiny into its own hands. The
lights that, in the words of Sir Edward Grey, went out all over Europe in 1914, have,
been relit, although they are flickering in both Western and Eastern Europe. l
An important question facing Europe is how many members will be in the EC in
10 or 20 years. Certainly the EFTA nations will join. Then will come Poland,
Czechoslovakia, and Hungary. But the line goes on to include new applicants from the
former Soviet Union as well as old applicants like Turkey and Cyprus.
Another question is how will the community's institutions have to change to
accommodate this larger membership. Profound changes will be necessary to improve the·
dficicncy and democratic accountability of a community of 24 to 30 members. Thcr
fu ture architecture of the community may look more like a pagoda, with many roofs and;
not every member under all of them. Different countries may be able to choose their'
own timetable to reach the common goal. But there probably should be an inner core[
of members under all the roofs, and they should not be held back by the more recentf
arrivals. · '
Finally, it is inevitable that Europe will have to have a distinct military identity.
and capability. It will have to remain allied to the US, but on the basis of Kenned]"s two'
pillars. 1l1e need for a European defense capability is partly a matter of self-esteem, but
is also occasioned by the inevitable withdrawal of most An1erican troops from Europe and
by America's turning from security issues that concern Europe. 1be establishment of the
Franco-German corps should be seen as a first step toward creation of this European,
defense entity. :
Finally, the debate over Maastricht should not be interpreted as Europe in1
dtsarray. -Il1e debate is not surprising, given the huge implications of Maastricht. What,
we are seeing is a short-term affliction of doubt which the community will rapidly shake:
off. Europe is rediscovering itself and, with a bit of courage, wisdom, and good fortune,
it will open the gates to a new world.
44
Discussion
The enormous opportunities and challenges facing Europe were the subject of a
Dutch speaker's remarks. He characterized Europe as being on the move, having
achieved significant accomplishments in the form of Maastricht, the agreement on the
reform of the Common Agriculture Policy, and the applications of the EFTA countries
to join the community.
But still, there are significant problems. After a period of robust expansion,
European economies are comparatively weak. The end of the cold war did not produce
a peace dividend, and, in some respects, it is more difficult not to have an enemy. A
Europe without borders presents additional problems, such as immigration. Politicians
must tackle these problems in order to avoid a revival of Euro-pessimism, of inward-
looking, defensive, and even racial attitudes. Complex institutional changes are required.
The welfare society must be adapted to provide a more dynamic labor market. Europe
must avoid bureaucracy, especially in Brussels. Externally, Europe must focus on
expanding the community east, on GATT, and on the environment.
To meet the enormous challenges facing it, Europe must examine and adjust its
fundamental architecture, said a Belgian. It cannot afford to take a business as usual
attitude, but must reconsider its goals, responsibilities, and forms of organization. ll1is
is particularly true with respect to the world outside the community. The EC must be at
the center, must be the interlocutor, not the member countries individually.
On the question of economic growth, a Greek participant expressed concern that
the prospects for the foreseeable future were not very good. 1l1e boom of the late 1980's
seemed to be petering out, and the unemployment that would result from lower rates of
growth presented the risk of a return to nationalism. A Frenchman echoed this concern
when he said that, in addition to economic and monetary union, which seem to be
foregone conclusions, political union is also essential and will be more difficult to achieve.
The issue of enlargement of the EC received a great deal of attention. In the
1990's, said a Swede, virtually every European state would be knocking at the
community's door. The first step must be to quickly admit the EFTA countries. llten,
the Community will be ready to tackle the more difficult problems of dealing with the
countries of Eastern, Central, and Southeastern Europe.
It was generally agreed that the architecture of the EC would. have to change to
accommodate all the new applicants. Perhaps, said an Irishman, an element of variable
geometry, as suggested by the German panelist, would be necessary. However, a two-
speed Europe must be avoided at all costs.
Regarding the prioritizing of what countries get in when, a Briton warned against
sending discouraging signals to applicants. It is psychologically in1portant for them to be
given the expectation that they will be able to join. Any country that can meet the
standards and requirements should not be made to wait.
Also receiving much attention in the discussion was the issue of security. This
was seen by several speakers as a major impetus for countries to want to join the EC,
especially the EFTA countries. In a Swede's view, the collapse of the traditional East-
West rivalry presented these neutral countries with a bewildering set of intellectual
problems. A new set of tensions and conflicts have taken the place of the old threat, and
countries that have called themselves neutral are now as interested as any other country
in setting up viable security structures. The old kind of neutrality, added a Swiss speaker,
was outmoded; neutrality was incompatible with membership in the Community.
45
What kind of security structure should Europe establish? Opinion was divided
among those who favored maintaining NATO as the primary security structure and those
who favored creation of more independent European capability. lbe recent
establishment of the Franco-European corps was a matter of particular"interest, and, to 1
those who opposed its bilateral aspect, of concern. A French speaker stressed that the ·
corps was open to any other country that wished to join. A European security structure )
organized around the WEU was advocated by several speakers. 1
The continued importance of a strong role for NATO was underlined by an 1
International speaker. He said that the Alliance has a very adequate architecture for ~
stability and a strong capability to act. Any military force will need to have infrastructure,
intelligence capability, and the means of reinforcement and sustainment; all of these
NATO has. It should be given the opportunity to assess any given situation to determine \
whether or not to act. Whether the Franco-German corps could fit in as a part of this
structure remains to be seen. One danger that it presents is that, if it is seen in the US
as a substitute for American forces, it will be difficult to sustain the An1erican strategic J
commitment and forward deployment of forces. )
At the heart of the security discussion was the question of redefining the whole
transAtlantic relationship. A Canadian wondered, with NATO clearly in transition, what I
structures would sustain this relationship. In an An1erican's view, political interests were !
I
now more important than security concerns. TI1e old concept of burden-sharing will no .
longer work. Europe and the US must develop independent but compatible political
goals as the basis for a new relationship.
While several felt that nothing should be done to cause the US to turn away from
Europe, an Italian, expressing a somewhat contrary view, said that there had to be a
readjustment of interests between the US and Europe even if it precipitated a crisis in
European-American relations, as it probably would.
An An1erican wondered if, in what emerges from the enormous changes taking
place in Europe, there would still be a future for the transAtlantic unity of interests. Will
there be a basis for continued cooperation on global and regional matters? In the
speaker's opinion, there was such a commonality of interests, but the search for a new
form of relationship to express these interests was not helped by suggestions that the US
is no longer interested in Europe. lhe US has responded appropriately to a changed
threat and imaginatively to new opportunities. It is open to the difficult question of
changing the nature of the partnership. There is a basis for Atlanticism, but redefining
it is going to be very tough.
Panelists' Conclusions
In his concluding remarks, the German panelist said he shared the belief that
there continues to be basis for transAtlantic cooperation. Dut the US seems to be
turning a blind eye toward Eastern Europe in general and to Yugoslavia in particular, to
be leaving it to Europe to work out these problems.
'n1e British panelist focused his closing comments on the issue of enlargement of
the Community. The new partners must accept not only what the Community is but
where it is going. And that means recognizing the diminishing meaning of neutrality.
46
Those who join the Community must accept that it does aspire to have a co,rm0n forl'i<!.,
policy and security and defense policy. As for Eastern Europe, it i~ fine t0 gi\t.' the•!' th--
vision of membership, but we should not yet talk ab0ut a date.
As for defense, unilateral moves should he avoided. We still need KA!-r\ J'l~
we need France to rejoin it. All the EC countries should join fully in a furnpcan 1vi•F
of NATO with a real European defense force acting as part of NATO, but al~o ,,cf;'":
outside of NATO for the interests and benefit of Europe. 11Jerc is a0 inco!1':i~1c·wv i•
this.
The French panelist likened the evolving Community to a French cathedra!. I'"
built in a day, but rather transformed by enrichments over time. Apart from the iss•1c
neutrality, there is not much to question about the membership of the EFTI\ wunt ··i,•s
As for the Eastern European countries, it will take time for them tc get. intc' th
cathedral. First they must solve their problems. l11en a dialogue about integratH>!' c·•1
begin.
Another architectural metaphor -- that of two pillars-- is suitable to describe tb
kind of defense structure that should evolve. -ll1ese two pillar~ should h<' of cq'l:J
strength, and, if you pull one of them down, the whole structure will collapse.
Finally, what it will really take to do all that Europe has to do is mnn!.':·. Th:•
means we must have worldwide growth and on that we must focus.
What kind of security structure should Europe establish? Opinion was divided
mong those who favored maintaining NATO as the primary security structure and those
•ho favored creation of more independent l::.uropean capability. The recent
stablishment of the Franco-European corps was a matter of particular interest, and, to
JOse who opposed its bilateral aspect, of concern. A French speaker stressed that the
Jrps was open to any other country that wished to join. A European security structure
rganizcd around the WEU was advocated by several speakers.
The continued importance of a strong role for NATO was underlined by an
Jternational speaker. He said that the Nliance bas a very adequate architecture for
.ability and a strong capability to act. Any military force will need to have infrastructure,
ttelligence capability, and the means of reinforcement and sustainment; all of these
A TO has. It should be given the opportunity to assess any given situation to determine
bether or not to act. Whether the Franco-German corps could fit in as a part of this
ructure remains to be seen. One danger that it presents is that, if it is seen in the US
; a substitute for American forces, it will be difficult to sustain the American strategic
>
mmitment and forward deployment of forces.
At the heart of the security discussion was the question of redefining the whole'
ansAtlantic relationship. A Canadian wondered, with NATO clearly in transition, what
ructures would sustain this relat ionship. In an American's view, political interests were
JW more important than security concerns. The old concept of burden-sharing will no
nger work. Europe and the US must develop independent but compatible political
lals as the basis for a new relationship.
While several felt that nothing should be done to cause the US to turn away from
urope, an Italian, expressing a somewhat contrary view, said that there had to be a
·adjustment of interests between the US and Europe even if it precipitated a crisis ini
uropean-American relations, as it probably would.
An American wondered if, in what emerges from the enormous changes taking
ace in Europe, there would still be a future for the transAtlantic unity of interests. Will'
ere be a basis for continued cooperation on global and regional matters? In the
•eaker's opinion, there was such a commonality of interests, but the search for a new
rm of relationship to express these interests was net helped by suggestions that the US
no longer interested in Europe. ll1e US has responded appropriately to a changed
real and imaginatively to new opportunities. It i.s open to the difficult question of
tanging the nature of the partnership. There is a basis for Atlanticism, but redefining
is going to be very tough.
Panelists' Conclusions
In his concluding remarks, the German panelist said he shared the belief that '
ere continues to be hasis for transAtlantic cooperation. 13ut the US seems to be
rning a blind eye toward Eastern Europe in general and to Yugoslavia in particular, to ·
leaving it to Europe to work out these problems. 1
The British panelist focused his closing comments on the issue of enlargement of ,
e Community. llJC new partners must accept net only what the Community is but ,
1ere it is going. And that means recognizing the diminishing meaning of neutrality.
Those who join the Community must accept that it does aspire to have a common foreign
policy and security and defense policy. As for Eastern E urope, it is fine to give them the
vision of membership, but we should not yet talk about a date.
As for defense, unilateral moves should be avoided. We still need NATO, and
we need France to rejoin it. All the EC countries should join fully in a European wing
of NATO with a real European defense force acting as part of NATO, but also acting
outside of NATO for the interests and benefit of Europe. There is no inconsistency in
this.
The French panelist likened the evolving Community to a French cathedral, not
built in a day, but rather transformed by enrichments over time. Apart from the issue of
neutrality, there is not much to question about the membership of the EfTA coun.tries.
As for the Eastern European countries, it will take tin1e for them to get into the
cathedral. First they must solve their problems. Then a dialogue about integration can
begin.
Another architectural metaphor -- that of two pillars -- is suitable to describe the
kind of defense structure that should evolve. These two pillars should be of equal
strength, and, if you pull one of them down, the whole structure will collapse.
Finally, what it will really take to do all that Europe has to do is money. That
means we must have worldwide growth and on that we must focus.
47
'.
'
>
VI. PIERRE BEREGOVOY, Prime Minister of France The lack of resolution on this means that the world is suffering from a monetary
disorganization and if the free flow of capital.is the p revailing rule, currency cannot be
lniroductory Remarks : considered as goods, like any other. All this implies that something has to be done to
insure greater organization.
When we talk about France, or about the role of Europe in the world, we begi1 A meeting was held in New York in September 1985 where we said that the
with the acceleration of history which we have witnessed in the past few years. It would market was free but that we would give certain indications and, if need be, would
be difficult to imagine discussing this topic in 1989, and being told that three years later cooperate so that our central banks might act together. Ibis makes our currencies an
Germany would be reunified, that the Soviet empire would have exploded, or that the irreplaceable instrument. This is an example of cooperation which works sometimes well,
Communist ~)'stem of government would no longer exist -- barring a few countries in the sometimes less well, but a cooperation which has continued since the agreement was
world. Had we been told that Yugoslavia would be disintegrating, and that the Serbs and' reached in 1985.
the Croats would be fighting a bitter war, that the Christians and the Muslims would also• Given the accelerating history described above and in the face of the victory of
be figh ting one another; had we been told at that tin1e that there would be a war in the freedom and of market economy over any other system, there are a certain number of
Guif where Kuwait would be liberated with the combined forces of Europe, NATO, the' issues to be discussed and prospects for the future to be discovered. This requires
United States and Unit_
ed Nations; if all of this had been predicted in 1989, there would humility on the part of politicians, as well as the ambition to sustain comm~nly held
have been very few believers. t beliefs. lbis being said, France has voted for Europe, has voted for the European
But these events have come to pass and the United Nations, in spite of a few' Community __ a choice France made very long ago. In fact it was just after the Second
difficulties, are now strengthened after the Gulf crisis. Everything is not settled by any' World War that most of the politicians, men and women who had experienced the war
means; there are still a number of problems. But progress has been made on some1 and had assumed responsibilities afterwards, decided to work for a united Europe. -lbis
fronts, in particular in the dialogue which has begun between Israel and the Arab world.j took quite some time. Sometimes circumstances accelerated history; sometimes
In other words, history has accelerated and a point in llistory has been reached where one. circumstances acted as a break to history. TI1ere were even discussions on the European
must look with very clear eyes at the progress which has been made, as well as the, defense community. Some thought of this as a way of rearming Germany, whereas ot~er
problems still at hand, and the threats which exist. i promoters of this community thought of it as a way of building a first European enlity.
Freedom has prevailed but one cannot be certain that there is freedom for i France rejected this concept at the end of the war, but later on -- in 1957 -- the :rreaty
cveryon~ in the industrialized countries or that freedom is guaranteed to people in thd of Rome, along with a treaty on the coal and steel community and Euratom saw Irght of
developmg world. And there is one problem which must be tackled: planned economy.' day.
An ~co~omy where everything comes from the state is something which does not work.I Throughout this period debates were raging in France. But General de Gaulle,
Capnahsuc economy, where entrepreneurs and consumers benefit from individuaL who had come back into power, helped the O)mmon Market along. He returned to
~reedon:•. is somcthi_
n? w.hich wo~ks . bet:er, but not to total satisfaction. There are! power in May 1958, and the Common Market came into being on January 1,_1959. 'This
mequahttes; mequallttes Ill the dtstnbul!on of wealth and income; in the access to I European effort undertaken by the six countries-- the Benelux states, Italy, l·rance, and
knowledge an~ to jobs. In other words, market economy cannot be replaced but it mustIGermany __ was, of course, based on the good will among the participants. General de
follow a ccrtam number of rules accepted by all. 1 Gaulle considered __ and this is what led to the Franco-German treaty -- that the Franco-
The first ':~Ie is the liberty to start one's own business. It is also the rule whichIGerman relationship was decisive. At that time, around 1963-~, General de Gaulle
leads to competttton when too many agreements are passed, in particular at a closed the door to Mr. MacMillan and it was only under Mr. Pomprdou that the door was
multinational level. When a company holds a sizable market share, can one say that j
'• opened to Great Britain and to other states which have since then become members.
competition is insured? A market economy implies not only solidarity, but also a certain · Next Greece came in, during the time of Giscard d'Estaing's Presidency, followed by
number of rules which the public authorities of a given country, or in the international! Portugal and Spain, the latter two under President Francois Mitterand. Each and every
community, must organize. Itime in France and certainly in other countries, there was a debate as to whether each
. ~n France, f~r the ~ast ten years, we have bc(!n discussing monetary problems, addition was a positive change to Europe's make-up and outlook. But today it is a
lrom a European pomt of vrew as well as an international point of view. And whatever 1community of twelve members, and now tlw process has been taken one step further.
government h~s been in ~lace, there has been continuity -- continuity in the way we have !' Twelve have signed the Maastricht ~greem~nt, at ~ ceremony "':here for the first ti~e
expressed our rdeas and m the way measures have been taken. In the early 1980s France Finance Ministers were allowed to stgn an mternattOnal treaty. D1ere are two parts m
said in _
the framework of the International Monetary Fund that there could be three 1the Maastricht agreement: the monetary and economic union which will determine ~he
currenc_
ies -- the dollar, the yen, and the ecu -- each oue covering target areas. The ecuIsingle currency; and the political union, which is intended as a joint agreement on ~orergn
at the lime was not yet a proper currenc-y, but a unit of account which was representative I policy and security. France has chosen to ratify this treaty, or to propose to Parham~nt
of what wa_
s happening in th~ Eu,ropean monetary systen~. This idea ~as picked up again I' and the Fre_n~h ~cop!~, that this treaty be ratified. If approved by the congress, the h rst
by Mr. Chuac and Mr. Balladur s government and conunucs to be discussed. stage of ratificatiOn wtll have taken place. ~· .
48
France has chosen this course to follow for several reasons. h rst, nen her France
nor the other governments wish to see another war on the European continent, or in
49
Western Europe in particular. Tbe atrocities of World War Two are still vivid memories.
And the European union, or the construction of the European union, has made it
possible thus far to avoid the creation of situations which might lead to conflict.
President francois Mitterand has said that Europe is our future and that France is our
Fatherland. In order to protect each Fatherland, the countries of Europe must be thought 1
of as European in order to avoid wars amongst themselves in the name of narrow-minded
nationalism. Yugoslavia is a tragic example of such an occurrence. The break-up of the
Soviet Union is another example where such dislocations can lead to confrontation of
nationalities, as opposed to uniting in joint efforts for the common good.
France has also chosen to support Maastricht because of its conviction that it is
necessary to "deepen" Europe. As mentioned, the common defense and security policy
of Europe is one that has not been in place, taking note, for instance, that in the Gulf ,
War, all countries did not respond in the same way. The more this can be corrected, the
better it will be for Europe and for the world. It should also be noted that Europe's
security today is insured through an existing alliance. And although France has wished
to be faithful to NATO, it wishes, as a nuclear power to retain its autonomy, its freedom:
of decision. Therefore, it would be a good thing for Europe to endow itself with the t
means necessary to enjoy its defense and its security within the framework of our alliance,
which will most likely change because of changing circumstances in the world.
Such security might also be defined through a new entity, recently worked out t
between France and Germany. lbe Eurocorps, as it is called, is a joint army which will i
be formed by the two countries and, one would imagine, will be joined by other European f
countries as well. Whereas some Americans have showed concern about this initiative,
it can be described as a response to the hope that Europe would endow itself with the j
necessary means for its defense, while at the same time respecting all of its international ,
commitments. !
On the subject of the proposed economic and monetary union and the single
current.)', one must be very clear. Through the Common Market, a single entity was 1
created where goods and capital would flow freely, where men and women would be able
to move freely, as entrepreneurs or workers. This is something important, but in need
of a unifying element, a single currency. It is hoped that the implementation of this
single currency will be in place at some point between 1997 and 1999. A majority of {
countries would be needed as full participants at the outset, but it is recognized it might J!
be difficult for every country to be ready in that time period. This monetary union will
have to give itself common economic goals, the primary criteria being monetary stability. I
At the same time, there must be strong effective economic cooperation leading to the !
necessary growth, because Europe can no longer tolerate its high unemployment. t
The central bank, an independent bank, will be decisive, although it will be f
considered a concession on the part of some. But the most recent example of the wisdom
behind this view relates to the existence, and success, of the German central bank, the
most independent central bank, during the recent German unification. I
Such a treaty as the Maastricht Treaty is complicated when twelve parties are
involved, but improvement in the life of a European is inevitable. It is important to have !
full confidence in the texts that have been drafted as well as those who have the
responsibility of implementing these texts.
'Ibere is a third reason for which France wishes to manifest its interest in the
European community, its interest in "widening" Europe. "lbere are now twelve members.
1
.
But there are other countries -- Austria, Sweden, Finland -- as developed as other
50
European countries and perhaps even more developed than countries within the
community -- which are ready to join the community, a move France supports. Even
Switzerland wishes to join, and that in itself reflects how fast the world is changing. l l1ere
will undoubtedly be other countries later on. But between those who arc ready politically
and economically, and those who aren't ready economically and sometimes politically as
well, it is important to find bridges, ties, and links.
Therefore, it is important for the future of Europe that the community be
deepened and widened. The effort must begin by strengthening that which exists now,
by maintaining the equilibrium needed for building towards future success. lltis question
of balance is interesting because the world has never been fully and completely balanced.
In the 19th century Europe, as a colonial and economic and commercial power,
dominated the world. In the 20th century, things have changed, and the United Sta tes
emerged as a political power, Japan emerged as an economic power, and the Soviet
Union until very recently was a major world player. This century has been one of
economic and political competition, of a cold war where one had to choose between one
or the other power. But it has also been the century of peaceful coexistence where
countries have come together and where perhaps the example given by Europe finally
shook the Soviet world and gave birth to all the hopes emerging today.
The 21st century, after the domination by Europe in the 19th century, after the
tough completion of the 20th century, cannot be one which will see Europe fading away.
Europe has to continue to be present, as Francois Mitterand has said, to be able to speak
with one voice, to act together, ~o develop together. At the same time there will be other
groups which will emerge. China, for example, which is waking up slowly, may perhaps
start moving more quickly. .Japan, already a strong economic power, will want to play a
greater political role. In another 50 years countries in Latin America or elsewhere will
also have an important role to play. In a balanced world of that kind Europe must be
there, must be present as ~ participating entity which will act jointly while expressing the
diversity of its history.
We have now come out of the cold war, out of the balance of terror where two
super powers made any major conflict impossible, simply because they were there to
follow things closely. Today there is only one super power left, the United States, a
respected ally which Europe must keep as a true friend. But the world must not be in
the hands of one power and one power only. So Europe should be deepened today in
its institutions which should become more political and Jess bureaucratic, should be
deepened also on the front of its single currency, and must be widened to those who wish
to join it tomorrow. Europe, as such, must be a factor of peace -- of peace in our midst
but also elsewhere. Europe must be a factor of progress, and also a factor of balance in
a world which is changing very quickly and very deeply. And it is because Europe has to
be a factor of balance and peace, that the countries which are now in Europe should
ratify the Maastricht treaty. One would hope that the countries which have confronted
one another in the course of centuries, and those who have been the victims of th c~e
confrontations, will act jointly in Europe to bring about peace, progress, and balance in
the world.
5
Discussion
I
Because of the length of the presentation and the time constraints of the speaker.
r
there were only three interventions from the participants. Each one supported the
speaker, while developing several points from a different perspective.
1
A German commented that not only Germany had been unified, but all or
Western Europe had been restored to its earlier parameters with the liberation of Poland,'
Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, formerly considered -- however inaccurately -- as part oi1
Eastern Europe. This realignment underscored the importance of the recent unification
of Germany, enabling all European countries to consider the larger territory in terms ol·
membership in the European \.A)mmunity. A second point focussed on the complexity
f
of European relations following the end of the cold war. Whereas Europe had beeu
bound together in a common defense against the Soviet threat, it must find new methodl
of developing common goals, most effectively through the Maastricht process. !
The second speaker, an American, underscored the importance of the Atlanticf
Alliance, and reminded everyone that transAtlantic coordination had gone back as far as
i
200 years, not only to the French contribution to the independence of the United States,.
but to the shared values which have sustained this relationship. A continued coordination!
on economic, cultural and security policies is of the utmost importance to the Alliance.!
A participant from the Netherlands asked the speaker to comment on the,
challenge of attempting to reduce the disparity betw~:;en the poor and the wealthy, while!
at the same time promoting economic growth in order to produce jobs. I
Conc/usio11s
I
TI1e speaker concluded by developing earlier themes and responding to thet
inrerventions from the floor. 1
As the members of the European Community go forward, they will jointly
participate in some efforts which were sovereign in the past, while fulfilling other
responsibilities best performed individually. Maastricht represents a decisive step, the
speaker said, a process which is leading to a point not yet fully defined, but which musl
move forward to be successfuL There will be a military plan, which will confronl
situations such as the recent Gulf War, and there must be a social and economic plan,
to help people in developing countries. Europe, Am~rica, and Japan, as rich countries,!
have selective duties to the emerging world. In response to the last intervention, the
speaker agreed that there is no doubt that the economic and social system is one needing
some difficult decisions. It is true that Europe, because of the 1939 crisis, invented a
welfare state which at the beginning was meant to calm and overcome certain crises.
111ese crises were brutal and bitter, and it was essential to find measures to bring abom
new solidarity. This system, the welfare state, continues to bridge the gap between the
rich and the poor, but it is time to work on economic growth in order to create the
necessary jobs. This brings one back to an economic and monetary union, and what an
important role it will play in fostering the economic growth so necessary for every
European government.
52
VII. SOVIET UNION: THE VIEW FROM MOSCOW
llllroductory Remarks
I.
Russia today is one of the worst places in the world for those who wish to be
fore.casters. It is a constantly shifting montage of daily happenings and events, political,
economic, and otherwise. One day's predictions are apt to be the comments of a fool in
24 hours. Will Russia make it? No one, not even Yeltsin, knows.
The real danger is not what the public sees on' television -- a few dozen over-
the-hill communists waving anti-American and anti-European banners in Red Square.
The real dangers are economic collapse, ethnic conflict, the lack of real democrats at the
lower working levels of government, and the selfish and too often illegal activities of the
managerial elite, who have much to lose in Ycltsin's reform program. Another concern
is the realization of the people that they are no longer part of a great empire. As things
get tougher, they are going to be looking for someone or some group to blame, which
will make for a perfect climate for demigods to function in.
On the more positive side, many of the dire predictions that have been made
have not come to pass. Hunger, famine, and riots have not occurred; there have been
no pogroms against ethnic and religious groups; there has been no military takeover; and
nuclear weapons have not fallen into the wrong hands. Events of this nature are not
necessarily inevitable. Indeed, while there are great problems and considerable confusion,
life in Russia has been far less turbulent than anyone expected. lbe shock therapy of
price liberalization, while one of many terrible hardships, has been tolerated and accepted
by the people thus far.
But the struggle for power goes on. President Yeltsin must deal with a very
difficult Congress, composed of about a third reformers, a third old hard liners, and a
third somewhere in between. For the time being, Ycltsin has emerged stronger, as has
his young Finance Minister, Gaidar. But, unfortunately, while the self-confidence and
competence of this man and his economic team have brought them respect in the West,
they haven't fared so well at home. TI1ey must absorb a great deal of the blame from a
public that is willing to forgive Yeltsin, a public that must live with shortages and prices
that have increased tenfold. They are also resented by others both out of power and in
power, and, strangely, by the intelligentsia who have lost their power base,
The fight will continue, and the government is going to have to trim its reform
sails and be a bit more sensitive to some of the conservative, nationalist-minded
constituencies if they are going to keep moving forward. But the basic reform program
is intact, even though most of Yeltsin's timetables are going to slip quite badly.
The economy must be the first priority, and the public will have to see and feel
some tangible in1provement reasonably soon. lbere are not going to be any miracles.
There are tremendous technical difficulties both internally and in dealing with the IMF
and other Western institutions. Such things as defense conversion, privatization, and
demonopolization are easy to talk about but have never been tried before. No one can
be certain the present policies and reforms are the right ones at the right time.
'n~e West should be preparing to prudently spend some money in this area and
should immediately intensify technical assistance to support the reforms that are taking
place. With respect to the IMF and other institutions, we have not had satisfactory high-
level negotiations over the technical financial arrangements.
53
Industrial production in Russia today is nearly 15 percent down ani
unemployment is rising. It will have to go down even further. 111C Russian industria:
complex produces little of any real value in today's marketplace, either domestically o;
externally. There is little structure to work with. ll1ere is little basis for comparin1
Russia's problems with those of the countries of Eastern Europe. While there h
something to work with in Eastern Europe, in Russia it is necessary to get the most basi~
elementary economy started so that democraLJ' and democratic institutions can grow.
Tbis must happen in what is far from the perfect political climate.
What is taking place in Russia is not merely reform, it is nothing less than
revolution, political, economic, social, and cultural. The establishment of democratic
values as firmly and as quickly as possible is essential if Russia is to learn to live in peace'
with its neighbors and fully participate in Western institutions. That participation is
essential if we are to avoid the re-emergence of Russian imperialism.
It is very likely that there will be a return to a strong central authority in Russia.
or at least a stronger one. "IlJe question is not whether that will happen, but what kind,
of authority that new central power will be. This is a major question for the future. ·
Is Russia going to make it? lney have a pretty good chance. But their odds for
success will be substantially improved if the West can remain constructively and wisely-
engaged. If Russia is allowed to revert to its past, if the old suspicions of foreigners(
cannot be overcome, if, out of humiliation at its loss of empire and a sense of,
hopelessness, Russia turns inward, then democracy there will be lost for a long time. lne'
task will not he easy and demands patience, prudence, and wisdom. But the challenge
is there for us, and the opportunity.
Introductory Remarks
i
u I
In Russia today, business activity is organized around three different patterns of
relationships among economic actors. The first of these are the traditional administrative !.
relationships of the old economy, where business interactions are regulated by
administrative orders. 1l1is relationship has survived, and all supply contracts and ~
administrative prices are still being continued.
A second relationship, which is growing more important, is that based on trading,
bartering, and arbitrage -- activities which are carried on often without the use of
monetary instruments. Whole sections of the Russian economy and society resemble
Middle Eastern bazaars. Even manufacturing firms conduct a substantial trade in goods
they do not produce.
A third type of relationship, which is fortunately becoming more common, is
based upon a new sort of industrial capitalism in which the output of various firms is sold
at free prices, and, at various stages, the inputs are diverted to the uses that yield the
most.
lne pattern of relationships that will eventually emerge as dominant is going to
be determined l;ngely by government policies. TI!C government is going to remain the
most significant economic actor for quite some time. The Russian government is
committed to certain policies which will determine the particular mix that will emerge:
fiscal and monetary stabilization, price liberalization, and the liberalization of exchange.
However, within this commitment there is scope for a wider range of specific policies.
54
For example, regarding privatization, there is a debate in Russia between advocates of the
two different types of privatization: the one regulated by law and run by the state: and
spontaneous privatization in which control is converted into ownership.
A complicating factor is that, in the past, policy was determined in the state and
party bureaucracy, and government was autonomous in implementing it. There was no
mechanism for individuals to pursue their interests. In the current society, individual
interests are determined by such factors as education, the kind of work done, and the
position occupied in the emerging society. "This is giving rise to the formation of pressure
groups. So, the specific policies of reform and stabilization that are adopted are going
to be influenced by these new pressure groups. To have a sense of what the policy mi'<
will be, one must look at which groups are the most powerful in Russian society today,
and which of the various policies of reform and stabilization they like and which they
oppose.
That the shock ther~py in Russia has not created a political backlash is because
there is a rough, but powerful, ideology of the market that increases the political power
of groups that are seen to be relevant for the market process. This ideology decreases
the political influence of groups that are seen as marginal to the market process. This
phenomenon increases the political influence of bankers, traders, and managers, while
decreasing that of government employees, workers, etc.
There are five groups that are highly int1uential in Russian politics today, and a
look at their preferences will give us an idea of what policy mix is likely to emerge. lncse
five groups are: the managers of collective farms, the traders, the bankers, the managers
of state enterprise, and the members of the military-industrial complex.
TI!C managers of the collective farms are a highly cohesive group, have blackmail
power over the government, and are opposed to all reform. 'TI1cy oppose privatization
of land, tight monetary and fiscal policy, and price liberalization, and they are indifferent
toward liberalization of exchange.
The traders are a new group, very mixed, and very large. 1l1ey range from the
owner of a private shop to a trader on the commodity exchange. 1l1is group is generally
against further price liberalization because they have made their money by buying
products at controlled prices and selling them at free prices. They arc against tight fi<>cal
and monetary policy and against spontaneous privatization. They favor state-run
privatization and liberalization of exchange.
In Russia there are about 1200 commercial banks, very few of which arc privately
owned. The bankers oppose tight monetary and fiscal policy, and they favor spontaneous
privatization as well as state-run privatization.
The managers of !;tate enterprise are numerous and powerful. In general. they
are against tight fiscal and monetary policy and in favor of spontaneous privatization,
because it gives them a chance to own their own companies.
1l1e military-industrial complex is highly divided. Like the managers of collective
farms, the traditional producers of armaments are against all reform. But the managers
of highly technical companies are in a similar position to the managers of state enterprise.
So, it is evident that, even among the groups more strongly identified with the
free market system, attitudes toward the various policies of reform and stabilization are
mixed. What this means is that the process of reform and stabilization is going to slow.
subject to stops and starts, and not very cohesive. lne system will remain a mixed one
for some time, in which the various sets of relationships will continue to exist. ll1csc
groups seem to be more positive toward economic reform than toward stabilization. It
'i~
is therefore likely that the Russian government will speak with one language toward the,
IMF and with another one toward these five groups with the most political power and
influence in Russian society.
Discussion
An American led off the discussion with a warning against forgetting the lessonsI
of history. The last time there was a democratic revolution in Russia, the West turned,
its back, and the resulting misery, hunger, and unrest opened the door to Lenin. The ~.
next time, there may not be a communist revolution, but there is sure to be some equally ~
unpleasant form of authoritarianism. '01e West must help. In the US, it won't be easy r
to get an aid package through Congress, but it probably will happen. 1ne best argument!
is that we spent trillions in the Cold War. Perhaps now, by spending billions, we can I
prevent that from happening again. l
. A variety of concerns about the situation in Russia were raised by participants in !
the discussion, mainly in the form of questions addressed to the panel. A Frenchman 1
wanted to know how Yeltsin's decisions are implemented, how power is divided between1
the central government and local authorities. What abcut the nuclear disarmament issue,
1
and the possible dumping of conventional weapons? What about nationalism? Is it a
serious threat? And what about relations between Russia and the rest of the CIS,
Ukraine in particular? Is there a possibility of conflict? With respect to the Russian
economy, what about the problems of hyperinflation and massive unemployment?
An Italian speaker was worried about imposing a Western pattern on the Russian
political system. For example, we in the West reproach Russia for not redistributing land,
bu t there is no such tradition in Russian history. Democracy is probably not in the cards
for Russia. The choice is more apt to be between different kinds of dictatorships. At
present, Yeltsin's dictatorship prevails over the dictatorship of the congress. No political
parties have arisen; at best there are only clubs and movements with little leadership.
Bu t there is a great deal of difference between a totalitarian regime and a dictatorial
regime. A dictatorial regin1e will allow a considerable margin of freedom, especially in a
civil society.
An American made the point that, if the various reform programs and Western
aid to Russia work, what will emerge will be a stronger Russia, a territory four or five
times the size of Europe, extending from the Polish border to Vladivostok and to the
gates of the Middle East. Should the West not now discuss what political relationship it
wants with this territory, and what it would like to see happen. between the various
members of the CIS? Shouldn't the fact be addressed that the Soviet Army still exists
and has troops on the soil of each of the member states of the CIS? It is important to
realize that not every anti-communist is a democrat, and not every democrat is an anti-
in1perialist. The organization of the territory of the former Soviet Union ought to be a
matter of great concern.
Panelists' Conclusions
Responding to the question of whether or not they were too optimistic in their
assessmems of the Russian situation, both panelists sought to temper their optimism in
their concluding remarks. 1ne Italian called his a cynic:.I optimism -- that the policies of
56
shock therapy would be carried out because those that were hurt the most by it mattered
the least politically. As to the eventual outcome, he said he was not at all optimistic.
The American panelist said the only thing he was optimistic about was that a small
economy would get started and some basic democratic institutions put in place by the end
of the decade.
Regarding the matter of the Russian tax system, both panelists agreed that it is
terribly complicated and disorganized -- a mess, in the words of the American panelist.
Businesses face every conceivable kind of tax: VAT, excise, profits, excess profits, etc.
Recently, a tax law had been passed that levied a 60 percent tax on the worldwide
earnings of any foreign national living in Russia. In order to get Western capital, said the
American, the Russians will have to establish some kind of predictability in their tax
system.
The Italian panelist said his advice to the IMF is to be at once a bit tougher in
negotiating and to make a bit more effort to understand the situation that Russia is in,
the structure of its industry and its banking system. It should work together with the
Russian government to see what can really be implemented.
In response to an assortment of questions raised in the discussion, the American
panelist made the following additional comments:
-- TilC West could not prudently spend $10 billion in aid to Russia at the present
time.
-- In spite of Yeltsin's assurances that things are under control in relations
between Russia and Ukraine, the situation is likely to get worse before getting
better.
-- With respect to enterprises pursuing their activities, the role of the central
government is almost irrelevant. But in terms of the power structure, there is
no question that Yeltsin is in charge and that Gaidar is in charge of the
economy.
He concluded by warning against isolationist tendencies in the West and in
Russia. We must keep our doors open and Russia's door open. If Russia turns inward,
we will be in deep trouble.
57
VITI. Yl!GOSLAVIA
Lord Carrington's Remarks
!
I would like to begin by very briefly recalling the genesis of the EC Conference ~
and the subsequent developments, as I believe that a knowledge of these events is !
essential for an understanding of, and a solution to, this Balkan tragedy. 1•
After the death of Tito and Communism, a vacuum has rapidly been filled in the .
six republics by long suppressed nationalism, fuelled by traditional ethnic animosities and1'
memories, sometimes selective, of events forty-five or fifty years ago, or indeed longer. ,
The Croatian and Slovenian declarations of independence brought matters to aI
head. Serbs in the Krajina reacted -- in part because the then Croatian constitution ~
contained inadequate provisions to safeguard their position and also because it rekindled (
memories of wartime atrocities. 11JC JNA, by this time a predominantly Serb force,l
grossly over-reacted. 11JC pattern was set -- provocation, or perceived provocation, i
followed by massive Serbian retaliation, often senseless, as we saw later at Vukovar, I
Dubrovnik and elsewhere. 1
'DJe CSCE gave the European Community a special responsibility for managing !
and solving the crisis and, early last September, almost exactly a year ago, reached I
agreement with the Yugoslav parties on the convening of a Peace Conference. !
When the EC appointed me as Chairman of the Conference, my mandate was ·
b:-tsed on three conditions: first, that there should be a genuine ceasefire; second, that !
none of the six republics would be recognized as independent and sovereign states except ~~··.
as part of an overall settlement, agreeable to all six republics; third, that there sl10uld be
no change of boundaries except by peaceful means :-tnd by agreement.
Of these three, only one remains -- namely, the principle governing a change of !
l
borders. We started the Conference, and quite rightly, in the absence of a ceasefire, I
partly because there was an expectation that the establishment of the Conference would, ·•
of itself, help create the necessary conditions for stopping the hostilities in Croatia. i
ll1ese hopes were soon dashed. 1ne numerous ceasefires which punctuated the ~
1
•
succeeding months tragically fu lfilled the assertion that I made in the first of many !.
agreements I brokered, in Igalo on 17th September, that this was "the last chance for de-
escalation and cessation of actual warfare."
ll1ere is no doubt that the lack of an effective ccasefire greatly complicated the ~
Conferc'nce's task.
1bc decision taken by the European Community last December to invite the
Yugoslav republics to ilpply for recognition of their independence, even though an overall
settlement satisfactory to all of them had not been achieved, changed the whole nature
of the Conference.
From the outset, the prospect of recognition had been the one real instrumen't
to keep the parties engaged in the negotiating process; though it is equally fair to say
that, by the end of last year, the Conference had not produced agreement. Five of the
si.x republics had accepted the Draft Convention for an overall settlement prepared within
the Conference: the Serbian government was not prepared to do this. CD1is draft
envisaged the establishment of sovereign and independent republics, comprehensive
arrangements for the protection of human rights, and allowed such financial and
economic cooperation as each state wished.
58
It also atlowed for those republics who so wished to form a common state. But
this formula did not go far enough for Serbia which asserted that any common state thus
formed would be a continuation of Yugoslavia -- a claim hotly contested by four of the
other five republics. Eight months on, this problem remains and, indeed, has become
even more complex.
As a result of thnt December decision, the original concept of the Peace
Conference had unravelled and we had no real leverage (that is to say, the prospect of
recognition) which we could bring to bear. Some of the republics at least bad got what
they wanted. The only true shared interest which remained was to see a quick and
equitable division of the assets, and to a much lesser extent the liabilities, of the former
Yugoslavia.
'This has meant that most of the work we have been trying to do since the
beginning of this year has had to be on a bilateral or trilateral basis, since plenary
sessions are inappropriate when much of the agenda concerns only one or two of the
countries involved.
We are left, therefore, witiJ a number of specific problems. First and foremost
is Bosnia-Herzegovina. But there is also Krajina and East/West Slavonia; Koscwo,
Vojvodina and Sandzak; Macedonia; and the question of the successor state and the new
"Republic of Yugoslavia," which I mentioned briefly just now.
Bosnia-Herzegovirw
From the outset of the Conference it was obvious that Bosnia was a tinderbox.
When EC Foreign Ministers asked the Bosnian government whether or not it wished for
independence, it was clear that the answer was going to be "yes." How could President
Izetbegovic say otherwise? But, in the Bosnian Serb view, a Declaration of Independence
without their agreement was contrary to the existing Constitution and they were resolutely
opposed to a unitary state with a Muslim majority. Foreseeing the problems that were
likely to arise from the p!.anned independence referendum, I visited Sarajevo in early
February. There I reached agreement with the leaders of the three main political panics,
representing Serb, Muslim and Croat interests respectively, and including President
lzetbegovic and Dr. Karadzic, to begin talks on new constitutional arrangements -- which
would adequately safeguard the rights and acknowledged the fears of the three
communities. I asked Ambassador Cutileiro to take on this task -- which he has dom·
with great skill and persistence. Eventually, on March 18th all three parties agreed on
a set of principles -- a formula in which there would be a great deal of autonomy given
to the three nationalities within some form of federal arrangement.
Much ~f what has been written about this plan, since rejected by the Muslim
SDA party, has been inaccurate, and it is, I think, necessary to set the record str;Jight.
Firstly, the 18th March agreement and the Statement of Principles, like most
political settlements, was a compromise. Although the Bosnian Croats had voted with the
Muslims in the Bosnian Parliament for independence, once the Cutilciro talks began, they
aligned themselves with the Serbs. Both parties insisted on a confederal structure. The
Muslims' preference was for a unitary state. ll1ere was tbus a major gap to be bridged,
and any agreement rcach·~d was therefore likely to be fragile.
Secondly, there was 2 clear understanding that the three "constituent un its"
envisaged under the agreement would not be geographical entities, in the setN~ of
consisting of only one nationa.lity, nor would the three units be distinct sclf-containeJ
blocks. 'The mosaic of Serb, Muslim and Croat communities dictated this.
5Q
It was largely on the basis of the 18th March Statement of Principles and its
agreement that the EC and a number of other states recognized the independence
llosnia-Hcrtegovina on 7th April. The Bosnian Serbs started the fighting, which quickly
escalated and has made Bosnia today the greatest human tragedy in Europe since the end
of the Second World War. cnw Bosnian Serbs complained at the time, and still do, that
the recognition of Bosnia was premature and that the 18th March Principles were an
insufficient basis on which to take this decision. They argue that recognition should have
been withheld until the end of the negotiating process. In my view, the 18th March
Statement of Principles provided a wholly adequate platform for recognition. Moreover,
to have withheld recognition would have run the risk of giving the Bosnian Serbs an
effective veto over the decision; nor has it ever been the position in Ambassador
Cutileiro's talks that the 18th March agreement was the only basis on which a solution
could be found. We have always been willing to look at any proposals likely to be agreed
by the three parties.
Nevertheless, the fact is that recognition was immediately followed by fighting.
Against this background it has, not surprisingly, been very difficult to make any progress
on the constitutional talks, though we have just about managed to keep the negotiating
process itself alive. President Izetbegovic has said that he is no longer prepared to
negotiate on the basis of the 18th March Statement of Principles. The leaders of the
Bosnian Serb and Croat parties, Dr. Karadzic and Mr. Boban, say they are. The only
point on which all three parties currently agree is that no political settlement can be
attained in Bosnia unless it commands their support. Until this is accomplished, peace
will not return to Bosnia. Bosnia's very existence hangs in the balance. If the
imernational community acquiesces in a policy of fait accompli, for example by
recognizing either the Bosnian Serb or Croat entities, then Bosnia-Herzegovina cannot
conceivably survive. The Muslims have the most to lose by the partition of Bosnia and,
in my view, the most to gain by participating fully in the political negotiations. Until
now, there has been insistence that there has to be a ceascfire before negotiations can
begin; and that no ceasefire will be possible until Muslim territory is returned. (11tat is
the Muslim position.) Dr. Karadzic has been equally firm that the Bosnian Serb forces
will not withdraw until an overall settlement has been reached.
President Izetbegovic has, I believe, got some new proposals to present. I very
much hope he will do so. But, in my judgement, aJ.l three parties must show a greater
willingness to compromise on the shape of a political settlement, otherwise it is very
difficult to see where we go from here. If the three parties -- and all of them are
breaking the ceasefire -- don't wish for peace, except on their own terms, then no amount
.of diplomacy can or will bring it about.
Krajina and East/West S/avonia
Au understanding of the problems of the Krajina and the areas of East and West
Slavonia is the key to understanding the Serb-Croat conflict. Tite Krajina, based on the
towns of Knin and Glina, is historically a Serb majority area. This is not in dispute. The
situation in East and West Slavonia is different, although the Serbian authorities have
consistently argued the contrary. Many Croats fled this area when it was occupied by the
JNA, so that today there is a Serb majority -- but historically this has not been the case,
and indeed the 1991 census shows a large Croat majority.
60
Under my original proposals, the Serb majority area in Croatia, the Krajina, was
to have "Special Status" -- including its own legislative lx)dy and judiciary, internationally
monitored human rights guarantees and so on.
The Croatians have accepted the principle of Special Status and have amended
their constitutional law to reflect its provisions. However, the leaders of the Krajina
Serbs (and, it has to be said, many in Serbia itself) continue to reject any solution short
of independence for the Krajina.
According to the principles on which the Conference was established,
independence for the Krajina is not an option: self-determination is at the level of
republics, not of peoples. The only valid selllement, therefore, is one which respects the
territorial integrity of Croatia.
l11C peacekeeping plan, negotiated by Secretary Vance and his UN colleagues,
envisaged the deployment of UN forces in the Krajina and also in East and West
Slavonia -- thus constituting the four UN Protected Areas. The plan makes it clear that
the special arrangements in these areas will be of "an interim nature and will not pre-
judge the outcome of the political negotiations (i.e. the Conference) for a comprehensive
settlement of the Yugoslav crisis." Nevertheless, it is indisputable that, under the
protection of the blue helmets, the Krajina Serbs believe themselves to be better off now
than they would be under the authority of the Croatian government, as in the Conference
plan.
Meanwhile, the Croatian government is obviously impatient to regain control of
this territory. These pressures will doubtless increase and will lead to an increase in
tension --and possibly even to a resumption of the conflict. It is therefore of the utmost
importance for the international community to bring all its influence to bear on the
Krajina Serbs to negotiate, and on the Croatian authorities to exercise restraint. It is also
essential for the Belgrade authorities to persuade the Krajina Serbs to negotiate.
Kosovo, VojvoditUl, Sandzak
The next potential flashpoint concerns the minorities in Serbia -- by far and away
the most important of which is Kosovo, where nearly 2 million Albanians live and 200,000
Serbs, or thereabouts. l11e Albanians living in Kosovo have had an election of their own
and declared their independence from Serbia. But this, as in the Krajina, is not a
solution, since existing borders must be maintained, and it is certainly not one which the
Serbs would ever accept, since Kosovo is perceived as the birthplace of Serbian
nationhood.
The Kosovans have recently shown willingness to negotiate without pre-judging
the outcome but have, given the general antipathy between Kosovan and Serb, asked the
O:mference to mediate. Regrettably, the Serbs have so far refused to accept EC
Conference participation. I believe it is essential for the Peace Conference to be involved
in seeking a settlement between the Kosovans and the Serbian government. 11te dangers
there are infinitely great and it is overwhelmingly in the imerest of both sides to come
to the negotiating table and hammer out a solution on the basis of real autonomy.
The situations in Vojvodina and Sandzak are also cause for concern and must not
be overlooked.
61
Macedonia
The next problem is the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Recognition,
is a matter for governments, not the Peace Conference. Suffice it to say that it was thel
Community which invited Macedonia to apply for recognition and that the Arbitration!
Commission, presided over by Monsieur Badinter, made clear that Macedonia had!
satisfied the EC criteria. Moreover, they went on to say that the use of the name
Macedonia did not imply territorial claims on another state. The Greek position is well!
known. I very much hope that it will be possible for the Greeks and President Gligorov!
to come to a compromise on this which will satisfy both sides. l11is is causing President!
Gligorov the greatest possible difficulty. 1
On the positive side, I do believe that there is a real possibility of reaching an
agreement between the Macedonian government and the Albanian minority. We are
working very hard to achieve this. If it materializes, as I think it will, I hope it will have
a positive impact on the Kosovo negotiations. It does reflect the consistently positive
attitude of President Gligorov and his government. •
You will see from what I have said that there are enormous difficulties and t
problems ahead. You will also see that all these problems, apart from Macedonia, have
a Serbian involvement in them. I cannot pretend that J see a quick solution to thesei
problems but, above all, we must prevent au outbreak of violence in Kosovo which would,
in international terms, have the most serious consequences.
Sooner or later all these problems I have described will be solved. The longer
it takes, the more misery and human suffering there will be, as events in Bosnia have
made tragically clear. That revolting act and expression "ethnic cleansing" will continue. ·[
Innocent people will lose their homes and their lives.
Responsibility rests upon those who are engaged in the fighting and the leadersj
who are encouraging them. I pray that they will understand the need for urgent action l
on their part to stop the killings and the deportations, and instead to promote and protect
their interests at the negotiating table. 1
Discussion I
The discussion began with an Austrian elaborating on the panelist's historical !
perspective of the Yugoslav situation. It is inaccurate to attribute the present problem I
exclusively to Serbian nationalism. 1be Slovenes, Croats and Serbs jointly gave birth to
the first Yugoslavia after World War I, and recreated it after World War H. The main
reason for the Slovenes and Croats to break away from Yugoslavia was less religious or
ethnic tensions than a remnant of the West Roman Empire fighting the East Roman
Empire. 'TIJCy had a higher economic development and were tired of being the net
contributors to Yugoslavia. Rather they were anxious to become members of the
European Community.
l11is same participant agreed with the panelist that to isolate Yugoslavia would
not only be impossible but wrong; Yugoslavia is part of Europe and, therefore, part of
Europe's responsibility. ·nte most appropriate way to curb the crisis is through a mixture
of political, economic, and -- possibly -- military intervention. An Italian participant
disagreed, saying that it was not the EC's place or responsibility to step in. What we are
witnessing today is very cruel, but at this point irreversible, and undoubtedly will end with
new borders defining new nations. 11JC EC is not threatened by the situation in
62
Yugoslavia and, therefore, no go•;ernment is going to be willing to send troops in to solve
its problems. On the contrary, said a Frenchman. ll1e very fabric of Yugoslavia is a
threat, and therefore this war is a major risk to everyone. A humanitarian approach
should be tried as a way of getting through to the warring parties, and a less negative
press would go a long way to curtailing the hatred everywhere.
Several Americans addressed the level of United States support for Yugoshwia.
One reminded the group that aid for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe did not pa's
easily in the US Congress, and felt that support for Yugoslavia was no more restrained.
The other American asked the panelist to address the issue of UN troops in Yugoslavi:~,
whether they are being effective, and if more will be needed.
ll1e subject of whether to send troops into Yugoslavia produced strong opinions.
Several participants -- including a Greek and a Turk -- felt that military force was the
only option remaining. 'Tbe Turkish participant urged that the fighting be stopped but,
as diplomacy has failed, acknowledged that a force such as NATO may be required to
achieve and maintain a peace. He underscored the need to portray Yugoslavia as not
being an isolated conflict but one which could be repeated in other areas, mmt
particularly the former Soviet Union. Titerefore it is necessary to foster, through
whatever means, constitutional mechanisms to bolster democracy. A German concurred,
commenting that Europe not only has NATO but has just formed the "Eurocorps", and
the present situation in Yugoslavia is a strong example o( when these forces should be
used.
Several participants felt that the EC has made serious mist.akes in the Yugoslav
crisis, particularly in not standing up to the expansionist aspirations of the presidents of
Serbia and Croatia. A German agreed with this, tracing the problem to the period before
the war, when the European Community was unable to agree on what was going on or
how to resolve it. A Briton added that even now the EC does not seem to be working
as a team, as shown in its lack of support for the chief negotiator.
Several participants, with a certain amount of hindsight, felt that the European
C'..ommunity should never have supported the central power in Yugoslavia in the first
place. If the various EC members had realized, before it was too late, that Yugoslavia
would not be able to hold together, they might have been able to deflect President
Milosovic's strategy of the Serbianization of Yugoslavia.
Finally, a participant from the Netherlands asked the panelist to address what
effect the war would have on the European integration process, because one can expect
other such conflicts in the future.
6~
IX. THE MIGRATION ISSUE
l11troductory Remarks
I.
In the long run, the important effects of immigration arise not necessarily from
today's waves of refugees, but from the cumulative effects over a long period of time of
unskilled south to north immigration. Demographers say that demography is destiny,
meaning that, if one ethnic group grows in an integrated fashion by one or two percent
faster than another, there will be significant effects within one or two generations.
Political leaders, when they respond to immigration crises, rarely appreciate that
compounding works for people just as it does for money.
The first point to be made is that the population problem that was such an issue
in the 1960's and 1970's is finally beginning to hit the industrialized countries. World
population is roughly five and a half billion, and the world labor force is roughly two and
a h:~Jf billion. Both numbers are growing by about 100 million a year: about 85 or 90
percent of that growth is occurring in developing countries.
Most people don't move. They live and die within a few kilometers of where they
were born. But even if migrants are only two percent of the annual increase in the
world's workforce, that is about two million a year -- roughly the current estimate by
which the migrant population is growing around the world.
TI1ere are about 80 million immigrants of all categories -- refugees, asylees, legal
guest workers, illegal migrant workers, etc. Only about half that number are in the
OECD countries, which means that there are about 15 to 20 million in Western Europe,
15 to 20 million in the US, and 2 to 3 million in the industrial countries of Asia. lbese
40 million immigrants send home to their countries about $100 billion a year in
remittances and goods, making remittances the number one source of foreign exchange
in many countries, from Bangladesh to Yugoslavia. Remittances are about twice the level
of official development aid. Put differently, exporting people into the world labor market
is second in world trade terms only to petroleum products. Thus immigration is an
important issue and will become more important in the 1990's.
Another important point is that industrial countries are reacting very differently
to today's immigration. 11Je European response is to get control of the immigration.
The US response is to want to get control of many other things -- crime, health care
costs, etc. -- before getting control of immigration. The industrialized Asian countries
want to increase immigration in a very controlled fashion.
Migration occurs because of demand-pull factors, supply-push factors, and
uccworks. The demand-pull is jobs, welfare benefits, etc. in rich countries. Supply-push
rd1ects the economic and political factors that send migrants into the international labor
market -- wage differentials, for example. Networks are the friends and relatives who,
once they settle in industrialized countries, provide information and additional incentive
for others who would like to come.
The big switch in Europe has been from demand-pull to supply-push.
Immigration control systems in Western Europe, as well as in the US, have failed to stop
the supply-push. So far, industrialized countries have focused on development strategies
to keep people at home. But this is not a short-term solution; it will require several
generations. Moreover, economic restructuring initially increases immigration because of
the disruptions it produces.
Industrialized countries would be better advised to seek ways to reduce demand-
pull. In our deregulated labor markets and economics, there are many gaps that migrants
can fill. TI!C lawn-care industry in California is an example. 1l1at industry has tripled
employment in the past decade because of the availability of immigrants. If immigration
is to be slowed down in the short-run, industrial countries will have to look harder at
things they can do at home, rather than concentrating on development solutions.
US immigration policies have been affected by the fact that the US is a nation
of inunigrants that has always been ambivalent about taking more immigrants. The most
recent attempts by the US to reduce immigration have had exactly the opposite effect.
Immigration reforms passed in 1965, 1986, and 1990 all aimed at limiting and modifying
immigration patterns through specific policy changes, but in each case, the goals of the
legislation were not met, and immigration has remained largely out of control. American
public opinion is fairly anti-immigrant, and the last two immigration acts have enacted
restrictionist symbols to appease public opinion. But immigration to the US today is
higher than ever. US experience shows that you can appear to be restrictionist but still
run an expansionist immigration policy.
The final point is that the kind of large scale immigration going on today in
California will occur in other industrialized areas a generation later. Large scale unskilled
immigration reinforces the trends toward inequality in industrial economies. "I11e Los
Angeles economy is an example of what can happen with a first world infrastructure and
third world work force. It is one of the highest cost of living areas in the United States
and is also the major US manufacturing center. This has happened because of the
tremendous expansion of low wage workers in such industries as garments, shoes, and
furniture. This growth has benefited the college-educated fourth of the California work
force, but blue collar workers, who have had to compete with these immigrants, have
begun to leave the state, leaving the inunigrants trapped as an underclass. lbe only
solution is a very difficult policy of simultaneously getting control of immigration and
doing more to integrate those who do immigrate.
llllroductory Remarks
II.
Underlying the immigrarion issue is the permanent tension between human rights
and their demands on the one side and the economic and political pressures within
society on the other. It is a dilemma between humanity and security.
In France today, immigrants are seven percent of the population. One reason
there are. so many immigrants is that many French people have become French through
naturalization, a phenomenon traceable to France's colonial past. 11tere has also been,
over the past 20 years, a flow of immigrants who first came as guest workers and then as
illegals.
The difficulties in France tend to be more qualitative than quantitative. They are
social difficulties, caused by re.lationships between the original French and the new
French. There are fewer people of European stock, fewer people who practice the
Christian religion. lbere is unemployment, which is often blamed on foreign workers.
(-"'
Immigrants, who tend to be clustered in and around major c!l!Cs, are not integrated
sufficiently into society. 'llJCy remain marginal and this leads them to social failure and
under employment.
l11ere is in France a question of national iden tity, an ambivalence in attitudes and
feelings. Tbe French swerve from generosity to selfishness. This explains why
immigration policies are less efficient and adequate. l11e current policy tries to deal with
the root causes of immigration. In 1979, France stopped importing workers, but, because
of its porous borders, immigrants still come illegally. There are no quotas, no forms of
discrimination in French immigration policy. l11e policy also tries to prevent abuse of
political asylum. ·n1ere is no longer free access to the work market for those who seek
political asylum. Also, there are restrictive policies governing foreign workers' ability to
bring in their families.
The second category of measures are police measures which do such things as
governing the stay of foreigners in France. lne implementation of these controls is not
very effective.
Another area concerns the right of a child born in France to French citizenship
upon achieving majority. Whether this should continue to be automatic or be a matter
of choice is currently being looked at.
Finally, France has tried to follow a policy of integrating foreigners in French
schools and institutions, but this has proved a difficult policy because of selfishness and
because of budget cuts.
Immigration policies in Europe today cannot merely be national policies; they
must be European. ll1cre are no longer any horders in Europe, so policies must be
coordinated. A P.uropcan policy should at once welcome foreigners while being vigilant.
Article IOOC in the Maastricht Treaty concerning visas should be implemented by all the
memher countries.
Immigration is a politically divisive issue in France, with very divergent views
between the left and the right. The extreme right is particularly vociferous on
immigration. It is important that immigration not be politicized, lest inefficient measures
be adopted and public opinion become more intolerant.
There is much at stake. Population is growing, and so is the gulf between rich
and poor. We are not living in one world but in worlds that are moving toward one
another and which may come into conflict. For Europeans, Nrica presents the greatest
threat, for political democracy, for social stability, and for peace. Each year a million
more children are born in North Nrica than in the EC. We must simultaneously manage
the development of populations in these poor countries and increase social and ethnic
diversity in our own countries. We will have to insure jobs and create growth in poor
countries. l11is can best he done by investment and free trade. It is a question we all
must deal with, and deal with generously.
lnJroductory Remarks
/!/.
The problem in Germany is not one of the relationship hetween Germans and
foreigners. 'Inere are about 5 million permanent foreigners living in Germany, and there
is very little prohlem. Most Turks, for example, are well-integrated, and they themselves
are as concerned as anyone about the real problem, which is the abuse of the right of
66
political refugees to come into Germany. There is today a massive influx of foreign ers
entering Germany under the pretense that they are political refugees.
The problem goes back to 1948, when the German consituti.on decreed that the
nation would be open to anyone from any part of the world who was heing oppressed for
political, religious, or racia1 reasons. It was never foreseen that people would want to
come to Germany for economic reasons.
People -- currently about 35,000 a month -- come to Germany and stay for
months, sometimes years, going through all the legal processes. During that time, they
receive the same benefits that German citizens get. In the end, only about 5 percent are
found to qualify as political refugees. More than 400,000 a year are coming from the new
democracies in Eastern Europe. Another 200,000 of German descent arc coming from
Poland and Russia. In March, the number coming from Czechoslovakia tripled. Tnese
people who come to ask for political asylum cannot be refused, even if they live in
democratic countries.
One of the problems of this abuse is that it is unfair to those who are real
political refugees. They are lost in the flood of people coming for economic reasons. ;\
majority in Germany want to remain open to political refugees, but to get control over
those who come for economic reasons.
The problem is mainly an east-west one. l11e people who arc coming were
formerly stopped by communi~t barbed wire. Now we have to get used to a Europe
without barbed wire. l11e situation will be more difficult when East Germany ach ieves
the same wage and living standards as West Germany.
Germany has to d•)velop an immigration policy. lt should aim at helping people
in their own countries. We spend more than $5 billion a year on a~-ylum seekers in
Germany. The same amount of money would he much more effectively spent in the
home countries of these people. If German leaders cannot come to a consensus on this
issue, it will he a dangerous invitation to radicals, especially those on the right.
Discussion
An American began the discussion with an elaboration of the historical rok of
immigration in the US and the current socio-ethnic makeup of the country.
The US was built upon successive waves of immigration that brought an en0rmous
wealth of talent to its shores. Most immigrants in the US have integrated. More than
half of the Catholics and Jews marry outside their faiths. More than half of the Hispanics
speak only English. l11e US i~ becoming the first universal nation.
But there are two major changes that are causing problems. First, due to change~
in immigration laws and to differentials in fertility rates, there has been an explosion in
the minority population in the US. When the Supreme Court ordered school integration
in 1954, one out of every ten children was a minority; the number today is one out of
every three. In 1980, seven of the ten largest cities had white majorities; today three have
white majorities.
At the same time, the social mobility of minorities in the US has slowed down.
and this has caused significant social tension. School segregation has actually increased
And income groups are dividing up along racial and ethnic lines, with a very large gar
between black and Hispanic families at the bottom and white and Asian families at the
top.
6~
Some of the solutions that should be considered are to reduce the speed oi
inunigration; to enforce immigration laws more effectively; to make a more aggressive ,
etfort to provide jobs and training for minorities.
Another important solution that should be undertaken not just by the US but by
Europeans as well, is a much more aggressive effort to control world population growth.
This is perhaps the greatest source of the instability we are facing. Studies show that
population growth in many countries can be reduced by 20 percent with aggressive family
planning policies. The US was once at the forefront of this effort, but is no longer
because of the politicization of the abortion issue. It must renew its leadership, but it
cannot do it alone.
Population growth was seen by several other speakers as the crucial issue -- the
most dramatic political and human problem we face, in the words of a Frenchman, who
pointed out that world population is growing by 97 million a year. A German wondered
iJ it is futile to try to raise the standard of living in developing countries with very high
birth rates. Meanwhile, pointed out a Greek participant, fertility rates in all the EC
countries except Ireland are declining, leading inevitably to declining and aging
populations.
An American called for a strong political commitment on the part of Western
governments to provide funding for family planning in developing countries. Such
programs have achieved considerable succe-ss in lowering birth rates in such Latin
American countries as Mexico, Brazil, and Columbia.
Speakers from Spain, Portugal, and France expressed particular concern about
population growth and economic conditions in the Mahgreb region, an area of economic
stagnation where there will be 100 million people by the year 2010. This presents a
major challenge for Southern Europe, and a Spaniard urged that the focus of Western
assistance not be limited to the countries of Eastern Europe, but be extended to all the
countries neighboring the EC. In response to a question from the moderator about
whether an island nation like the UK had different experiences with and attitudes toward
immigration, a Briton offered some remarks on the situation in his country. AJter the big
postwar wave of immigration from the newly independent countries of the
C'A>mmonwealth, Britain imposed strict limitations except on families of people already
there and genuine asylum seekers. Nevertheless, the immigrant population has grown
considerably. There are a considerable number of people seeking asylum. llte
government bas tried to get through limitations on asylum, and is adamantly opposed to
the notion of open borders -- a position which the opposition does not oppose.
1l1e situation in Canada, as described by a speaker from that country, is that
there is a growing backlash against the liberal immigration policies that have resulted in
'' great influx of immigrants. This kind of political reaction is the result of immigration
poucies getting out of balance. The way to keep public opinion from becoming anti-
immigrant is to have a refugee determination system that is fair and efficient, and an
immigration policy that provides a balance between family reunification and new
immigrants.
61:\
Panelists' Conclusions
The concluding remarks from the panel underscored many of the points made in
the discussion: the importance of family planning assistance, the need for aid to Europe's
southern as well as eastern neighbors, the need to develop a European immigration
policy.
The American panelist pointed out that population trends go up and down, and
that, as au example, white birth rates in California have gone up. He warned against
what he said was the worst of both worlds: immigration continuing at a high level because
control systems are not effective and development is not fast enough, while publics are
unwilling to pay the costs of integrating immigrants into advanced industrial societies.
Such a state of affairs will present a very important problem for industrialized countries
to manage.
69
X. THE EVOLVING WEST/WEST RELATIONSIDP
Introductory Remarks
I.
!
[
I
The nature of the US-European relationship at the present time is characterized ~
by a feeling on the part of many Americans that they are regarded in Europe as being
irrelevant. All of us are committed to the transAtlantic relationship, but it is beginning
to look like a project in search of a mission. TI1is is due in part to changed conditions,
in part to attitudes, and in part to policies.
The Atlantic Alliance was formed as a defensive alliance. With the threat now
having disintegrated politically, it is impossible to maintain the same sense of vigilance or
the same sense of danger as existed in the past. What is the function of the Alliance now
that the purpose for which it was created has so fundamentally changed?
Another major change in conditions is German unification. When Germany was 1
divided, the military frontier was in the center of Europe. Further, Germany had an l
incentive to integrate itself into the West and not to assert a national identity. With
unification, Germany cannot be said to be more nationalistic, but it can now address
national issues the same way any other European country can, without looking over its
shoulder at the impact any action might have on the chances for reunification. It is also
significant that Germany is no longer on the front line, but is in the center of Western I
Europe.
In all of our countries, domestic politics have achieved a prominence they did not
have ten years ago. Many decisions are taken for domestic reasons, which differ from
country to country and produce an element of disunity because leaders have to be more
attuned to political considerations of how to get into or stay in office, rather than
focusing on the purpose for which they are in office.
All of this has created a multi-polar world in which there are various centers of ,
power. This interacts badly with traditional American attitudes which have historically 1
1
been that international problems were uniform the world over and should be dealt with
by collective security. TI1e American view has been that burden-sharing was the way to
allocate responsibilities within the Alliance, that the burden was perceived domestically
to be similar in all the countries, and thus that the decision-making was essentially
domestic. 'TI1is all worked fine in a two-power world. One of our current problems is the
success of our joint efforts. The US has no experience operating in a multi-polar world.
It has always been either isolated or dominant, never in an equilibrium situation.
Europe has been in an equilibrium situation, but toward itself and not the outside
world. What Europe is doing now is asserting is own individual identity, but it sometimes
gives the impression it is doing so with no specific purpose. One of the results of an
identity becoming its own objective can be seen in the plethora of institutions which have
developed in Europe and among which nations may pick and choose, resulting in a
strange kind of nationalism.
Another odd thing is the way these institutions are being augmented. For
example, Pakistan is in the European Security Conference and the defense minister of
Kazhakistan attends NATO meetings. The reason for this is that we have not addressed
the question of how to organize the territory between the Polish frontier and Vladivostok;
we have not defined what is our interest in it.
70
This raises the question of the Franco-German corps and other ideas of an
independent European security arrangement. TI1ere was no discussion with Britain or the
US about the formation of this corps, nor a discussion of what political purpose it was
supposed to serve. 'n1e danger is that, if such a corps is used without American approval
or consultation, where is the backup, the intelligence going to come from? A European
defense identity requires more, rather than less, consultation with the US. The special
relationship between the US and Britain has worked so well precisely because it has been
taken for granted that there would be a prior exchange of views on major issues.
Does a more independent Europe mean that Europe and the US have a different
set of interests, or that we are dividing up common interests? Are there areas of greater
European interest? It is necessary to define these areas of interest and the differences
of responsibility toward them.
On the question of Germany, there are those who fear Germany becoming too
powerful. The best way for the relationship between Germany and the rest of Euwpc
to be less tense is for the US to be involved, because Germany can relate to the US and
the other countries know that the possibility of German domination is less if the US is
part of the decision-making process. So there must be some kind of permanent dialogue
between the US and Europe.
NATO may not be right for this role. TI1e Alliance should not invent mission~
for itself, though there must be some function for it because it is the part of the
transAtlantic relationship that Americans understand best. Certainly, support for NATO
in the US will be undermined if it is seen as a reservt1 for when things get really tough.
The great strength of the Atlantic relationship has been the sense that there is r~
common interest between the US and Europe. TI1is is as true as ever, especially in the
political area. Right now, we don't have the right institutions for this. We need to
decide and agree on what we are doing around the world, what we want to achieve.
We need a more inten~e political dialogue, to discuss the political relationship.
The US cannot be denied involvement in European decision-making. We must decide
if we have a special relationship or if each side is going to calculate its own self interest
and then act accordingly.
Introductory Remarks
II.
In viewing the West/West relationship, some basic assumptions apply. One is that
there has been fundamental and far-reaching change, but we arc acting as if it had never
occurred. The usual state of confusion exists, which is a matter of concern. Before, the
confusion sorted itself out unavoidably, because of the common threat, which was the
basis of our relationship. The need for the West/West relationship is greater than ever,
but the agenda has changed, and we are having trouble adjusting to that.
Confusion in the European decision-making process should not disguise the fact
that great progress is being made, in the form of the single market and of monetary
union. 11J.e single currency will certainly happen and will require the participation of all
members. The economic convergence that will result puts additional pressure on the
political questions. The issue of how to organize the Community is difficult, but prngres~
is being made.
71
What about the West/West relationship? NATO has always been the symbol of
it, but the situation has changed. We no longer have the unifying threat of attack, but
the importance of NATO is still great as the only real integrated military organization
capable of acting. The question is what are the missions? We have to define what our
areas of joint interest are and what sort of division of labor is appropriate.
Our institutional set-up is outdated. It is clear and logical that the Community
should be the one European institution. It will increasingly have to deal with all the
issues before its member states. In the defense area, WEU is a transitory phenomenon.
There cannot for long be such an organization separate from the Community which some
of the Community members belong to and not others. The US should realize that it will
be much easier to organize the West/West relationship when Europe is one body.
The WEU is ambiguous and must be gotten rid of. So must the CSCE which was
created to serve a specific purpose when the Soviet Bloc existed. Its job is done. It is
no longer necessary and should be eliminated. Nor is OECD working properly; its role
must change. As for GATT, we must also discuss its role. Are we ready to give it real
responsibility?
Finally, it is important for the Americans to know that the agenda for
consolidation of Europe does not include the goal of getting the US out of Europe.
Quite the opposite is true.
Discussio11
Tl1e discussion was initiated by an International participant who expressed the
view that the evolving West/West relationship was a matter of strategy-making in a era
of unusual instability that will exist for the foreseeable future. The stabilizers in this
situation are our institutions (UN, EC, NATO, WEU, CSCE, etc.), of which there are too
many but all are necessary right now; the processes of arms control, nuclear non-
proliferation, etc.; the relationships with countries out of the Atlantic area, especially
those in Eastern Europe, and the help that we can give them; and the management of
crises.
None of these stabilizers can really be effective without NATO, which gives us the
capability to act on our strategy. NATO is the ultimate stabilizer, but it must be looked
at through new eyes. We must get away from the fixation on Article Five that has
characterized our thinking since the Cold War. We must get away from the idea that
NATO's operations must be restricted, that it should not have an out-of-area role. And
we must get away from the idea that we need a specific threat. NATO anchors the US
commitment to Europe and there is no other possible strategy than the collective strategy
we have in NATO. It is true that NATO's function must be redefined, but, without '
NATO, it would be impossible to deal strategically with the immediate future.
The perceived threat to NATO by the newly-established Franco-German Corps
was the subject of several interventions. The previous speaker said that, while its
formation was an appropriate expression of the Franco-German relationship, it would
weaken NATO unless it had a specific tie to the Alliance. A German argued that the
corps is not intended to replace NATO, but should be seen as strengthening NATO by
presenting an option for taking action in those situatious where NATO does not choose
!0 act. Added a Frenchman, NATO remains the basic security link.
72
j
l The maintenance of a close transAtlantic relationship was seen by virtually every
j
.participant in the discussion as a matter of great importance. A Portuguese speaker
called for a special relationship between the US and Europe as close as the one that
1
exists between the US and Britain. Said a British participant, the next priority after
!Maastricht should be the strengthening of the Atlantic Alliance. The US and Europe
1 have common interests in defense and in other areas, and, more important, they share
Icommon values. A strong Atlantic Alliance must be the protector and custodian of the
! these shared values.
I
A German speaker underscored the importance of the US commitment to Europe
. by saying that German unification would have been much more difficult without US
j involvement. From the point of view of a majority of Germans, the US is an integral
part of European security culture. Strongly emphasizing this point, a Canadian said there
j was no precedent for a war-free Europe without an American presence. lt is difficult to
· take seriously any European security arrangement that is not closely connected to the US.
Another matter of concern was how the US and Europe were to cooperate in
1out-of-area situations. An An1erican asked if Europe was to take primary responsibility
1
for security on the periphery of the European continent, did that imply that the US was
! free to act unilaterally on other continents? It was a Frenchman's view that it is too early
; to formalize the approach to out-of-area situations, that it should continue to be
1
pragmatic.
I Expressing a thought on the minds of a number of speakers, a German wondered
: if we are too preoccupied with security concerns. If, as a panelist said, security is no
longer sufficient to hold the Atlantic community together, what else should the US and
Europe be doing besides crisis management?
An Italian's response was that the US and Europe should develop a permanent
political dialogue on all issues. An International speaker emphasized the importance of
the US and Europe getting their act together on economic and trade issues. The Atlantic
community, said a Briton, is faced with a whole host of new challenges outside its
traditional areas of cooperation: conflicts in the Third World, arms races in the Middle
East and Asia, nuclear proliferation, and economic competition in the Pacific, to name
a few. Of all our institutions, the best otw to focus our approach to these issues is the
UN. A Swiss speaker made the point that we also need to focus on the ideological
meaning of freedom. Many smaller, less-developed countries are starting to practice
freedom, and the example we set for them, in such areas as the GATT round, is terribly
important.
Pamlists' Conclusions
The Belgian panelist concluded by emphasizing two points: that security is the
central issue for the well-being of the European continent and that the objective of
European policy is to keep the US involved. As for countries outside the Atlantic
community, there must be institutional links as well. It is important that we focus on
what these links are to be. NATO and the EC have brought stability to the European
continent, but these institutions need to address new challenges and requirements if
stability is to be maintained.
73
The American panelist repeated his concern that, even if there is no hidden
European agenda, a consequence of certain European actions is to increase the
separation in the political consciousness of the US and Europe. For example, the
prevailing view in American foreign policy circles is that the French want to exclude the
US from major decisions and relegate it to a reserve position. Of course changes must
occur in the American point of view, too. Americans must abandon the idea that it is the
role of the US to define what the common set of interests and goals is. We have to get
used to operating in an international system in which a consensus emerges out of a
multiplicity of interests.
The Atlantic community must accept that there are threats wh!ch are variable and
undefineable, but nonetheless very real, and we must create structures than can deal with
them. To do that, we need some sort of political framework in which to reconcile the
assessment of these threats before a crisis arises. In the past, the US and its allies have
used military integration as a substitute for long-range political thinking. TIJC security
threat was so real and so closely tied to the political threat that we did not have to
distinguish between the two. TI1e challenge on both sides of the Atlantic now is to
change this way of thinking and operating.
74
CLOSING
Lord Carrington closed the 40th Bilderberg Meeting with an expression of
appreciation to all those who had made it such a success: the moderators, panelists, and
participants in the discussions for making the sessions especially interesting; French hosts
Marc Ladreit de Lacharriere and Thierry de Montbrial for selecting such a wonderful site;
Felicia Cavasse and her staff for organizing the conference; the staff of the Royal Club
Evian and the Ermitage Hotel for taking such good care of the participants; and the
BiJderberg secretariat under the direction of Maja Banck for its usual efficiency and
thoroughness.
* * * * * *
One of the participants at Evian, Philip Habib, died shortly after the conference
ended. Ambassador Habib, who served as a panelist in one of the sessions, was a
distinguished American diplomat and will be sorely missed by his many friends and
colleagues.
?S
