..
....:...
(Jl
I
0
OJ
....:...
'-J
QC:
~~
~
z
AJ
mr-
mo
)>
Tl
(j)
:::::!
m
-<
z::o
....:...
mm
G)tp
"°
::0
z
(/)
;a
CX>
....:...
m
en
G)
z
-I
oO
mO
~
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
BURGENSTOCK
CONFERENCE
15 - 17 May 1981
NOT FOR QUOTATION
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS ................................................ 5
INTRODUCTION ........................................................ 9
I. WHAT SHOULD WESTERN POLICY BE TOWARD THE SOVIET UNION
IN THE l980's?
American Working Paper . .............................................11
British Working Paper ................................................14
German Working Paper .................................'.............. 17
Discussion ...........................................................24
Changes in the Soviet Union ......................................25
Assessing Soviet Intentions..................................... , ...26
Arms Negotiations and the Military Balance .........................26
II. OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE COORDINATION OF WESTERN POLICIES
American Working Paper . .............................................28
International Working Paper . ..........................................32
Discussion ...........................................................38
Internal Stresses and Strains .......................................38
The Need for Consultation ........................................39
The Middle East ................................................ .40
III. HOW CAN '.fHE WESTERN ECONOMIES PUT THEIR HOUSE
IN ORDER?
American Working Paper . ............................................ .42
German Working Paper .............................................. .47
Discussion ...........................................................52
President Reagan's Economic Program ..............................52
The State's Growing Share of the National Product ..................53
The Decline in Productivity and Economic Growth ..................54
Political Aspects ...................................... :............54
IV. PANEL ON CURRENT INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ISSUES
International Background Paper........................................55
Discussion .. .........................................................56
East-West Economic Relations .....................................56
Energy ..........................................................57
Japan's Performance..............................................57
Trade and Protectionism ..........................................57
Interest Rates and Exchange Rates .................................57
Recycling and Debts ..............................................58
The North-South Dialogue ........................................58
International Economic Cooperation ................................59
V. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
Foreign Policy Prospects Under the New U.S. Administration ........61
Analyzing the French Election Results ..............................62
Crises Outside the NATO Area ....................................62
CLOSING REMARKS ....................................................63
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
Walter Scheel *
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
Victor Halberstadt *
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
Paul B. Finney *
HONORARY TREASURER:
Willem F. Duisenberg *
AEPPLI, OSWALD
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI**
ANDERSEN, TAGE
ANDROSCH, HANNES
BALL, GEORGE w. **
BALSEMAO, FRANCISCO P.
BENNETT, JACK F. *
BERTRAM, CHRISTOPH*
BEUGEL, ERNST H. VAN DER **
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN *
BJ0L, ERLING
BLACK, CONRAD M.
BRINKHORST, LAURENS J.
BUNDY, WILLIAM P. **
CAMUNAS Sous, laNACIO
CARRAS, COSTA *
ELIOT, THEODORE L., JR. *
FINLEY, MURRAY H. *
FISHER, GORDON N.
FLESCH, COLETTE
FoRD, ROBERT A.D.
FRYDENLUND, KNUT
FURER, ARTHUR
FURGLER, KURT
GERBER, FRITZ
GUSTAFSSON' STEN
HALLGRIMSSON, GEIR *
HEALEY, DENIS W.
HEINZ, HENRY J., II **
HERRHAUSEN, ALFRED *
HORN' TANKMAR
HOUTHUYS, JOSEF
HURD, DOUGLAS R.
HYSING-DAHL, PER
IGLER, HANS *
INAN, l<AMRAN
!SELIN, F. EMMANUEL
SWITZERLAND
ITALY
DENMARK
AUSTRIA
U.S.A.
PORTUGAL
U.S.A.
INTERNATIONAL
NETHERLANDS
TURKEY
DENMARK
CANADA
NETHERLANDS
U.S.A.
SPAIN
GREECE
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
CANADA
LUXEMBOURG
CANADA
NORWAY
SWITZERLAND
SWITZERLAND
SWITZERLAND
SWEDEN
ICELAND
UNITED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FINLAND
BELGIUM
UNITED KINGDOM
NORWAY
AUSTRIA
TURKEY
SWITZERLAND
5
'ANSSEN, DANIEL' E. *
ORDAN, VERNON E., JR. *
ULIEN, CLAUDE
~KE, KARLHEINZ
JRKJ>ATRICK, JEANE
JSSINGER, HENRY A. *
J<!GHT' ANDREW *
:oHNSTAMM, MAx **
,AMBERT, BARON *
,AMBRIAS, P.
.ENNEP, ]HR. EMJLE VAN
,EONHARD, WOLFGANG
EVESQUE, JACQUES
,EWIS, FLORA
,IBSEN, Kr.Aus
.IOTARD-VOGT, PIERRE
,UNS, JOSEPH M.A.H.
UTOLF, FRANZ J. *
IAcDoNALD, DONALD S. *
IAcLAURY, BRUCE K. *
IAHONEY, DAVID J.
lATHIAS, CHARLES McC., JR.
lcCoLOUGH, c. PETER
IERTES, ALors
[ILLS, JOHN L.
[ONDALE, WALTER F.
[ONTBRIAL, THIERRY DE *
[OURSUND, TOR
[fuLER, PAUL H.
ETHERLANDS, PRINCE CLAUS OF THE
IQU!LLE, P.F.
~RLUND, NIELS *
SWALD, HEINRICH
[pES, RICHARD
RODI, ROMANO *
DCKEFELLER, DAVID **
DOERS, BERNARD W.
DLL OF IPSDEN, LORD **
iIDEL, HANs
ilLLrERE, ANTOINE *
LVESTRI, STEFANO *
>AMES, LORD
lMMER, THEO *
'EIN, HERBERT
•YLOR, ARTHUR R. *
!ORN' GASTON
ION' MALCOLM
lffiRICHT, VICTOR H. **
,TNE, HANs
iRDONNET, JEAN-FRANCOIS,
ALLENBERG, MARqus *
BCHMAR, BARON R. VON
BELGIUM
U.S.A.
FRANCE
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
UNITED KINGDOM
INTERNATIONAL
BELGIUM
GREECE
INTERNATIONAL
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
CANADA
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
SWITZERLAND
INTERNATIONAL
SWITZERLAND
CANADA
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
U.S.A.
FRANCE
NORWAY
SWITZERLAND
NETHERLANDS
SWITZERLAND
DENMARK
SWITZERLAND
U.S.A.
ITALY
U.S.A.
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED KINGDOM
AUSTRIA
FRANCE
ITALY
UNITED KINGDOM
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
INTERNATIONAL
U.S.A.
SWITZERLAND
NORWAY
SWITzERLAND
SWEDEN
INTERNATIONAL
WERRING, NIELS, JR. *
WILL, GEORGE F.
WoHLIN, LARS
YANKELOVICH, DANIEL
Z'GRAGGEN, ANDREAS
RAPPORTEURS:
GETCHELL, CHARLES *
WINTHROP, GRANT F.
OBSERVERS:
O'CONNOR, PATRICK
SCHWARZENBERG, PRINCE
1
KA!u. J.
IN ATTENDANCE:
GOMES, JOSE LUIS
HARTMANN, HANNO
HOOGENDOORN, ANNE
MCKECHNIE, MALCOLM J.
MULLER, CHARLES
REUTER, ETIENNE
RoE, RAYMOND T.
STOECKER, F.
* MEMBER OF THE STEERING COMMITTEE
** MEMBER OF THE ADVISORY GROUP
NORWAY
U.S.A.
SWEDEN
U.S.A.
SWITZERLAND
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
U.S.A.
AUSTRIA
PORTUGAL
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
NETHERLANDS
CANADA
U.S.A.
LUXEMBOURG
U.S.A.
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
7
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-ninth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Palace Hotel, Biirgenstock,
Switzerland, on 15, 16 and 17 May 1981 under the chairmanship of Mr. Walter
Scheel.
There were 98 participants, drawn from a variety of fields: government and
politics, banking, industry, diplomacy, the armed servi,ces, journalism, trade
unions, transport, education, and institutes specialized· in national and interna-
tional affairs. They came from 18 Western European countries, Canada, the
United States, and various international organizations.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without in any way committing the
organization or government to which they belonged. To allow participants to speak
frankly, the discussions were confidential with no reporters being admitted.
At the opening of the meeting, the Chairman read the text of a telegram of good
wishes which he had sent to the Swiss Federal Council. During the conference, the
Council was the host at a gala dinner presided over by Mr. Kurt Furgler, President
of the Swiss Confederation.
The agenda was a follows:
I. What Should Western Policy Be Toward the Soviet Union in the 1980's?
II. Obstacles to Effective Coordination of Western Policies
III. How Can the Western Economies Put Their House in Order?
·-
In addition, one morning was devoted to a panel discussion-of international
economic issues and another to current events.
9
I. WHAT SHOULD WESTERN POLICY BE
TOWARD THE SOVIET UNION IN THE 1980's?
* * * *
"Dealing with the Soviet Union in the l980's"
Working Paper Prepared by the Hon. Malcolm Toon,
Former U.S. Ambassador to the USSR, Israel, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia
Parity on the strategic level between the U.S. ano the Soviet Union has radically
altered the strategic environment in which the Western Alliance must operate now and
as far ahead as we can see.
For twenty years after the birth of NATO, the superior strategic power of the U.S.
compensated for the Soviet Union's superior conventional strength on the European
continent. This, however, is no longer the case. Today, strategic power cannot serve as a
reliable shield for the defense of Western Europe; and thus some way must be devised
for bringing about parity between NATO's regional forces and those under Soviet
control on the European continent. Recognition of this, of course, lay behind the
decision taken at the ministerial meeting in Brussels last December to strengthen
NATO's theatre nuclear arsenal. It is also an essential backdrop to the wearisome
negotiations on Mutual Balanced Force Reduction (MBFR), which have been a feature
of the international scene for almost a decade.
Despite the problems that beset these courses of action-inter a/ia, Western public
opinion, Brezhnev's chicanery, and our impatience for agreement-we must continue to
pursue both tracks in an effort to narrow the dangerous gap between NATO's and the
Warsaw Pact's capabilities, both nuclear and conventional. This is necessary for two
fundamental reasons: the Soviet threat will not evaporate; and, despite the rhetoric of
the 1980 electoral campaigns, it is highly doubtful that the U.S. will ever again be
strategically superior to the Soviet Union.
While we should give top priority to this objective of coping with the weakened
strategic umbrella and narrowing the gap on the European continent, there is anotlfer
problem-also not envisaged at NATO's birth-that requires.our most urgent attention.
That problem is the Soviet global threat arising from several parallel deyelopments: a
growing and disturbing contempt for the West's will and ability to defend its vital
interests; and the development of a significant global reach-with the formidable Soviet
blue-water fleet, a strengthened and improved long-range nuclear arsenal, acquisition of
bases and pliant allies on several continents, and the willingness to use Cuban and other
proxy forces where they can effectively and safely advance Soviet aims. This is the more
difficult of the two problems confronting NATO, for it forces us as NATO partners to
lift our sights above and beyond the European continent, to revise our perception of the
nature and geographic compass of long-range Soviet strategy, and to arrive at an
alliance consensus on how we should deal with the threats to our vital interests beyond
traditional NATO terrain posed by Soviet expansionism.
Since my return from Moscow in late 1979, I have given much thought to the nature
of the Soviet challenge and how we should deal with it. While disclaiming any real
expertise-since I feel strongly that only those who sit on the Politburo in Moscow can
really fathom Soviet motivations or predict Soviet behavior-let me set forth some
thoughts which apply primarily to the U.S.-Soviet equation but which may provide a
useful input to the development of a NATO consensus.
First, I believe-in the words of the late President Kennedy voiced at the time of the
Cuban missile crisis-that the Soviets do not wish us well. I have no doubt that the
11
Soviets would do us in if they thought they could with acceptable damage to themselves·.
This is simply because they regard the U.S. as the principal barrier to the achievement
of their long-range political goal which, frankly, has not changed much since 1917. That
goal is to recast the world in the Soviet image-not necessarily a totally Communist
world, since even Moscow probably no longer regards this as a viable goal, but at least a
world responsive to Moscow's will.
Second, I believe the Soviets regard detente not as a mechanism for cooperation and
getting along with the capitalist world but as a device for hastening the achievement of
their long-range aims. For them, detente is a device for lulling the free world into a false
sense of security. It is a way of bringing about a degree of orelaxation on their Western
flank because of their concern about China and their desire to avoid hostility on two
fronts. And it is a scheme for getting their clutches on Western technology to shore up
and modernize their creaking economy and thus strengthen their military arsenal.
Third, I feel strongly that the Soviets will continue to seize opportunities in the Third
World to extend their political influence and power even at the risk of jeopardizing
detente and undermining stability and peace, at least on a regional basis. And once they
have established a power center abroad, they will not retreat, as we have seen in Eastern
Europe, in Africa, and now in Afghanistan. If the war between Baghdad and Teheran
continues, the Soviets might find it convenient and safe to intervene. And they might
also make major military moves in Poland if the workers persist in their demands-
demands which by our standards are legitimate and defensible, but heretical and
dangerous by theirs. If the Soviets believe the primacy of the Communist Party is
threatened and their lines of communication with East Germany imperiled, they will
directly intervene.
Finally, it is my strongly held view that despite the dangerously aggressive behavior of
the Soviets abroad and the highly repressive treatment of their citizens at home, we
cannot ignore them. We cannot refuse to deal with them-difficult and uncompromis-
ing as they may be. The nuclear world, in my view, is much too dangerous a place for
such a negative attitude.
But the fundamental problem-which has bedevilled us since World War II and
which now is of greater urgency as we face the increased threats to our vital interests
engendered by Moscow's adventurism and reach-is how to deal with this brutal power
without violating our fundamental principles and beliefs and, more important, without
jeopardizing the security of the Western alliance. This is not an easy question, and none
of us, even those of us who are acclaimed as Soviet experts, has a precise formula. But
while we do not claim to be experts on Soviet motivations or behavior, those of us who
have dealt with the Soviets-not just on an intellectual plane, but operationally in
Moscow and over the negotiating table-have fixed on some parameters and guidelines
which, if understood and heeded, could make it possible for us to engage in an effective
and safe dialogue with the Soviet Union:
(1) We should have no illusions as to what the Soviets are up to, what their long-
range political aims are, and what their basic attitude toward the NATO alliance is. That
attitude, frankly, is one of implacable hostility.
(2) We should recognize that the Soviet view of the ideal world order, its concept of
the proper relationship of man to state-its basic principles and values-is totally
incompatible with everything we believe in and everything we stand for. This means that
on most issues, either in negotiations or simply in diplomatic exchanges, we will find
ourselves at opposite poles from the Soviet Union. And we will see the Soviets trying
ruthlessly to take advantage of the handicaps that traditionally hamper Western
negotiators, including the inexperience of our political appointees, their unabashed
eagerness to curry favor with our adversary, our dedication to principle, and our
passionate and impatient desire for agreement.
12
But we in the West should have enough confidence in ourselves to carry on a dialogue
with the Soviets. We should have the courage and the wisdom to forego reasonable
solutions to the issues that divide us and, if they remain unsolved, will surely undermine
world peace and stability. But our proposed solutions to these problems-if they are to
be viable subjects for negotiatfon-must be seen by the Soviets as not being to their
disadvantage.
It ·is vital that we recognize that we cannot negotiate a position of superiority over the
Sovi+ts. And let me say that for our nation's safety and well-being I would hope that
President Reagan and the people around him who are concerned with foreign and
national security policy understand this clearly. We can negotiate only a position of
equality. This particularly applies, of course, to our appraoch to SALT. Those who now
recommend that we return to the negotiating table, work out a new SALT Treaty clearly
to our advantage, and then ram it down the Soviets' throats simply do not understand
the Soviet Union. I cannot conceive of any circumstances in which a rational Soviet
leader would accept any' agreement heavily weighted in our favor and against their
interests.
(3) We should bear in mind that the Soviets pay little attention to what we say. They
pay attention to and heed only what we do. That is why we must have adequate and
properly deployed military strength as an essential underpinning for our foreign policies
and doctrines. This applies with particular force to the Gulf Region. I am encouraged to
note from statements by the people around Mr. Reagan that the present administration
has a clear understanding of this fundamental point-that a foreign policy without
assured popular support and without the military underpinning to make it credible is
worse than useless. It is downright dangerous.
(4) We should avoid bluff or idle threats in dealing with the Soviets. This simply will
not work with the Soviet Union, as we know from our humiliating experience in the fall
of 1979 over the issue of the Soviet combat brigade in Cuba.
(5) We should studiously avoid joining with the Soviets in making statements or
agreements based on broad principles and pious expressions of purpose. Not only do
these mean different things to different people, but-given the way we operate-they
bind us to promises. Considering their cynical attitude toward promises, the Soviets
have ignored them and will continue to do so when they feel it is in their interest, while
accusing us of welching on our obligations, whether or not this is the case. Any
agreements that we conclude with the Soviet Union should be specific, self-enforcing,
and verifiable.
Now, finally, a few words on alliance behavior, which, as we all know, has on
occasion permitted the Soviets to drive wedges among its members and thus to inch
toward achievement of its political aims in Europe. Each of us must constantly be aware
of the vital concerns of others in the alliance, and in negotiations with adversaries, an
alliance member should never reflect a willingness to abandon its allies just to reach
bilateral agreement with the Soviets. We should bury the suspicions, the recriminations,
the readiness to indict others for ulterior motives that have weakened the alliance
structure in the past and, in the process, have advanced Soviet aims.
In addition, we must arrive at a consensus on the alliance's vital interests-and
frankly, these go far beyond the views of the founding fathers of NATO-making clear
to the Soviets that any encroachment on those interests will trigger a unified alliance
response. For we cannot expect to succeed in convincing the Soviet Union of the need
for restraint if we fail to respond firmly to Soviet challenges. Such a posture is an
essential ingredient to an effective and safe dialogue with the Soviet Union, without
which we cannot hope to preserve stability and peace in the world.
* * *
13
"Russia and the West in the Eighties"
Working Paper Prepared by the Rt. Hon. Denis W Healey, M.P.
(1) Changes in the Soviet Bloc. Some time in this decade there will be a change of
leadership in the Soviet Union. The new leaders may be only a year or two younger than
Brezhnev and his team, or they may be ten or even twenty years younger. Unfortunately
we know little about the views even of Brezhnev's contemporaries like Kirilenko, and
almost nothing about the leading personalities in younger generations. Some experts
think they can detect three groups-the neo-Stalinists, the technocrats, and the "little
Russians"-though they find difficulties in fitting names to these groups. It may be that
the younger the new leaders, the more conscious they will be of their responsibilities for
safeguarding their inheritance against external threats, and the more concerned to
modernize the decaying economic and political structure of the Soviet Union; this is a
common view in Eastern Europe. But we simply do not know. When the change takes
place the West will be wise to seek to get to know the new leaders as soon as possible.
Even Brezhnev has admitted that Russia's recent economic performance has been
disappointing. Agriculture is still a disaster area, and industrial growth has been as poor
as in the countries of OECD. There are signs that Russia may be short of energy in this
decade. But it is as difficult as ever to decide whether the West has an interest in easing
Russia's economic problems by supplying new technologies and helping to develop
Russia's oil resources, and whether various forms of economic sanction will simply lead
Russia to become less dependent on the West and more liable to use military means for
obtaining oil from the Gulf. Experience of the so-called grain embargo suggests that
unless sanctions are loyally applied by all potential suppliers, they may do more damage
to Western unity than to the Soviet economy.
However the Russians ultimately react to current events in Poland, Russia's political
control of Eastern Europe is likely to become increasingly precarious, and her ideologi-
cal influence on Communist parties outside the bloc vestigial. Khrushchev's ex cathedra
denunciation of the doctrine of Kremlin infallibility has dissolved the cement of
international Communism for good.
(2) Europe and the Strategic Balance. Ever since Russia obtained the possibility of
inflicting intolerable nuclear destruction on the U.S. a quarter of a century ago, Europe
·has been unable to rely absolutely on American nuclear retaliation in case of a
conventional attack by Russia-as Secretary Herter pointed out in 1960. The security of
Western Europe has always depended, not on the certainty of American retaliation, but
on its probability if Russia launched a major invasion in which thousands of American
troops were killed. The function of NATO's conventional forces is to ensure that they
can defend Western Europe against anything but a major invasion, as they have long
been able to do.
Unfortunately, although it may take only a five per cent probability of nuclear
retaliation to deter an aggressor, it takes more like 95 per cent probability to reassure an
ally, while from time to time America would like to reduce the need for retaliation to
one per cent or less. The strategic argument inside NATO has largely revolved round
these transatlantic differences of psychology within the alliance. But Russia has never
indicated the slightest readiness to test America's resolve in Western Europe, despite the
fantasies of strategic theorists. I remember, for example, Mr. Paul Nitze's conviction
that the Russians had confected the second Berlin crisis in 1958 in order to inflict a
demonstrative defeat on NATO with conventional weapons, after which the alliance
would disintegrate. In fact they were much more careful to avoid a military confronta-
tion than in the Berlin blockade a decade earlier, when they had practically no strategic
14
nuclear forces at all. The stability of the strategic nuclear balance has proved insensitive
to large variations in the relative striking power of the two world powers.
At present, as the International Institute of Strategic Studies has estimated in "The
Strategic Balance in 1980," the Warsaw Pact has superiority in Europe by some
measures and NATO by others, but the overall balance is still such as to make military
aggression appear unattractive; if Poseidon is included, the Warsaw Pact overall
advantage in arriving nuclear warheads is about one and a half to one. But the growing
Sov\et improvement in the quality of its forces and equipment, and the accelerating
deployment of SS-20 missiles, will give Russia a significant edge in some fields by 1983.
Even this advantage is unlikely to shake dangerously the stability of European balance.
But NATO is bound to try to restore a situation of parity. The question is whether this
will lead Russia into accelerating the arms race further, or into meaningful arms
negotiations. The latter seems more likely if NATO is willing.
(3) Russia and the Wt;st Outside Europe. While, thanks to NATO, Europe has
enjoyed over 30 years of uninterrupted peace, six million people have been killed in 35
wars outside Europe, and many more have lost their homes. The main cause of these
wars has been the instability of the post-imperial settlements, which left a myriad of
national and tribal conflicts unresolved. Russia initially played little or no role in the
great majority of these wars, although she took advantage of some, and assumed a large
part in Korea and Vietnam once the U.S. was involved. But she has derived no lasting
gain from most of her interventions in the Third World. The only dominoes which fell
after America's defeat in Vietnam were Communist dominoes. It is difficult to see her
making lasting gains in Afghanistan which are commensurate with her political and
military losses there.
Nevertheless Russia has substantially increased her capacity for military intervention
outside Europe, initially perhaps because her humiliation in the Cuban missile crisis
gave Admiral Gorshkov the chance of lifting Khushchev's ban on building up the Red
Navy. It is obviously desirable for the West to maintain a comparable intervention
capability. The main problem is to decide when its use would do more good than harm.
In most of the situations which might threaten Western interests, in the Middle East in
particular, Western military intervention would be either impossible or counter-
productive. Indeed even to talk of it has damaged Western influence in the Gulf.
There is a strong case for warning Russia off any military adventures in the Gulf, as
President.Carter did. But that warning derives little additional credibility from the noisy
publicity given to a Rapid Deployment Force which is to be based on Diego Garcia,
4,000 miles away from Kuwait, and which would take up to eight years to become fully
operational. The biggest single threat to world peace in the Middle East would be the
disintegration of Iran as a state, leading to intervention by all the surrounding countries.
Such a situation would require agreement between Russia and the U.S. on how to
regulate their competition there. But when Mr. Brzezinski casually suggested such a
condominium he sowed a suspicion of America's intentions in other parts of the Gulf
which it will take more than a decade to remove.
The main problem which must be overcome before the European governments will
seriously consider contributing to a Western intervention force beyond the Atlantic-
Mediterranean is the yawning gap which separates their belief that local or regional
factors are the root cause of instability in the Third World, from the apparent
conviction of the present American Administration that the root cause is Soviet
intervention. Thus Europe sees a solution of the Palestine problem involving the
participation of the PLO as a precondition of better relations between the West and the
Arab world, and a solution of the Namibian problem along the lines previously agreed
with the front-line states as a precondition of better relations with black Africa as a
whole.
15
Similarly, the initial handling of El Salvador by the new U.S. Administration seemed
to Europe symptomatic of a dangerous misunderstanding by Washington not just of
Central America, but of the Third World in general, a misunderstanding underlined by
savage cuts in American development aid. In gingerly associating himself with Mr.
Carlucci's demand in Munich for European military cooperation in the Third World,
the British Under-Secretary for the RAF felt it necessary to warn: "Western countries
must avoid falling into the trap which the Russians have fallen into of reviving
imperialist attitudes and practices in their relations towards the developing world."
(4) Can the West Cooperate with Russia? Detente has always been an inadequate
word for the sort of cooperation which Western governments have sought with Russia
in areas where they believed a mutual interest existed even though political hostility
remained. By directing attention to what is sometimes the psychological consequence of
cooperation, or even of the search for it-i.e., a relaxation of tension-detente is too
easily derided as a means by which Russia may take the West off guard. Yet in the
Second World War the existence of a common enemy produced five year's cooperation
between America and the Soviet Union to the advantage of both. Are there any
common interests which would justify the search for cooperation now? Of course there
are-above all the risks and costs of continuing an arms race which neither side can win.
There is also an obvious common interest in regulating the political competition
between the two alliances so as to minimize the risk that through misunderstanding it
may lead to a military conflict which neither side wants.
The European countries sometimes have an unappealing ambivalence on these issues,
born of the fear that cooperation between America and Russia might be at their
expense. Memories of Yalta die hard even West of the Iron Curtain. But there is reason
in the widespread popular feeling in Europe that NATO's attempt to improve its
military position relative to the Warsaw Pact will make sense only as the basis for a
renewed attempt to control the arms race. Mr. Weinberger's argument that detente was
the cause of Russia's increased arms spending in the seventies finds little echo in
Europe. President Reagan's formal rejection of SALT II in its present form, and the
long delay in developing an American negotiating position for talks on theatre nuclear
weapons, could compel the European governments to abandon current plans for
deploying Cruise missiles and Pershing 2's. If NATO is not seen also as an instrument of
detente, it could cease to be an effective instrument of defense.
European countries have derived much greater benefits from trade with Russia and
the Helsinki Agreements than has the U.S. Germany in particular has until the Polish
crisis enjoyed human advantages from increased freedom to visit Eastern Europe, and
greater freedom to emigrate from Eastern Europe, which any democratic alliance
should value highly. The case to seek cooperation from Russia in the pursuit of common
interests is compelling.
None of this is to imply that the West should assume that Russia will always enter
negotiations with the desire to reach a fair agreement, or that it should expect
negotiations to be swift or easy. But there are many signs that Russia is worried, even
frightened, by the unresolved conflict between pragmatists and ideologues in Washing-
ton, and looks back on the days of the last Republican Administration as a golden age
which she desperately hopes will come again.
If the West could now show some of the vision-and vigilance-of those days it
might be possible to re-establish a healthier relationship while the veterans Brezhnev,
Gromyko and Ustinov are still in power. To have begun such a relationship could prove
of inestimable value when the change of leadership in the Kremlin finally takes place.
* *
16
"The Soviet Union and East Europe:
Their Problems, Contradictions and Perspectives"
Working Paper Prepared by Professor Wolfgang Leonhard,
Professor, Yale University
Soviet Party Congresses, which take place only once every five years, represent key
events in Kremlin policy. They are the forum in which new guidelines are announced
and poren\ial successors presented. However, the keenly anticipated 26th Party Confer-
ence in February 1981 did not provide any answers to those questions, which are now
acquiring ever greater urgency. The Party Congress did not generate any new guidelines
either on economic reforms, nationality policies, social affairs, culture or ideology.
Moreover, the problem of naming successors to the present leaders remained unre-
solved. No changes were announced among the current leaders.
(1) The Internal Problems and Contradictions of the Present Soviet System. In
terms of domestic policy, the Soviet Union of today is marked by the striking
incongruity between the outdated, hierarchically graded and dictatorially bureaucratic
system on the one hand, and the fresh needs, social forces and objectives of an emerging
industrial society on the other. The existing structures of bureaucratic and centralist
domination serve to thwart economic, technological and cultural advancement and
reveal themselves more and more as a hindrance and obstruction. The urgently
necessary reforms have been recognized and elaborated, but their implementation has
been prevented by the bureaucrats and their powerful apparatus out of fear that they
might lose their power of control and their privileges. The decisive problems faced by
the Soviet Union in domestic policy are as follows:
- The completely inefficient kolkhoz system in agriculture is incapable of safeguard-
ing the supply offood to the population. On repeated occasions in recent years, millions
of tons of cereals have had to be imported from abroad and, in particular, from the
U.S. Following the appalling crop failure of 1980, the harvest for 1981 shows every sign
of being a bad one, too. The food-supply situation is more difficult than ever. Even the
cities suffer shortages of the major foodstuffs and people have to stand in never-ending
queues in front of virtually empty shops.
- The gap between the economic objectives announced in the Party Program of
October 1961 and the given realities is becoming wider and wider. The present state of
the Soviet ecoriom)l is characterized by a lack of economic incentives, the shackling of
the ecomony by an overpowerful bureaucracy, the forced pace of development in heavy
industry and arms production at the expense of light industry and consumer goods, and
the hindrance of technological innovatoin by small-minded bureaucratic interference.
Even though 36 years have passed since the end of the War, the outcome of all this is a
prevailing lack of consumer goods-a phenomenon which has led to dissatisfaction in
wide circles of the population.
- The russijication policy pursued by the Brezhnev regime in a State whose
population includes nearly 49 per cent non-Russian nationalities is encountering more
and more resistance. The insistence on the teaching of Russian (even in kindergartens),
the emphasis placed upon an allegedly "uniform Soviet nation" under clear-cut Russian
domination, and the appointment of Russians to key positions in the non-Russian
Republics of the Union have engendered a mounting degree of opposition from the non-
Russian nationalities. The opposition to russification is particularly strong in the
Ukraine, in Protestant Estonia, in Catholic Lithuania, in Georgia and Armenia, and to
a growing extent in the five Islamic central Asiatic republics of the Union.
- In the social sphere, the problems surrounding the supply of food and the
increasingly flaunted privileges of the functionaries are producing a mounting tide of
17
discontent. The existing level of social inequity and the wide differentials in wages and
salaries are no longer simply accepted without further ado. The increasingly self-assured
Soviet workers can no longer be treated like spineless subordinates. They are now giving
more explicit expression to their demands by strikes and frequent attempts to found free
independent trade unions-moves which are met by arresting the initiators. There is
every likelihood that industrial workers will gain greater influence in Soviet society in
future.
- The ideological influence of the official state doctrine, Marxism-Leninism, has
declined drastically during the last two decades. Whereas millions of people believed in
this doctrine in the thirties and forties, proved willing to accept sufferings and
privations in its name, and saw in Marxism-Leninism a source of inspiration and an
instrument for standardizing the regime, this stance is now a thing of the past. The
decline in ideological influence since Khrushchev's overthrow in October 1964 in
particular has been so drastic that one is now forced to speak of an ideological and
psychological vacuum in Soviet society. This finds expression in the growing resignation
(inter alia in a dangerous increase in alcoholism, too) as well as in the search for
ideological and philosophical alternatives: Christianity, national traditions, ideological-
political alternatives for reform movements including liberalism and democratic social-
ism.
- Although the gigantic machinery of the bureaucratic and dictatorial system is still
very powerful, it is by no means as efficient and as energetic as it used to be. Within the
apparatus, there has been a spread of cynicism, corruption, nepotism, egoism and
careerism which has assumed dangerous proportions for the leadership.
The above-mentioned inconsistencies and problems in the internal political system of
the USSR thus impinge upon the most varied spheres: trade and industry, farming and
food supplies, technological innovations, relations between the nationalities, loss of
ideological impetus, growing social differences and the degeneration of the regime.
Under these circumstances, it is certainly not exaggerated to speak of a crisis in Soviet
Communism.
At the same time, one should not underestimate or deny the many economic, social,
political and-in part-national contradictions in Western democratic systems. Never-
theless, it is clear that the problems of the Soviet Union are much more difficult, serious
a~d profound. In addition, there is no mechanism in the USSR for enforcing the
req).lisite solutions. As a rule, there is not even any possibility of openly discussing the
evident problems and contradictions.
(2) The Soviet Union and the East European States. The problems, inconsistencies
and contrasts listed above for the Soviet Union also apply to the countries in the East
European bloc as these are controlled by the same system (apart from a few unimport-
ant details) and are therefore confronted by the same consequences. The following
points should also be borne in mind in regard to the East European countries, albeit on
a varying scale:
- Internal contradictions and differences are felt more keenly in most East European
nations because the system was forced upon them from outside and because it
discharges its functions with the support of the Soviet leadership. It is therefore deemed
to be an alien domination. The quest for internal reforms in the countries of Eastern
Europe is in most cases inseparably linked with the demand for autonomy and
nondependence. As a rule, the national aspect in the countries of East Europe is
stronger than among the non-Russian nationalities vis-a-vis the "ruling Russian people"
in the USSR.
- The traditions of the East European countries, which differ from those in Russia,
continue to exercise a strong influence. Some East European countries are noted for
their tradition of a multiparty system. In others (notably Poland, but also Hungary to
18
certain extent), there is no denying the great influence exercised by the Catholic Church.
To this must be added liberal and social democratic traditions. All these factors
strengthen the aspirations to pluralism and the yearning for reform.
- Finally, there prevails in wide sections of the population in East European states
the feeling of belonging to Europe. The firm relations and links with West Europe are
by no means only of significance in the economic sphere, but also in cultural and
political affairs. This also exercises an influence in linking democratic reforms with
nati6ria1 independence.
These special features have already found expression in three major attempts to
overcome bureaucratic dictatorship and to bring about a democratization of the system
with a greater measure of independence: the Hungarian Revolution (October-November
1956); the Prague Spring in Czechoslovakia (January-August 1968); and, since July
1980, the renewal movement (Odnowa) in Poland. However different the manifesta-
tions and the methods of c0mbat or the influence waged by the various trends and
socio-political forces in these movements, certain common fundamentals ought not to
be overlooked or denied.
(3) The Latest Developments in Poland. The causes of the Polish renewal move-
ment since the summer of 1980 are to be found in the economic and the socio-political
sphere. In economic terms, the crisis was brought about by: the unilateral investment in
heavy industry, above all in huge prestige building projects which yielded few benefits
for the economy; the neglect of farming and consumer goods production; and the over-
hasty recourse to immense Western loans, whose redemption and interest service ruin
the balance of payments.
In the socio-political sphere, the factors behind the crisis lay above all in: the
luxurious life-style of the prvileged functionaries and the gigantic scale of corruption;
the crisis of confidence among the population in regard to the Party and the
government; the discrediting of the state trade unions; and the discrepancy between the
soothing success stories offered in the press and the realities of everyday life in Poland.
The interaction between economic, political and social factors explains why the
sporadic local strikes, confined to current issues, rapidly grew into a powerful mass
movement expressing a long list of desired reforms covering all the important spheres of
life. The 21-point program drawn up by the strikers in Danzig-the decisive program of
the whole Polish renewal movement-not only refers to current economic-social issues
but also puts forward the demand for political reforms: the introduction of free, self-
administering trade unions; the release of political prisoners; the ending of censorship;
access to the mass media for the views of all ideological movements; and the ending of
privileges for functionaries in the state security service and party machine.
The Polish renewal movement spearheaded by the new independent trade unions
known as Solidarity (which soon united 10 million out of a total of 13 million workers)
is noted for the following features:
a. Militancy and resolution. This was demonstrated by Solidarity's refusal to believe
empty promises and by its recourse to further combat measures in reply to all the
regime's attempts to undermine the realization of their demands by dint of tricks and
maneuvers.
b. Realism. Everything that might have generated complications in foreign policy
was waived. Poland's membership of the Warsaw Pact was never queried; the basic
Socialist system was recognized; and no mention was made of the Soviet Union.
c. Self-discipline. This may be seen in the absence of any clashes with the police
(apart from the Bydgosz incident instigated by the police themselves), riots or outrages,
attacks or looting. No alcohol was consumed on the premises of plants where strikes
were taking place.
19
d. A mass movement. Although industrial workers are the driving force behind
Solidarity, this movement embraces the whole population and enjoys the support of the
farmers, the intellectuals and the youth of the country. This mass movement is
influenced by the representatives of the most widely differing ideologies. Although the
Catholic Church plays a decisive role, there is no denying the presence of social-
democratic and liberal currents of thought.
Under the pressure of a genuine mass movement among the population providing a
wide measure of support for the independent trade unions "Solidarity", wide-ranging
changes took place in Poland between the summer of 1980 and May of 1981-changes
which no one, either in the East bloc or in the West, would have deemed possible only a
year ago. These changes were as follows:
- The Polish Communist leaders had to stop issuing orders from above and, instead,
to take into consideration the moods and demands of the population.
- Hundreds of discredited functionaries-including Gierek himself in early Septem-
ber 1980-were replaced.
- The independent trade unions "Solidarity" not only achieved legal recognition,
but also became an important negotiating partner for the Party and government leaders
with negotations (at least hitherto) usually resulting in a compromise between these two
forces.
- Instead of the one-sided presentation of propagandist success stories in the mass
media, the population were increasingly informed about the real situation existing in the
country.
- The Polish Parliament witnessed serious, critical and frank debates for the very
first time.
- The Catholic Church not only won access to the mass media, but also gained more
and more recognition from the Party and government leaders as an equal partner,
sometimes even being directly wooed.
- In addition to industrial workers, other sections of the population (including
farmers, intellectuals and youth) began to organize themselves as self-reliant and
independent forces. In the long run, it will probably prove impossible to withhold
offical recognition from an independent farmers' union or association.
- Clear-cut differences have emerged within the ruling State Party, the Polish United
Workers Party (with a membership of three million). Today, about one million members
support the independent trade unions "Solidarity" and take part in their campaigns.
There is a growing demand among Party members for democratizing the structure of
the Party. This current of opinion became so strong that the Party leaders decided to
postpone the Party Conference. Despite the relatively major successes achieved in
Poland, it is a striking fact that this powerful movement has largely remained confined
to that country even though the contradictions of the system and the quest for reforms
and non-dependence are without doubt latently present in the other East European
countries, too.
- The confinement of this phenomenon to Poland is primarily due to the success of
Communist Party leaders-particularly in the German Democratic Republic and
Czechoslovakia-in cleverly exploiting national prejudices, presenting one-sided ac-
counts of events, voicing threats and intimidations, and (following the renewed
jamming of Western radio stations since October 1980) drastically curtailing the
dissemination of true information and thus preventing a spread of the Polish renewal to
the other East bloc states.
(4) Moscow and Poland: Military Intervention or "Cold Strangulation"? The final
word on Polish renewal has not yet been spoken. Hopefully, the achievements to date
will be preserved, developed and strengthened. This would produce a pluralism, though
restricted in nature, in Poland. The old distrust would dwindle while resignation would
20
give way to fresh confidence. New hope would be awakened and fresh inititatives
created so as to lay the foundation stone for a gradual economic recovery in the
country. However, these hopes are limited by two dangers from the Eastern bloc
designed, albeit with different means, to terminate and reverse the Polish process of
democratization.
a. The danger of military intervention. The suspicion has often been expressed that
the leaders of the Soviet Union and a number of East bloc states are planning a military
intervention similar to the one in Czechoslovakia in August 1968. Although the massing
of troops 'came to an end in December 1980, the Soviet leaders have hitherto waived the
possibility of a direct military intervention in Poland, because the risk apparently
seemed too great.
Unlike the situation in Czechoslovakia in August 1968, a military invasion of Poland
by Soviet troops would meet with stiff resistance from the entire Polish population, and
would also have to reckon with the possibility that large sections or perhaps even the
bulk of the Polish armed forces'might join the population in opposing the intervention.
A military intervention in Poland in the spring of 1981 would take place at a much
more unfavorable juncture in international affairs for the Soviet government than was
the case with the occupation of Czechoslovakia in August 1968. The leaders in the
Kremlin would have to face not only the most violent reactions in the U.S. and East
Europe, but also the discontinuance of (or at least a drastic cut in) trade relations with
the West, which are so essential for the Soviet leadership. These relations also embrace
the deliveries of grain and the transfer of technology, on which the Soviet Union has to
rely more than ever because of the difficult economic and technological situation. In
these circumstances although the danger of a direct Soviet military intervention cannot
be fully ruled out, it probably does not constitute at present the main danger to the
Polish renewal.
b. The process of "cold strangulation". In my opinion, the main danger to the
Polish renewal lies in a process which may be designated as "cold strangulation". The
strategy pursued by the Soviet leaders (and the governments in Prague and East Berlin)
rests on the hope that the Polish people's will to fight will gradually decline-above all
because of the increasing supply difficulties. The process of "cold strangulation" would
take place as follows:
- The massing of troops, which already ended in December 1980, was intended to
strengthen the_ position of the bureaucratic-dictatorial forces. The Party and govern-
ment functionaries-thus gain an opportunity to intimidate the population and to retard
the attempts at democratization by constant references to a possible Soviet intervention.
- Provocations (such as false reports, the dissemination of leaflets in German by the
alleged former owners of large country estates, etc.) help to bring about situations in
which the Polish state security forces could be called upon to take rigorous action.
- Unsettling and intimidating the Polish population by means of a political and
psychological war of nerves.
- Sowing discord among the various lines of approach within the renewal move-
ment, keeping the more moderate forces in check by means of promises and isolating
the sytematic fighters for "renewal" by virtue of threats and slanders depicting them as
"irresponsible."
- As soon as the situation has calmed down and a favorable point in time has been
reached for the Kremlin, the Polish dictatorial forces (including above all the security
services) will be ordered to eliminate the most active members of the renewal movement
by means of mass arrests and to intimidate the population more than ever.
With the help of this "cold strangulation,'' the leaders in the USSR, Czechoslovakia
and the GDR intend to put on the screw, cautiously but systematically, with the aim of
halting and reversing the incipient democratization process and restoring the bureau-
21
cratic, centralist dictatorship. East bloc leaders will only indulge in a military interven-
tion-following careful consideration of the pros and cons-if the strategy of "cold
strangulation" does not yield the hoped-for results.
The struggle between reformers and dictatorial forces in Poland has not yet been
decided. The outcome of this struggle will hinge not only on the pattern of forces in
Poland itself, but also on future developments in the Soviet Union with the problems of
Brezhnev's successor playing an important role.
(5) The Successors in the Kremlin and the Perspectives ofSoviet Developments. The
change of power now imminent in the Kremlin will take place amid conditions which
are extremely unfavorable for the Soviet leaders: a downturn in the economy, great
difficulties in maintaining supplies, increasing disputes between the various nationalities
in the Soviet Union, the decline in ideological influence, the growth in social tension and
manifestations of degeneration in the regime itself. Furthermore, the developments in
Poland might also cause the Kremlin further difficulties in its East bloc policy. The
current problems of a succession in the Kremlin are marked by the following character-
istics:
- No institutional arrangements exist for a change of power in the Politburo.
Neither the Soviet Constitution nor (and this is more important) the statutes of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union define the function of the Politburo and its
members. There are no binding provisions on a Politburo member's tenure of office or
on the crucial questions as to when, where, how, by whom and in what manner the top
men in the Kremlin are to be replaced by younger members.
- The average age of the Kremlin leaders was never as high as it is today. (The 14
members of the Politburo have an average age of nearly 70.) The four principal leaders
at present are between 74 and 78 years old! Secretary-General Brezhnev is 74; Michael
Suslov, No. 2 among the Kremlin leaders, chief ideologist and Brezhnev's deputy in the
Politburo, is 78; the new, recently appointed Prime Minister Nicolay Tichonov will be
76 in May; and Andrei Kiri!enko, responsible in the Politburo for decisive issues of
Soviet internal policy (including Party questions and heavy industry) is 74. Hence, it is
not simply a question-as is sometimes supposed-of finding a successor to Brezhnev,
but of replacing the four top leaders in the Kremlin. This situation has hitherto never
occurred in the history of Soviet Communism.
- Even though the situation has long since been acute, the present leaders have failed
to take timely steps to "build up" strong successors, to demonstrate their position to the
Party and to the people as future leaders, and to draw the attention of Party
functionaries and members as well as of the general population in good time to the
changes in leadership.
- Finally, the 26th Party Congress itself (held at the end of February 1981) did not
appoint any younger members nor did it refer to the problems of succession. All 14
members of the Politburo, the eight Politburo candidates and the 10 members of the
Central Committee Secretariat (of whom five are simultaneously members of the
Politburo) were reaffirmed in their previous positions. As the next (i.e., the 27th) Party
Congress does not take place until the spring of 1986 according to the statutes, the
change of power in the Kremlin will probably have to take place between two
conferences and this is likely to enhance the uncertainty.
In these circumstances, we shall probably face a fairly long period of succession
before a new post-Brezhnev leadership acquires sufficient authority to take control of
the country's destiny. Under the conditions prevailing during a long period of succes-
sion, various trends and groupings with different objectives could emerge. Special
mention may be made of three movements in particular:
a. The hawks and neo-Stalinists, who are dominated by the exclusive wish to
maintain and strengthen their own power. In their view, detente policy has not helped to
22
make up the leeway in technology nor rendered it possible to develop West Siberia as
desired. In economic terms, it produced a mountain of debts and in political terms-at
least indirectly-it allowed the events in Poland to take place. Hence, the time has come
to replace this policy by a drastically intensified course of action. In domestic policy, the
neo-Stalinists advocate an unrestricted rehabilitation of Stalin, vigilance campaigns and
purges, rigid controls in the economy, a tightening of working discipline and, if
necessary, even an expansion of forced labor. They ·advocate vigorous measures
(possibly including military means) to strengthen the unity of the Soviet bloc. In foreign
policy, they favor a sharpening of demarcation, a clear image of the "enemy," and a
more offensive policy towards the West. Although there is no denying the danger of a
neo-Stalinist setback, there is much to indicate that these forces will not determine
Soviet policy in the long run. Neither the mounting economic problems nor the
increasing social and national tensions can be overcome by neo-Stalinist methods.
b. It could thus happen, yspecially in the course of a fairly long period of
succession, that the "economic modernizers" will prevail. They emphasize not only
power-political interests but also economic necessities. In their opinion, the catastrophic
economic situation-notably the difficulties of supplies and the lagging behind in
modern technology-can only be overcome by a departure from the outmoded
centralist planning system and a series of controlled and limited economic reforms.
They advocate the delegating of responsibility, the strengthening of individual initiative
and greater material inducements as well as a relaxing of the kolkhoz system in order to
overcome economic backwardness. The strengthening of consumer goods production is
designed to bring about a gradual increase in living standards. The "modernizers" also
favor an elastic, modern and more flexible policy so as to defuse internal political
disputes-including, above all, nationality policy and the problems of the social sector.
In the field of foreign policy, the "modernizers" support a return to-or even a
deepening of-detente policy and an expansion of East-West relations. In their view,
Western computers are more important than Afghanistan mountain tribes. They believe
that an expansion of East-West relations is indispensable for the Soviet Union if the
economy is to recover and the leeway to be overcome. The political price for this is one
which can be afforded.
c. The "Russian nationalists" advocate a changeover from the past and present
Party dictatorship to. an authoritarian Russian nation state based on old traditions.
Under the headini· of "homeland, tradition, people and nation," they advocate a
concentration of effort on the traditional pillars of power-the state and the army and a
simultaneous reduction in the size of the Party machinery. Nor should the possibility of
an approach towards the Orthodox Church with far-ranging concessions to Christianity
be excluded. There is reason to believe that a hard line (with a different kind of
justification) will be taken in cultural policy and against the reform-conscious intelli-
gentsia. The nationalists reject both the modernization reforms on the one hand and a
rehabilitation of Stalin and ideological vigilance campaigns on the other.
In foreign policy, they are in favor of retreating from the international scene,
abandoning Soviet commitments in Africa, Asia and Latin America and curbing the
Communist world movement, which is becoming more and more difficult to control.
The present global foreign policy should be replaced by a continental policy in the
traditional Russian spheres of influence, i.e., including predominance in East Europe,
albeit with other means and arguments.
Although the influence of this movement should not be underestimated, it seems to
be weakened by the resistance of decisive elements in the Party apparatus and by the
inevitable aggravation of the nationality problems which would ensue from an unre-
stFicted Russian national policy.
23
A long succession period might well be marked by the struggle between the above-
mentioned three forces. It is also conceivable that there will be transitional stages and
mixed forms or even coalitions. If the succession is relatively stable, this would take
place behind the scenes. If it assumes sharper forms, the struggles might evolve on an
increasing scale in public.
During the succession period, one would have to reckon with a strong and perhaps
even increasing influence of the Soviet armed forces. The army leadership, at present
represented in the Politburo by the 72-year-old Minister of Defense Ustinov, will hardly
make any direct demand in regard to the total assumption of power. The officers and
the army leaders are keen to strengthen their decreased influence, but not to take over
complete power-which would include the burden of responsibility for all economic,
national and social problems.
In the period of succession, the army leaders would probably act as conservative and
authoritarian forces and warn against any "experiments." They would therefore check
the neo-Stalinists if they "were going too far" in their opinion (especially by a public
rehabilitation of Stalin) and also curb the "economic modernizers" if they felt that the
reforms were exceeding a certain level and might introduce a liberalization of the
system. In these circumstance, the army leaders do not make any direct claim to an
assumption of power during the period of succession. However, they will play an
important role as "king-makers" behind the scenes and as a powerful factor influencing
the line of policy to be adopted (perhaps even as an "umpire" between the three above-
mentioned movements).
Irrespective of the pattern which the period of succession assumes, i.e., whether the
leadership succeeds in implementing this with a certain degree of stability or whether
open disputes break out, there is much to indicate that both the population of the Soviet
Union and the East bloc states as well as the West will have to face the probability of a
struggle between the various movements and theories. In domestic policy, the struggle
will probably revolve around economic reforms, the distribution of investments, a
strengthening or weakening of russification, the decision about a stronger neo-Stalinist
line, a Russian authoritarian change or a more flexible and modern economy-oriented
policy. In foreign policy, there will probably be a clear struggle between the continuation
of a global power policy and a concentration upon traditional Russian zones of
influence or else a return to detente and perhaps even a deepening of the latter if the
"economic modernizers" win through.
In these circumstances, the problem of finding successors to the current Soviet leaders
goes beyond inner-Soviet affiars and· it may well exercise a deep influence upon the
further development of East-West relations.
* * *
DISCUSSION
Two fundamental elements of Western policy toward the Soviet Union lay at the heart
of the morning's discussion: the nature of the Soviet threat and NATO's response to it.
It was generally agreed that the Soviet Union continued to pose a threat to the interests
of NATO and the West and that a "dual track" strategy of military preparedness on the
one hand and arms control negotiations on the other was the best way of dealing with
that threat. But many questions provided grist for debate. How much emphasis ought
to be put on one side of the "dual track" at the expense of the other? How great was
the Soviet threat? Had the nature of that threat changed? Had the strategic balance
between NATO and the Warsaw Pact moved in favor of the latter, and, if so, by how
much? What was the role of the Soviet Union in Third World crises, and what should
24
NATO's response be? What were the differing interests of the U.S. and Europe and how
could these be reconciled?
Changes in the Soviet Union. The American working paper set the stage for debate
with its assertion that the nature of Soviet aims had not really changed since 1917; it was
still "to recast the world in a Soviet image." That claim conflicted with extensive
evidence presented by several participants that sweeping, unprecedented changes were
going on within the Soviet Union that promised to alter the nature of the Soviet threat.
These changes were summarized succinctly in the German working paper, which
argued that the Soviet Union was no longer a stable system. There were clear signs of a
degeneration of the current regime: food shortages unprecedented since World War II,
social disputes, and rumblings among ethnic groups. On top of the internal difficulties
was the greatest challenge ever to Moscow's stewardwhip of the Communist bloc: the
simmering situation in Poland. Against this turbulent backdrop, the Soviet Union faced
the prospect of having to replace its aging quartet of leaders. The prospect of new
leadership in the Kremlin presented both a hope and a danger. One of two leading
groups might emerge-the "neo-Stalinists" committed to aggressively furthering the
ideological struggle, or the "economic modernizers," more concerned with remedying
the catastrophic economic situation by departing from the old centralist system and
adopting limited economic reforms.
Other participants expressed similar views of Soviet developments. Some saw signs of
a weakening in Soviet ideology, a diminution of "theological zeal." The Polish situation
was viewed as an indication of Moscow's weakening grasp on East Europe. An
American felt that what was happening in Poland was comparable to what had
happened in Russia in 1905. The Soviet Union was in a "crisis of Stalinism," marked by
a growing incompatibility between the needs of society and those of the state, as
represented by a dictatorial bureaucracy. A Russian dissident philosopher's phrase,
"The people want and the government can't," best characterized what was going in
Soviet society today.
One participant noted that the Soviet "arrogance of power" exhibited at the time of
the Afghanistan incursion had disappeared. With so many internal problems, he asked,
would the Soviets not be ready to accept some. degree of restraint?
How should NATO respond to these developments within the Soviet Union? The
consensus was that we could best discredit the neo-Stalinists by maintaining military
strength; at the same time we should use negotiations to bolster the position of the
economic modernizers. One speaker felt that we should not help the current regime out
of its economic hole by extending credit and providing for technology transfers.
Another stressed the importance of aiding Soviet dissidents. We should make full use of
the Voice of America, BBC, and other means of penetrating the Iron Curtain to speak
directly to the people.
But there were others whose view of events in the Soviet Union was less sanguine. An
American predicted "more of the same" after Brezhnev. The Soviets had faced hard
times before and had survived intact. What was important was their vast and powerful
military arsenal. Several participants were concerned that new leaders in the Soviet
Union would be less experienced and would know little about the outside world. This
might make them harder to deal with; "better the devil you know than the one you
don't."
Others worried that internal problems might make the Soviet Union harder to deal with.
A Briton asked if increasing worry on the part of the Soviet Union might not create a more
implacable foe. An American suggested we should not bank too much on a change in
leadership bringing about a change in policy; instead we should be concentrating on getting
our own house in order. In dealing with a weakened Soviet Union, said another American,
we should be subtle and careful not to push them to "exhibit their manhood."
25
Assessing Soviet intentions. While it was relatively easy to agree that the Soviet Union
was in a period of transition, it was not so easy to agree upon the significance of the
changes going on. Nor was it any easier to find consensus on Soviet intentions and
attitudes toward the NATO alliance and areas outside it, especially the Third World.
An American said bluntly that the Soviet Union "does not wish us well." Its real
intentions had not changed. It had exploited detente to further its political goals, and it
had exhibited a growing contempt for the West's will to act.
A Briton had a different opinion on the Soviet attitude toward the West, and
particularly toward the U.S. will to use its nuclear arsenal. There had been doubt for
over 20 years about the U.S. willingness to use the nuclear shield in defense of Europe.
Indeed, there was evidence today that the Soviet Union was no more ready to risk war
now that she was far stronger militarily than ever before. The Soviet Union was more
impressed with the increase in U.S. capacity than in any putative decline in the U.S. will
to use it. Soviet intentions were hard to estimate. There had been repeated false
predictions about Soviet behavior. Contrary to many expectations, it had stayed out of
Iran, out of post-Tito Yugoslavia, and, so far, out of Poland.
A Canadian struck a middle ground, arguing that, while the Soviets were not
"suicidally-minded" and wished as much as we to avoid a confrontation, the nature of
the West's relationship' with the Soviet Union would always remain confrontational.
Even in periods of relatively good relations with the West, Soviet actions would always
seem aggressive and hostile. It would be impossible for the Kremlin to refuse help to
leftist or pro-Soviet movements. But the Soviets were obsessed with the U.S.-with its
power, prosperity, and technical skill. They wanted very much to reestablish their
special relationship with Washington.
Nowhere was the debate on Soviet intentions and Western interests more sharply
focused than on the issue of Third World conflicts. An American participant's call for
the West to defend vital interests wherever they might be encroached upon prompted
some criticism of the alliance, and especially of the U.S., for seeing all global problems
in the context of East-West conflict. Local and regional factors were important and
should be considered. A separate Third World interest needed to be demonstrated. To
see East-West confrontation in each conflict was a disturbing tendency in the new
American Administration.
The counter-argument was that because the Soviets saw all global problems in terms
of East-West relations, the U.S. was forced to do the same. An American argued that,
while the U.S. did not see "the Soviet bogeyman" in all conflicts, there were certain
conflicts going on in Third World areas which clearly and demonstrably had been
importantly shaped and influenced by Soviet expansionism.
Some participants thought there was a lessening in Third World competition, that
there was a disinclination on the part of many Third World leaders to become pawns of
the Soviet Union. This was a situation of which NATO should take advantage. A Briton
argued that the alliance and the Soviet Union had a common interest in agreeing to
lessen cbmpetition in the Third World. But others saw no tendency on the part of the
Soviet Union to become less active in the Third World.
Arms negotiations and the military balance. Several participants agreed with the
contention in the British working paper that the strategic balance between NATO and
Warsaw Pact forces was still more or less intact. True, the Soviet Union would soon
have a significant edge in some areas if the current pace of military build-up continued.
But even this advantage was not likely to shake the stability of the Western alliance. Of
greater urgency than any NATO effort to redress a military imbalance was the need to
resume arms limitation negotiations.
Several speakers from smaller nations strongly echoed the call for immediate
resumption of talks. A Dutch participant expressed "deep disappointment" in the U.S.
26
failure to ratify SALT II. He worried that nuclear superiority was, after all, what NATO
was striving for. There was a concern widely held in smaller nati.ons that the U.S. was
not ready to engage in negotiations. If this was so, then the U.S. risked the alienation of
the smaller countries and the possibility of growing neutralism and pacificism in them.
An American wished that his country's Administration would speak with more clarity
and force concerning its commitment to negotiations. While the West had to match
Soviet forces or suffer a profound loss of viability and strength, the people of Europe
had w b'e reassured that the other side of the dual track was being pursued. Either
SALT II should be ratified, or negotiations toward a revised treaty be initiated.
Some participants felt there was too much emphasis on arms control. A Dutchman
criticized the "total priority of domestic economic and political considerations over
defense requirements." A Briton argued that the alliance must take the necessary steps
to defend itself, to deploy the necessary defensive weapons. An International partici-
pant expressed doubt that NAT,O could adequately defend itself. The Soviet arms build-
up would continue despite its internal problems. Warsaw Pact capabilities already
exceeded those of NATO in all categories. The ability of NATO to counter the Soviet
threat was declining, the gap was widening, the credibility of the deterrent diminishing.
Commitments from NATO partners were becoming overdue promissory notes.
Many speakers spoke of the need to educate the people of the NATO nations about
the severity of the Soviet threat. The difficulty in rallying public opinion in support of
NATO goals was great. The lack of synchronization of public opinion on both sides of
the Atlantic, a British speaker argued, could frustrate NATO's progress down the dual
track. People were influenced by "attractive new voices expressing old illusions." More
should be done to defend NATO's positions publicly. But there was a tendency for
NATO to keep secrets from the public; this arose in part from the needs of the
intelligence community. Still, there was a great need for public evidence of the risk
NATO faced in not maintaining strong defenses.
An American speaker saw a "state of confusion" in the West. If we were to be
serious about negotiations, we had to define what it was we wanted to negotiate for. On
the one hand we had to stop Soviet expansionism; on the other, we had to offer some
form of negotiation which clearly illustrated our idea of a peaceful world. Looking at
the Soviet Union and the West, the speaker saw two systems "in a state of disintegra-
tion." But the Soviet disintegration was in structure; ours was a disintegration of will,
which was therefore much more easily remedied.
*
* *
27
II. OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE
COORDINATION OF WESTERN POLICIES
* * *
Working Paper Prepared by the Hon. George W. Ball,
Senior Managing Director, Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb, Inc.
The first Bilderberg Conference which met at the end of May 1954, at the Bilderberg
Hotel in Oosterbeek, Holland, concentrated on trying to reconcile the views of
Europeans and Americans with regard to four issues: Communism and the Soviet
Union; dependent areas and peoples overseas; economic policies and problems; and
European integration and the European Defense Community. The participants quickly
discovered that most of their differences resulted from the disparity in conditions
prevailing on the two sides of the Atlantic. The war had been over less than a decade
and, compared to Europe, the U.S. was overwhelmingly rich, militarily powerful and
prepared to engage its might and influence almost anywhere in the world. The
European nations were poor, militarily weak, and, rather than extending their world
involvement, several were still engaged in shedding their vestiges of empire.
Although everyone in attendance worried about Soviet expansionism, there were
sharp differences in assessing the nature of the threat. The Americans spoke of
Communism as a foreign conspiracy, alien to all American national traditions and
traitorous in nature. Europeans tended to regard Soviet Communism, though dan-
gerous, as merely an ugly perversion of certain left-wing movements with long historical
backgrounds. Views were divided on the issue of coexistence. Many of the Americans
seemed to share John Foster Dulles' conviction that coexistence was impossible so long
as the Soviets continued their present aggressive policies. But the Europeans seemed
generally to believe that, with a sufficiently long period of coexistence, the internal
contradictions of the Soviet world were bound to turn in favor of the West.
Both groups saw the military danger primarily in terms of a Soviet threat to extend its
power across the face of Europe; they had far less concern for other potential trouble
spots. In addition, the Americans still suffered from the shocking revelation that, with
Moscow's possession of nuclear weapons, the U.S. was, for the first time in 150 years,
vulnerable to attack from abroad.
On this twenty-seventh anniversary of Bilderberg-or, if you prefer, the first meeting
of Bilderberg II-we are still preoccupied with Western cohesion and are, I think, still
agreed on the centrality of the bipolar conflict. But there has been a sweeping change in
the underlying conditions-and hence of the problems involved-in maintaining cohe-
sion.
We continue to take it for granted that the U.S. will indefinitely carry the burden of
responsibility in strategic nuclear matters. But can we be so sure, as in 1954, that,
without some European assistance, America will always be ready and willing to resist
Soviet power wherever it may obtrude beyond the containment lines worked out in the
immediate postwar period?
Today the certitudes of a quarter-century ago are vulnerable to challenge. Though
three decades have wiped out some of the differences in approach and attitude between
Europe and America, they have widened and deepened others; and countries on
opposite sides of the Atlantic no longer have the same degree of congruence either in
interests or attitudes that once existed. Relative circumstances have greatly changed.
Rather than being incomparably richer, Americans now have little, if any, advantage in
per capita income as compared with the people of several Western European countries.
Where in the early 1950's economists regarded the dollar as good as gold and described
28
the intractable dollar gap as structural and permanent, we are now confronted by a
weakened dollar and an equally troubling dollar surfeit. The U.S. no longer leads in the
rate of increase of productivity; indeed, the American productivity curve is almost flat,
while in many sectors American technology has been equalled if not surpassed by Japan
and some European nations.
In principle, this movement toward economic equality on the two sides of the Atlantic
should contribute to a greatly strengthened West. But the shift in the balance of wealth
and income has not been accompanied by any commensurate redistribution of political
or mifitary responsibilities outside the European theater. Europeans continue to expect
the U.S. to stand guard against Soviet expansion wherever it may occur in the world-
and many Europeans seem quite cross when America fails to do so. Though economi-
cally strong, European nations feel inhibited by their limited size and resources, disabled
from playing more than a regional role. Europe, in other words, is far less than the sum
of its parts, and the hopes mi;my of us once entertained that Europe would evolve a
political structure enabling its peoples to focus their politics, and mobilize their energies
and resources, toward a common purpose have not been realized. In spite of the
progress made toward economic collaboration, Europe's political and security relations
with the rest of the world are conceived almost entirely in national terms.
As time goes on that will inevitably result in an increase in resentment and
misunderstanding; yet neither side has found an adequate way to deal with the problem.
American governments find it irksome to consult with European nations in response to
Soviet threats, and tend toward an absent-minded unilateralism. European governments
constantly complain about a failure of consultation, and chide the U.S. for moving
precipitately and sometimes reacting excessively. Yet it seems likely that European
governments often welcome Washington's failure to consult since that exonerates them
from responsibility. So we live with a succession of recriminations-from Europe
because America has failed to consult, from America because Europe has failed to join
in an effective response to Soviet provocations.
So long as the U.S. maintained its postwar resilience and confidence the issue was less
important; Washington found it easier and less co'mplicated to go it alone. But that
feeling was weakened by America's nine years of self-destructive and irrelevant
embroilment in Southeast Asia followed by the squalid events of Watergate. Feeling less
strong in will and capability and threatened by economic competition, more and more
Americans ar_e beginning to resent having to carry a lonely burden; yet, at the same
time, U.S. goveritments-particularly when the leadership is inexperienced-are often
insensitive to the need to organize a common effort with Europeans who prefer advising
and scolding to common action. So American presidents act first, consult later, and are
surprised when the troops do not follow.
Paralleling these fundamental changes on the Western side have been at least three
changes worth noting in the Soviets' situation. Moscow can no longer conceal from the
Soviet people that its command economy does not work, and that discouraging fact is
increasingly apparent to the peoples of Eastern Europe. Accompanying that realization
is a progressive secularization of Soviet society. The gas has largely escaped from the
ideological balloon; the Soviet hierarchy no longer provides the infallible Vatican for a
world Communist system. No longer an effective evangelical power, the USSR looks
more and more like a czarist empire of the past, strongly influenced by the cultural
residue of the Mongol invaders-boorish in manner, expansionist in ambition, cruel and
repressive in its methods of ruling. Though that point has, I think, been increasingly
understood in Europe, not all Americans fully comprehend it. One can still detect in the
pronouncements of America's new Secretary of State a suggestion that the Soviet Union
is still ideologically driven rather than.merely a ruthless totalitarian power with excessive
world ambitions.
29
Any comfort we might derive from the economic failure and the secularization of the
Soviet Union is largely offset by the phenomenal extension of the Soviets' military
reach, not merely in strategic weapons and the missiles to propel them, but also in
conventional power. Walter Lippmann used to tell me that we could deal with the Soviet
Union effectively so long as it remained an elephant capabie of trampling across the
European land mass, but we would be gravely menaced were it to develop the additional
attributes of a fish and a bird. That, indeed, is what has happened. Though the Soviet
Union has lost much of its ideological attraction for Third World countries, its extended
military reach provides a formidable offset.
That causes proper concern, particularly for a U.S. expected to neutralize the Soviets'
sea and air power wherever it may be employed. At the moment, the new American
Administration is making a long overdue effort to increase America's conventional
military power, but it is concentrating on the wrong deficiency-buying new hardware
while ignoring the lack of competent manpower. Its defense exertions will yield major
results only when it faces up to the need for some system of national service.
Another element of potential division in the West results from the divergence of
individual Western interests in developing economk and political relations with the
COMECON nations. That is reflected in disparate definitions of detente.
The American people do not have a monolithic view about detente and the related
issue of East-West trade. Some, in the upper reaches of the new Reagan Administration,
would appear to prefer the simplicities of a direct cold war struggle to the more complex
task of finding areas of common interest with Moscow. To other Americans-and this,
I think is the majority view-detente is simply a condition in which superpower
relations can be maintained at a state of relative civility and tension short of the
immediate threat of armed conflict. In contrast, detente for the West Germans is not
merely theoretical but operational. Under its conceptual umbrella Berlin has been
relatively free of harassment; Bonn has been able to arrange the return of thousands of
Germans from Poland and has developed procedures to ease the agonies of separation
between members of families in East and West Germany.
Europeans are primarily interested in detente as contributing to the stability in
Europe, and they shy away from such concepts as linkage. America, on the other hand,
is preoccupied with a broader range of Soviet activities such as proxy intervention in
Africa and-at the moment-in the U.S. sphere of influence in Latin America.
Trade between Eastern and Western Europe has a long history. The U.S., on the
other hand, never had much commerce with Russia, and ever since the beginning of the
cold war it has regarded East-West trade as more a political tool than an economic
asset. This disparity of factual situations was clearly revealed when the Soviets invaded
Afghanistan. The U S. was quite willing to impose sanctions in the form of trade
embargoes against the Soviet Union, though even Washington found it more difficult to
cut off wheat sales. That reflected a curious evolution of attitude. As recently as 20
years ago, vocal opinion in the conservative American wheat-growing states regarded
the idea of selling grain to the Soviet Union as supping with the devil. Last year, those
same states were outraged when Washington halted Soviet grain sales.
America's greatest fear today is the spreading of Soviet influence in the Middle East.
Once the Middle East was important as the nexus of trade routes; today its strategic
value depends on its oil production. Though oil became a subject of urgent world
concern only seven years ago, it is now the greatest potential menace to Western
cohesion. The simple fact that the U.S. per capita consumption of a vital but potentially
scarce commodity is double that of Europe is a built-in source of resentment should
shortfalls occur. Once again, one can note odd contradictions. For many years there was
an imbalance between producers and consumers; American enterprises, together with
the British, controlled the production of Middle Eastern oil, yet continental Western
30
Europe provided their principal market. Today, that imbalance is of a' different kind;
Persian Gulf oil is far more important to Western Europe and Japan than to America,
yet America has preempted the Middle East diplomacy essential to keep the oil flowing.
That, in itself, might not be objectionable to Europeans were the U.S. free to shape its
diplomacy to serve American and European interests. But American diplomacy suffers
domestic constraints and disabilities that could at some time provoke Arab-and
particularly Persian Gulf-producing states to reduce the flow of oil to the jeopardy of
the who\e Western economy. Logically America should encourage a European diplo-
matic·· initiative, and try to work with European nations in shaping a common
diplomatic approach, but I doubt that will happen. So long as American diplomacy
remains stifled in the narrow bilateral Camp David framework, it cannot adequately
deal with the issues of the Palestinians or Jerusalem which are central to any ultimate
peace. Egyptian-Israeli relations only marginally relate to oil and the security of the
Gulf.
If the Persian Gulf oil flow should ever be curtailed-whether through the political
decision of Arab oil-producing countries, political upheavals in key oil-producing states,
additional wars between nations in the area, or (most dangerous of all) the extension of
Soviet influence into Iran or some other littoral state that would enable Moscow to
control Gulf traffic-it could have shattering consequences for European-American
solidarity. Were the Soviet Union ever to obtain a mastery of Gulf traffic, individual
nations of Europe would be greatly tempted, one by one, to seek accommodation with
Moscow.
These are some of the longer-range trends that could undercut Western cohesion-the
disparity in the distribution of responsibilities, the extension of the Soviets' military
reach, a differing appreciation as to the meaning and necessity of detente, and the
potential dangers surrounding the high dependence on, and uncertain availability of,
oil, particularly in relation to the U.S. monopoly of Middle East diplomacy. In
addition, more immediate sources of division derive from contrasting views as to the
requirements for effective deterrence and defense. These have been given special
urgency by the Soviets' rapid progress in expanding its strategic arsenal and diminishing
America's qualitative lead. The strategic balance can be rectified by the U.S. and it is
essential that it be done promptly but, at the same time, Washington must promptly
renew discussion of strategic arms limitation.The assured survivability of America's
second strike· ca~ility is essential to the maintenance of confidence in its nuclear
umbrella.
Meanwhile, the Soviets' possession of SS-20's, and their huge advantage in tanks and
manpower, pose problems of direct and immediate concern to the NATO countries. The
implications of Soviet superiority in Europe emphasize not only the need for cruise
missiles and theater nuclear weapons capable of reaching Soviet targets but also of
neutron bombs for tactical battlefield deployment. These are subjects with heavy
political overtones on both sides of the Atlantic but primarily in Europe. They deserve
far quieter and more rational discussion than has been the case so far, including a better
mutual understanding as to their relation, if any, to the issue of "decoupling," which, as
presently posed, verges on the theological. In addition, we face an immediate question
as to how and by whom the Gulf is to be protected as well as much clearer agreement on
the dangers of nuclear proliferation and how to deal with it.
Europe's confidence in America has unquestionably suffered during the last few years
from the jerky and erratic conduct of American policy and its lack of focus. If America
is to regain the world's confidence it must never again negotiate for seven or eight years,
then, as in the case of SALT II or the Law of the Sea Treaty, suddenly repudiate all that
has been achieved.
31
The issues mentioned so far relate primarily to p·olitical and security matters, but
Atlantic relations also are endangered by ill-conceived economic policies. Nothing could
do more harm to Atlantic harmony than a resurgence of protectionism either in the
U.S. or Europe. During recent years massive American balance of payments deficits
have undoubtedly contributed to inflationary forces in Europe, while at the same time,
American efforts to restore the value of the dollar and to halt inflation evoke cries of
anguish from European financial centers. If the dollar is too high, Europeans complain
that they must pay too much for the oil OPEC quotes in dollars; if the dollar is too low,
Europeans fear that it may inspire OPEC to raise prices. If interest rates are high,
Europe is troubled by capital flows to the U.S.; if interest rates are low, increased
American balance of payment deficits can result in excess liquidity.
Europe and America also need a better common approach to economic relations with
the Third World. With America infected by a budget-cutting fever, foreign aid may be
an early victim-even to the point of weakening our multinational institutions. In
addition to jeopardizing foreign aid's larger purposes, the U.S. Congress is currently
threatening to deprive America of two necessary political instruments: ample and
flexible economic aid and foreign military assistance. That trend must be reversed or we
shall find ourselves with sticks but no carrots.
Many Europeans were worried when the U.S. ceased to play an assiduous role as
world policeman and equally upset when America became the world's nanny. The
Carter Administration was, they declared, injecting human rights into American policy
far too rigidly and sanctimoniously. Today, I sense a similar apprehension regarding the
current trendy antiterrorism campaign, and I confess to sharing that concern. It is not at
all clear why antiterrorism and a concern for human rights should seem mutually
exclusive elements of policy.
The ties between the Atlantic nations have a rich foundation of common culture and
history. Our political systems are based on common democratic principles. Our
economic systems all reflect-to greater or lesser degree-a heavy dependence on
market forces. We have gone far to liberalize our trade relations and to establish
common rules for our economic and financial activities. Yet during three decades of
cold (moderating to chilly) war, the force that has given common purpose and definition
to the imperative of solidarity is primarily a fear of Soviet expansionism. Today that
fear, though still a reality, is offset and deflected by other trends and forces which tend
to reduce its cohesive effect, and, though we can count on recurrent Soviet bloody-
mindedness to renew it periodically, that prospect is not very attractive. Sooner or
later-if we continue to hold together-we are going to have to develop far more
effective institutional arrangements-which, in turn, depend on changing our habits of
thought and approach. How soon or even whether that will occur is by no means
certain.
* * *
Working Paper Prepared by the Hon. Gaston E. Thorn,
President of the Commission of the European Communities
Mirroring George Ball's excellent contribution to these proceedings, I would like to
submit a succinct analysis of the reasons behind the misunderstandings hampering
relations between Western partners which are unfortunately becoming more and more
frequent. I will try to explore ways in which these difficulties could be tackled, or at
least indicate possible improvements to the machinery of coordination between the
industrialized powers of the West.
32
I
I
I
.t
1
t
I
i
i
I
f
l
First, one or two preliminary remarks. When we talk about Western policy, we are
naturally considering the West as a whole, that small group of countries bound in
alliance and solidarity by a common faith .in democracy and a particular pattern of
civilization, and by an awareness of the international responsibilities conferred upon
them by their highly industrialized; technologically advanced and affluent status.
At a time like the present, when a new Administration has taken over in Washington,
it is undoubtedly essential to concentrate our attention on transatlantic relations, but I
feel also. that it is exceedingly important not to overlook the fact that the Western world
centers on three major economic blocs: the U.S., Japan and the European Community.
I will, like George Ball, focus on America and Europe, but I wish to emphasize that
there is this wider dimension to the "West".
For a number of years now, relations between Europe and America have been
suffering from a high degree of mutual misunderstanding. The strain and friction
between the U.S. and Europ(J! is partly due simply to accidents, to unfortunate
coincidences, but there are also ·deep-rooted historical and geopolitical causes. The
frequent vacillation, mistakes or fumblings of recent U.S. administrations have under-
mined the European leader's confidence in them, while on the American side there has
been a failure or an unwillingness to understand the less categorical European position
on various issues (Iran and the Middle East in particular), leading to accusations of
wavering loyalty or weakness.
But over and above incidents such as these we have the consequences of the structural
changes in Western society and the rise of a new generation. In Europe and the U.S. the
younger generation are increasingly turning in on themselves and moving towards
nationalist sentiments and parochial concerns. (I use these terms in the objective rather
than the pejorative sense; the concern for ecology, for example, is in itself wholly
justifiable, but it often reflects this inward-looking tendency.)
After the War, and throughout the fifties, the Western camp was held together by the
common reconstruction effort and the need to face up to a huge and formidable
enemy-the Soviet Union and the bloc it had formed. Economic success, the affluence
of the sixties and the rise of a new generation led-in Europe, at least-to a less
confrontational view of the world situation, and perhaps slackened the bonds of the
Western alliance. Narrower issues came to the fore again, and the differences which had
been smoothed over in the desire to stand together against totalitarianism once again
loomed large:
The geopolitical situation has also changed, altering the issues at stake in foreign
policy. While America, after the Vietnamese tragedy, is showing signs of impatience
with the Third World, Europe has become fully aware of the need for understanding
between the industrialized and developing nations, between the countries with the know-
how and those with the raw materials. Europe has taken on the role of protagonist in
the North-South dialogue, while America is tending to hold back.
This shift is actually a reflection of the profound alteration in the internal balance
within the free world. For centuries, Europe's history was a catalogue of invariably vain
attempts by one kingdom, nation or state to gain dominance over the others. Interne-
cine wars-civil wars, indeed-succeeded one another without ever enabling any leader,
any nation or state, to establish a lasting, stable hegemony.
It is a depressing sight for the philosopher or historian today to witness the states of
Western Europe still at odds, still squabbling for captaincy of the second eleven. The
goal of European union, the dream of a European political coalition propounded after
the Second World War by statesmen endowed with vision and dogged courage were
inspired by the very thing that gives the U.S. its strength, the forging of a union which
transcends differences.
33
While on this point, I should like to make two comments. The first is that European
unification is still after all in its infancy and naturally subject to teething troubles.
Ironically enough, today it is the European Community which is the New Continent
insofar as it is young and lacking in experience, in contrast to a U.S. whose institutions
date back over more than 200 years. The second is that it shows clumsiness on the part
of the U.S. to try to tell us which of the cousins in Europe it wants as principal
interlocutor.
Admittedly, the American public shows little interest in what is going on in Europe,
especially Western Europe. The lobbies representing immigrants from Eastern Europe
(and Israel as well) do not have equivalents putting the French, British or EEC case.
What is more, America has the impression that Europe as a partner is failing to take on
its full responsibilities, indeed that it is both thankless and disinclined to shoulder its
share of the burden of defending the West.
As regards the operation of the political institutions in the U.S., Congress and the
lobbies are interfering more and more in the running of affairs, especially in the
formulation of foreign policy. This in itself breeds uncertainty and misgivings. Over on
this side of the Atlantic chaos also reigns. As a club of sovereign states greatly attracted
to their traditions and history, the Community can speak for Western Europe with one
voice on only a very limited number of subjects. Mr. Kissinger's anguished "Who do I
ring when I want to talk to Europe?" has lost none of its poignancy.
But we feel it is of prime importance that the dangers inherent in the principal-nation
approach should be highlighted. The dialogue between the two sides of the Atlantic
must not be restricted to a privileged relationship between the U.S. and two or three
traditional European powers. Such an approach would engender indifference, and
subsequently nonalignment, among the countries left out, and this would act as a kind
of insidious gangrene which would soon eat away at the whole continent.
It may be difficult for America as a superpower to envisage close relations based on a
true partnership with all its Western allies, but this is the only way in which all free
nations, from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, can be inspired with a sense of
Western solidarity.
And for goodness' sake let us stress the importance of being partners and allies,
rather than satellites, even if admittedly the partners are not all equal.
The assertion of a new strength, of a new dignity, has led the U.S. Administration to
make some questionable moves, such as representations to the EEC on food aid to EI
Salvador, or the affair of the grain embargo. In response to the U.S. ban on grain sales
to the Soviets, Europe took tremendous trouble to ensure that the embargo would be
effective by refusing to make up for the lost American supplies by sales·of their own.
The U-turn in America's position for domestic policy reasons inevitably put up the
backs of those in Europe who had gone to great lengths to preserve a united front on
the embargo despite real commercial loss and sacrifice caused to our farmers and
traders. It is essential that genuine trust should be restored as quickly as possible
between the leaders of the West, so that coordinated stands can be taken on the major
issues on which the welfare of our countries and world peace and stability depend.
We in Europe are confident that by reason of their history and cultural affinities, our
American allies are ideally placed to grasp our particular situation and understand our
sensitive points. And yet we still have to protest against attitudes often dictated by hasty
oversimplifictions. For example, there sometimes seems to be a tendency to gloss over
the fact that the Iron Curtain-and the Wall-cruelly divides one of the major nations
of Europe into two. We must beware lest the raw scar admit the germs of neutralism or
become inflamed by the fevered ache of illusory hopes.
There is a danger that America's ambitions to restore and strengthen its hegemony in
the world may have the effect of placing every incident, every crisis, in ·an exclusively
34
t
J
~{
J
i
j
'I
I
East-West light, with the more or less implicit rider that solutions are to be found in the
East-West balance of power alone. Against such a background, European attitudes,
which in any event are seen in simplistic terms, irritate the Americans and lead to talk of
the neutralization or "Finlandization"of Europe. There is no doubt that the breakdown
of detente has caused considerable disappointment in Europe. The hopes of peace in
Europe and a relaxation in East-West tensions raised in the early seventies have been
cruelly dashed. But it would be a mistake to underestimate the attractions for some of
continuing with detente without regard to the real danger of the Soviet threat, while
playing.-Oown the importance of Soviet intervention in the Third World. Nor should it
be hard to appreciate how difficult it is to put over to the European man in the street
the Western position regarding the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in the light of the
way the grain embargo against the USSR was applied and then lifted.
The important thing is to restore the credibility of the Western Alliance. America
often reproaches Europe for not being more enthusiastic about NATO or willing to bear
a larger share of the costs, while being quite happy to take shelter under the American
nuclear umbrella.
I am not about to launch into the vexing question of the effectiveness of the alliance,
its military effectiveness in particular, but undeniably one of the reasons mentioned for
France's departure from NATO was that there were no plans to share the nuclear
responsibility. France has since equipped itself with a nuclear capability and
strengthened its conventional forces, and is now probably a more sought-after partner
for the U.S. than it was while within the military wing of the alliance.
Faced with the complaint that Europe is reluctant to shoulder its share of the burden
of defending the West, we must consider the military provision afresh on the basis of a
sounder understanding. In my view this calls, among other things, for better coopera-
tion on the matter of equipment. Is it really right that U.S. industry should be supplying
over 80 per cent of the European armies' military hardware, particularly in the field of
heavy equipment and advanced technology? Would it not be wiser to give a bigger share
to European research and industry and spread the contracts on both sides of the
Atlantic? One possibility would be to share the task of equipping the Western forces
and divide the development and production of weapons systems between firms and
research facilities on both sides of the Atlantic. Public opinion is undoubtedly more
sensitive to this type of political and military issue than to any latent or overt
misunderstandings affecting trade or economic relations between the U.S. and the
Community. · -
We are in the midst of the most deeply-rooted economic crisis since the dawn of the
industrial era, and it is jeopardizing our whole society and civilization. In this climate of
recession and unemployment, giving rise to insecurity and suspicion, withdrawal into
autarky and xenophobia is a very real danger to Western solidarity and cohesion. In this
connection, I think it is important to set aside emotional responses and uphold the laws
which govern relations between us. We must see that international trade agreements are
honored, and extend this approach to all the major Western trade powers. We must see
that the Tokyo Round GATT agreements are fully and fairly implemented and act with
all speed to stop the present deterioration in the situation. Protectionism is no solution
at all. By taking refuge behind artificial barriers we may for a time be able to claim that
we are saving our threatened industries, but the respite is only temporary; in the end the
axe will fall. Protectionism keeps inefficient, costly industries alive, disturbs the balance
of the markets, fuels inflation and discourages innovation and new investment, while its
external effect is to invite reprisals and deprive us of markets.
Looking back over trade relations between the U.S. and the rest of the world since
the Second World War, one is struck by the fact that whenever a new president moves
into the White House, the press and political circles in Washington complain that the
35
outgoing administration was too soft on foreigners and campaign for the new team to
adopt a harder line, bang its fist on the table and reaffirm Uncle Sam's virility. The fact
that the Western world is in the throes of the most serious recession since the thirties
lends strength to this phenomenon today. We dare to hope that despite the pressures
from its own public, the new U.S. Administration will not pay too much attention to
this old refrain. The fact is that over the past decade it has been possible to work with
the different U.S. administrations to find solutions to particularly prickly problems in
the field of foreign trade. The Tokyo Round negotiations started under a Republican
Administration. We were able to conclude them with the help of a Democrat Adminis-
tration. These were the most important trade negotiations ever proposed and they took
place at a time and in an economic climate which could not have been more
unfavorable. Their success was not only reflected in an ambitious program of tariff cuts
over the next ten years but also has to do with the fact that a new impetus was given to
the control and dismantling of nontariff barriers.
The success of these tough and complex negotiations demonstrated the full impor-
tance of cooperation between the U.S. and the European Community and what that
cooperation can achieve. We must now go further along that path. I shall not conceal
our great alarm at a number of difficulties which threaten to dangerously compromise
the whole system of world trade. Thus, while I do not wish to discuss in detail the
consequences of the very large increase in motor vehicle imports from Japan-for the
American and European industries alike-I should like to tell you what I think of the
recent agreement between Japan and the U.S. whereby Japan has undertaken to restrict
voluntarily its motor vehicle exports to the American market. From Brussels, the
American attitude looks ambiguous in the extreme. Did not Washington, a few weeks
earlier, warn her European friends against seeking such an arrangement with the
Japanese unilaterally? Now we find that the U.S. Administration has itself taken this
path, without any kind of prior consultation with Europe. And yet our interests in this
matter are closely interwoven. Do I need to stress this at a time when one of the big
U.S. motor manufacturers is able to offset the losses sustained by its Detroit plants with
the profits made by its European subsidiaries? And where will these Japanese cars end
up? They will naturally seek entry to our markets, or compete with us on Third World
markets, where their share of sales is already often higher than 80 per cent. Now the
Community must take the necessary precautions against any harmful or unfair conse-
quences for our industries and markets of the arrangement concluded in Tokyo at our
expense, as it were. This is the thin end of the wedge which could jeopardize the whole
system of world trade.
And what about our other points of concern? Take, for instance, petrochemic;als and
synthetic fibers. Last year we were very worried about cheap American exports in this
sector, which were only possible because of the artificially low oil and natural gas prices
in the U.S. We very much appreciated the decision of the new U.S. Administration to
abolish controls for petroleum products and propose the decontrol of natural gas prices
as well in the near future, but we hope that these measures will be applied in full.
Here I should like to point out that Europe, particularly the European Community, is
fully prepared to engage in discussions and negotiations in order to find solutions to our
difficulties. Whether we are talking about ruinous competition in the export credits
field, or the difficulties of adjustment in the iron and steel trade, to give only two
examples, in our view there is no subject on which a compromise to serve our mutual
interests and preserve the Western trading system could not be reached.
I should like to add, particularly in the light of the current economic crisis, and now
that some economists claim to see signs of recovery, that it is also essential that
Americans and Europeans understand each other on macroeconomic matters. The
Maastricht European Council stressed the need to come to an arrangement on interest-
36
I
I
i'~
t
~
l
rates policy. It is not so much the high interest rates in the U.S. as their volatile nature,
their sudden fluctuations, and consequential repercussions which are the problem and
frustrate investment opportunities in Europe. I should like to see contacts for the
formulation of economic policy objectives stepped up, and our cooperation should
likewise be strengthened in all areas (science, research, new technologies, energy) on
which the future of our way of life and our society essentially depend. This cooperation
must be structured so that maximum benefit is derived from each partner's specific
capacities and resources and everyone profits from the exercise.
The ·European position on the North-South dialogue, which I referred to earlier, a
subject on which the U.S. is making increasingly unenthusiastic noises, must be seen as
part of this same strategy for the future. It is true that the developing countries
denounce the cold egotism of the industrial powers. It is also true that the industrial
powers are not as rich as those in the Third World sometimes tend to believe, but they
are incredibly rich compared with certain Third World states. There are, I know, many
aspects of the American view df which the Europeans are also perfectly well aware,
which could curb our enthusiasm and our generosity. The disarray among the develop-
ing countries at the negotiating table, the jumbled presentation of their problems, the
occasionally overambitious nature of their requests, their Manichaean approach and the
ring of propaganda which often characterizes their utterances, all these are traits which
we recognize. The fact remains, however, that the destinies of the industrialized and
developing countries are inextricably linked. A third of the OECD's total exports go to
the developing countries. Our investment in the Third World is something on which
their prosperity as well as our own depends. We do not only need their resources and
their raw materials; we also need their markets. Equipping the developing countries and
providing them with the wherewithal to ensure the well-being of their populations
provide the Western industrialized nations with considerable opportunities for the
transfer of technology, export of capital goods and so on. This must form a major part
of economic recovery. For these reasons, we believe that it is in the interest of both
America and Europe to enter into a rational, intelligent North-South dialogue based on
a mutual understanding of the needs of rich and poor nations alike. In view of the
complexity of the obstacles to effective political coordination between the Western
partners, it would be pointless to try to propose immediate solutions. The important
thing is first of all for us to be aware-sincerely and without ulterior motives-of our
differences and also of each partner's right to differ. Then, we must coordinate our
positions. In particular, the new U.S. Administration and its Western partners must get
together. ·
One of the most obvious conclusions to be drawn from my remarks is the need to
update and make full use of the consultation procedures existing in the West. The
Atlantic alliance should be given back its full importance. A climate of trust and
cooperation must be created between the leaders of the West. We must discuss our
analyses and evaluations as allies. The major challenges which threaten the free world
are viewed in the same way by all the Western nations-whether it be the economic
crisis, the recession and resurgence of protectionism, changes in industrial society, our
vulnerability in terms of dependence on energy and resources, or Soviet imperialism. All
these challenges support the objective reasons for Western cohesion and solidarity. The
Western economic summits must, in this context, make it possible to strengthen Western
solidarity. Initially, the role of the summits was primarily economic. They were
originally aimed at establishing the West's economic policy guidelines. But of course
economics and politics cannot be separated. It was therefore only natural that matters
such as the balance between East and West, disarmament, China's role, and our
relations with the Third World countries should be brought up at the summits. I believe
that the summits must remain forums for discussion rather than decision-making
37
occasions. It is also important that the leaders who take part in the summits should take
the initiative in informing and consulting the smaller Western partners so as to maintain
full-blown Western cohesion.
At the European level, the international role of the European Community should
rapidly be developed. We cannot criticize the Americans when we are unable to offer
them a clear and credible negotiating partner. The development of the European
Economic Community means, in foreign policy terms, the strengthening and intensifica-
tion of political cooperation. It is the operational side of that cooperation which must
be improved.
I believe that progress on political cooperation between member states of the
Community is beneficial for all of the West. It is in the light of this strengthening of the
Community that the possibilities offered by the principal-nations approach must be
assessed. That approach has the drawback of being divisive for the Community and of
progressively diminishing the responsibilities of the other European states currently in
the Western orbit. It is precisely the role of meetings such as ours today to take full
measure of that danger. We should encourage the creation and development of a
European Community lobby in the U.S.
Lastly, effective coordination of Western policy requires in my view that greater
account be taken than in the past of the U.S./Japan/European Economic Community
triangle, not only in economic but also in political matters. This may call for a change in
attitudes not only in Europe and Washington, but also in Tokyo. Through its industry,
its economy, and its trade, Japan has become a world power. It should also assume its
share of the political responsibility deriving from the fact that its economy can only be
successful within the Western camp. Here too, American hegemony must be prevented
from "neutralizing" the Western ally.
* * *
DISCUSSION
There was no disagreement that without some degree of consultation and cooperation
among the partners in NATO there could be little hope for effective coordination of
Western policies. But to what extent did the U.S. and Europe consult and cooperate,
and to what extent should they? Consultation and cooperation were especially impor-
tant, participants felt, in economic policy, military burden-sharing, and dealings with
areas outside NATO, particularly the Middle East. The American working paper
suggested that "more effective institutional arrangements" were necessary. The Interna-
tional working paper called for an "updating" of the alliance. Did this mean new
groups within the alliance, such as principal nations' groups, or summits? Reaction
from speakers from most smaller countries and several larger ones was overwhelmingly
unfavorable to the idea of a directorate. This was a reflection that, apart from U.S.-
European tensions, there are also tensions between big and small countries.
Internal stresses and strains. An American felt that, as a starting point, there was one
set of obstacles to coordination between the U.S. and Europe that stemmed from
fundamental, immutable differences between the two. The U.S. was a single nation
organized on a continent-wide basis, while Europe was a "congerie of nations," each
with its own traditional policies and each jealous of its own sovereignty. Europe, from
the point of view of power, was not equal to the sum of its parts. This gave rise to the
current division of labor in the NATO alliance. The U.S., as the main nuclear power,
had historically undertaken the fundamental strategic defense of the West, while sharing
with Europe the defense of the European theater with conventional weapons. Outside
the European theater, the European nations were largely in the role of observers. This
38
was an irksome situation from the point of view of many Americans, and promised to
become more so as the strength of the European economy and standard of living
approached that of the U.S. There was a feeling that Europe was not doing its share.
There was also a geographical difference between the U.S. and Europe. Europe was
on the front lines, while the U.S. was separated by 3,000 miles of ocean. Europe had a
real stake in .East-West trade; the U.S. did not. Thus it was far easier for the U.S. to
declare an embargo against the Soviet Union than it was for Europe. There was a
certain.tertdency in the U.S. toward "careless unilateralism," as evidenced by the U.S.
actions against the Soviet Union after the invasion of Afghanistan. The U.S. acted
alone and then "waited for the troops to follow." Often it was simply easier to act
unilaterally than to consult. This was particularly a tendency of new U.S. administra-
tions.
Another American argued that the feeling in the U.S. that Europe was not doing its
share was especially keen with respect to the Middle East. There, although Europe had
more at stake in terms of energy dependence, the U.S. was taking the lead in mounting
a deterrent to Soviet pressures and in creating a mechanism for dealing with crises that
could interfere with the flow of oil. A significant portion of the planned increase in U.S.
military spending was for the development of the so-called Rapid Deployment Force.
Europe could assist in this effort either directly, or by taking on more of the burden in
the NATO area so that U.S. resources could be reallocated to the Middle East. This was
an area where the U.S. and Europe were far apart and getting farther apart.
As to the Rapid Deployment Force, a British speaker argued that it was true Europe
had a more powerful interest in the Middle East than did the U.S. So if the U.S. wanted
Europe to support the R.D.F., then Europe should be given a say on how it was to be
used. This was an example of the lack of consultation on issues where the U.S. was
asking for European support, but was unwilling to recognize that European views were
just as legitimate as its own.
An International participant contended that a major obstacle to coordination was the
American tendency to view cooperation on security matters, political cooperation, and
economic cooperation as distinct from one another. In Europe, these were viewed
collectively, as forming a whole. While it was true that per capita income in Europe was
about equal to that of the U.S., there was still a major difference between the U.S. and
Europe in terms of energy dependence and the influence of the dollar. Some nations
were more fragilethan others, more "prone to difficulties." It was also important to
include Japan when talking about relations between industrialized nations. The U.S.
exercised a "preferential influence" over Japan. Was it fair for the U.S. to ask Europe
to play a larger role in defense and to take a certain political leadership but at the same
time to declare "every man for himself" in economic matters?
Another participant felt that it was to be expected that there would be differences
between the U.S. and Europe, but their importance tended to be exaggerated. The
common interests overrode the diverse ones. Nations could have differences but still
remain compatible within the alliance, which was "not a rigid, but a flexible frame-
work, not a bloc, but a coalition." More significant than differences in interests were
uncertainties in U.S. policies. There was "an absence of any real clarity" in Washington
about what the positive direction of U.S. policy toward the Soviet Union should be.
The need for consultation. Several speakers criticized the U.S. for its failure to
consult properly. The U.S. tended to consult after the fact, to conduct information
briefings rather real consultations. An International participant reported that four U.S.
officials had met with him recently to ask what Europe thought about certain actions
the U.S. had taken. What they should have asked was what Europe thought about
actions that were being contemplated.
39
But one speaker said that there had been ·extensive consultation on the issue of a
response to the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, and there had been no great conflicts
over the matter. There had, he admitted, been "some differences on the application of
measures." (This view prompted a Briton to ask why, if there had been "such happy
agreement" in the NATO family, the Soviets were still in Afghanistan.)
It was a Canadian's opinion that much of the criticism of the U.S. was misdirected.
Only the U.S. had legitimate worldwide strategic interests. Only the U.S. could make
certain decisions and determine its military needs. In fact, the U.S. record on
consultation was not so bad. Rather, some of the European irritation on this matter was
"rooted in the lingering European fear and dislike of Americanization." The onus was
on Europe to strengthen itself. As long as it lacked military self-sufficiency, there would
be a status of dependency on the U.S. that was bound to be irritating.
While the majority of participants, especially Europeans, believed that consultation
among NATO partners needed to be improved, concrete suggestions for doing so
seemed elusive. The concept of a directorate would, many speakers argued, mean the
end of NATO and of the European Community. Smaller countries would turn away
from the alliance and opt out of the common responsibility. One participant warned
that creation of a directorate would eventually result in a neutral band going through
Scandinavia, the Benelux countries, and, eventually, Italy, Greece, and Turkey.
An American expressed skepticism about the effectiveness of consultation among a
large number of countries on a systematic basis. It had been tried before, he observed,
and it had not worked. There was a historical tendency for Europe not to want to get
too involved as long as things were going well, to let the U.S. proceed alone. An
International speaker said that the NATO system, while not ideal for all situations, was
adequate. The most urgent need was that, while it was understandable for the U.S. to
consult more often with larger nations, all NATO partners get the same information
simultaneously. All should have a say. Indeed, the classifications "large" and "small"
for NATO partners should be done away with.
Yet, as a Frenchman observed, there would always be some groups, like the neo-Gau!lists
in France, who would be opposed to consultation for fear of compromising their own
independence. Normal dipl6matic channels were sufficient in non-crisis situations. But in a
crisis was Europe not really impotent to act? Was it not in a "fright-induced alignment"
behind the U.S., too quick to criticize when the U.S. acted, and to criticize when it did not?
The nations of Europe were not in a position to take unified action. When action became
necessary, it would be taken not by NATO as a whole but by individual nations. There was
a large gap between what was said by NATO and what was done.
Consultation alone, said an International speaker, was not enough. More effective
procedures for contingency planning were necessary. The alliance had to act faster than
it had after the Afghanistan invasion, and after the taking of the U.S. hostages in Iran.
What was also needed was a new consensus with NATO. Indeed, the European nations
had less to complain about today than at times in the past. The old consensus depended
on economic good times. Now that Europe did not have it quite so good, it was drifting
into a new period of controversy and political polarization. Meanwhile, in the U.S.,
public opinion was becoming "increasingly nationalistic, impatient, and unilateralist in
inclination.'' We faced a growing domestic political challenge to effective coordination.
The Middle East. Here was the greatest test of consultation and cooperation between
the U.S. and Europe. In the view of some, it was an area where the U.S. expected
Europe to follow its lead blindly; others felt that Europe did not understand the U.S.
approach in the Middle East. Few participants saw the two sides' policies as compatible.
Many believed it was critical that the U.S. and Europe, regardless of the merits of their
respective positions, get together and work out a common approach to this troubled
area.
40 \\
\.
It was widely felt that without a solution to the Palestinian problem there could be no
comprehensive settlement in the Middle East. Current U.S. policy was going nowhere
and indeed had reached a dead end. To assist or encourage Israel in a self-destructive
policy was to do it a disservice. But the U.S. seemed impotent to do anything but let
things drift.
The prevalent European view was that the U.S. effort, as embodied in the Camp
David accords, was fine and laudable as far as it went. A Briton saw Camp David as an
"important triumph," but a necessarily limited one. The Palestinian problem could not
be settld:l within the limited bilateral framework of Camp David. This was one major
reason why the European initiative had come into existence. States vital to the peace
process had elected to stay out of the Camp David framework. The European initiative
had given these states some hope, had kept them quiet. The current direction of U.S.
policy could result in the undoing of all that had been accomplished. It was unreason-
able to expect Egypt to stay in a special relationship with the U.S. and Israel and remain
isolated from the Arab world.
A Greek speaker said that there was a widespread feeling in Europe that the
Palestinians had good reason to complain. He believed that an important reason for a
settlement in the Middle East acceptable to all was that in the long run the countries of
NATO would have to enter strategic and economic alliances with many Arab states.
But an American warned that it would be wrong to forget inner-Arab conflicts. If
Israel did not exist, it would almost have to be invented.
Most American participants viewed the European initiative, with its insistence on
P.L.O. participation in the peace process, as incompatible with U.S. policy. The
important thing was the moderate-radical balance in the Middle East. A Palestinian
state governed by the P.L.O. would be a radical state. In one American's view, Europe
was "mesmerized" by the Palestinian issue. It was neither the exclusive nor even the
central issue. It had nothing to do with many of the conflicts going on in the Middle
East. It was folly to think that, with the Palestinian problem solved, the oil routes
would then be safe.
There was general argeement on the sobering warning made by one participant that
the failure of the U.S. and Europe to work out a common approach to the Middle East
boded ill for the general issue of coordination of Western policies.
* *
*
41
III. HOW CAN THE WESTERN ECONOMIES PUT THEIR
HOUSE IN ORDER?
* * * *
"Economic Problems of the Industrial Democracies:
A View from the United States"
Working Paper Prepared by Dr. Herbert Stein
of the American Enterprise Institute
There is no need to approach the present economic problems of the industrial
democracies in a mood of despair or crisis. Our generation lived through an economic
miracle, which went on for almost 25 years after World War II. Now we are in an age of
reality, and the contrast with the period of the miracle is naturally disappointing. But
the reality is, after all, not so bad. In most of our countries real output per capita rises
year by year, and the exceptions result from short-run cyclical conditions. Real per
capita incomes are in all of our countries significantly higher than they were ten years
ago-to say nothing of being at a level that would have been undreamed of 50 years
ago. Within our countries the incidence of poverty has been greatly reduced and
economic security increased. Steps have been taken to protect our environments against
the side-effects of industrialization. We have left behind the concern which worried
many 20 years ago that our adversaries of the Soviet bloc would outstrip us economi-
cally and present an appealing model of economic organization to the developing world.
We are adapting to the shock of a big increase in the relative price of oil and see
evidence that our vulnerability to the political use of the oil weapon is declining.
This is not said to deny the existence of problems, which, of course, is what this essay
is all about. But we are not in a situation which by its nature demands extreme
remedies, or policies whose chief advantage is that they are different from those
followed in the past. Moreover, we should recognize that some of our present problems
are in part the cost of our achievements, and that although the costs may in some cases
be excessive they are not necessarily dead losses.
We have been experiencing three major problems, although all the industrial coun-
tries have not experienced the same problems in the same degrees. Our inflation rates
have been higher in the past period-say since 1973-than they were earlier. Our
unemployment rates have been higher. The rate of growth of productivity-of output
per worker or per unit of labor and capital combined-has been smaller.
These problems are interrelated in various ways, as causes and consequences of each
other. Some of the causation we understand and some we do not. As good a place as
any to break into the circular process is the inflation that took off after 1965 with a
worldwide boom, stimulated in part by the way the U.S. financed the Vietnam war, and
abetted by the effort everywhere to pump economies up to ambitious levels of output
and employment. Subsequent experience created skepticism about the determination of
governments to stop inflation if the cost was, as appeared likely, an interval of high
unemployment, slow growth, high interest rates and fiscal stringency. Moreover,
governments showed a preference for accommodating rather than resisting the general
effects of specific price increases, such as the oil price increase. The result was to
generate strong expectations of continuing inflation, and even of irregularly accelerating
inflation. These expectations became embodied in wage contracts, interest rates and
many other economic decisions.They created a condition in which even an effort to slow
down the accelerating inflation caused an increase of unemployment, which is where we
are now in the U.S., Britain and to a lesser degree elsewhere.
42
\
i
The causes of slowdown of productivity growth are more mysterious, certainly more
numerous, and apparently more varied among countries. The fact that the slowdown is
so widespread and becomes apparent around 1973 has led many people to place main
responsibility on the change in the energy situation. However, the cost of energy as an
input does not seem sufficient to permit it to explain much of what has happened to
productivity. Three factors that seem to have been important in all our countries have
been the near-exhaustion of the productivity gains froin the transfer of labor out of
agricuJJure into industry, the increased costs of environmental and safety regulations,
and the loss of some of the gains of productivity that come from an increase in the scale
of production. Except in the U.K. and France, a slowdown in the growth of capital per
worker contributed to the slowdown in the growth of total output per worker. Related
to this, there has been, in most countries, a slowdown in the rate at which the latest
technology is incorporated in the operating capital stock. But when account has been
taken of all the factors which c,an be even remotely measured, we are still left, in most
countries, with a large part of the decline in productivity growth unexplained.
At a deeper level of explanation, which is probably closer to revealing where the
corrections may be sought, there are two main things to be said. The inflation itself has
contributed to the slowdown of productivity growth. It has depressed business invest-
ment by increasing uncertainty about future costs and prices. In the U.S., and probably
in other countries, it has greatly increased the tax burden on the return to capital by
causing understatement of depreciation costs. Beyond that, it may have weakened
incentives to produce by creating the feeling that economic prosperity for an individual
does not depend on his productive efforts but depends on his good fortune in riding the
most rapidly-rising prices.
The slowdown of productivity growth probably also reflected a demotion of eco-
nomic growth in the scale of personal and national priorities. At the national level we
have made decisions about environmental and safety regulations, and about other
regulations, about the tax structure and about transfer payments which could only be
rationalized on the theory that economic growth was less important than we once
thought, or that the rate of growth was assured no matter what we did. Some reflections
of this at the personal level, which may have affected talk more than action, were seen
in the "new" ideas about the quality of life which tended to spurn acquisition and
conventional consumption.
At a still ni.ore-.general level, our problem may be that after 25 years of amazingly
rapid growth in real per capita output and incomes, we came to regard that as a
bottomless, always-replenished purse upon which we could make unlimited drafts
without danger. The result was to impair growth and establish higher and higher rates of
inflation from which it would be difficult to climb down without increased unemploy-
ment and other adverse consequences.
Certainly in the U.S., probably in Britain and possibly elsewhere, there is a
realization that this attitude was a mistake. Economic growth is not everything and
there are objectives for which it is worthwhile to sacrifice growth. But the experience of
living for several years with little growth, or with negative growth of productivity, has
convinced us that we went too far in subordinating growth to other objectives and that
we have been inefficient in the sense that we have paid more in growth than we had to
pay or expected to pay. One example in the American case is the imposition of
regulations to achieve clean air which are much more costly than can be justified by the
results.
This view of the problem narrows down considerably the range of policy options for
solving it. Once we could take it for granted that our potential output would be growing
rapidly and that the efficiency of production would be high. Then it seemed that our
economic problem was to assure that the potential output was actually produced anq
43
that it was at least in part used in ways that were superior to those the market would
dictate. In those circumstances there was a possible, although as it turned out, an
insufficient case for a policy compounded of expansionist fiscal and monetary measures
to get up to potential output, and full employment and regulations of various kinds to
prevent inflation and to "correct" the market outcomes. Such policies are now seen not
to be potential solutions but a large part of the problem.
Our present problem, insofar as it is related to policy, stems from excessive expansion
on the nominal side of the economy, excessive expansion in the supply of money and in
the flows of money/income, excessive restraint on the real side of the economy, and
excessive interferences with the supply of resources and with the efficiency of their use.
Our way out of today's difficulties will require a combination of restraint on the
expansion of the nominal or money side of the economy and removal of inhibitions to
the growth of the real side.
The issues are the appropriate distribution of the emphasis, in degree and timing,
between the two sides of this combination and the timing and magnitude of the effects
to be expected. The answers to these questions differ from country to country
depending on how far gone they are in the process of inflation and weakened
productivity growth, as well as on other aspects of their condition. Three possible
combinations of policies can be distinguished, which might be called Reaganism,
Thatcherism and Shock Treatment:
Reaganism is distinguished by a heavy emphasis on measures to increase productivity
and potential output coupled with moderate and uncommitted restraint on the expan-
sion of nominal demand. The rationale is that the supply-side measures will increase
productivity so much and so soon that the inflation rate will come down without the
need for any very severe restraint on demand. The favorable effect on inflation is to be
intensified and accelerated by a radical change of expectations resulting from the
demonstration that the government has embarked upon a credible anti-inflationary
policy. Because productivity growth will be accelerating and inflationary expectations
will be diminishing, the transition to a less inflationary world will be accomplished
without an increase of unemployment.
The leading example of Reaganism is, of course, the experiment just being launched
in the U.S. This relies heavily on large tax cuts and major regulatory reforms to speed
up productivity growth. On the other side of the demand-supply equation, there would
be substantial reductions of government expenditures (relative to recent trends) and a
gradual decline in the rate of monetary expansion in order to assist in reducing
inflation. The success of the program depends on three key points. Will the tax and
regulatory changes speed up productivity growth in the degree and with the speed
expected? Will the announcement and perception of the program have the dramatic
effect on inflationary expectations that the strategy counts on?
There is a good deal of skepticism on all three of these points. Empirical evidence that
the supply-promoting results will be forthcoming on the scale and speed expected is, to
say the most, highly uncertain. There is as yet no visible commitment by Congress to the
expenditure cuts or by the Federal Reserve to the monetary restraint that the Adminis-
tration wants. And while the announcement of the program has generated a certain
vague optimism, it has not yet generated the reversal of inflationary expectations that is
needed. There is also the more general difficulty that the program depends on a delicate
balance between the productivity stimulation and the demand restraint. If the demand
restraint is too great, the economy will be depressed and that will be bad for
productivity growth, despite the tax cuts, and if the demand restraint is too small, the
economy will be inflationary and that will be bad for productivity growth also. The
whole program is at an early stage and its possibilities are not to be dismissed. But for
the present, its consequences for the U.S. must be regarded as a big question mark.
44
Thatcherism, in a view of it which may be somewhat idealized, is a combination of
demand-side and supply-side measures which is more rigorous and committed on the
demand side than Reaganism. It is recognized, after two years of experience, that this
demand restraint causes high unemployment and recession. Hopes that the announce-
ment of a new policy would so reduce both actual and expected inflation as to permit
the policy to work without a serious recession have not_ been met. It is also recognized
that during this period of recession the process of reinvestment and adaptation of the
industrial base will not go on rapidly and that productivity will therefore not grow
rapidly. These disappointments are accepted and the policy of demand restraint is
continued in order to get the inflation down.
There is little doubt that a government could continue a policy of demand restraint
long enough to end inflation. How long that would be, and how much pain would be
caused along the way, we do not know, and the answer surely depends on the length and
severity of the preceding inflation, as well as on its real and perceived causes. The
British experience does not suggest that the period is short or the process painless. Fear
is sometimes expressed that the process of ending the inflation will so weaken British
industry, and so depress investment and destroy existing enterprises, that Britain will
remain permanently impoverished after the inflation is ended. This fear does not seem
realistic. If the American economy could recover from the Great Depression, and the
German and Japanese from the devastation of World War II, the British economy can
recover from the consequences of some years of anti-inflationary policy. The chief
question about Thatcherism is a political one. Even if there is no less painful solution,
will the British people tolerate this one or will they seek solutions whose painful
consequences are less obvious and immediate?
There may be a Peter Principle at work in economic policy. The Peter Principle says
that individuals progress in organizations to higher and more responsible jobs until they
finally reach positions which are just beyond their competence. It may be that anti-
inflation policies become more and more rigorous but never become sufficiently
rigorous to cope with an inflation that is becoming more and more subborn.
Frustration caused by this race in which the forcefulness of policy never catches up
with the difficulty of the problem leads to proposals for Shock Treatment to get it all
over in a hurry, before governments have a chance to become timid or the private sector
to become skeptical. The basic idea is that instead of aiming to get the inflation rate
down gradually -Bver the course of, say, five years, which is the usual target usually
unmet, the government would aim to get the inflation rate down quickly-in a few
quarters. That would be accomplished by severe monetary restraint, of whatever degree
proved to be necessary. There would be painful consequences, resulting from existing
wage and debt contracts which anticipate continuing high inflation. The pain would be
compressed in a short period, however, and would be over before the government was
under irresistible pressure to reverse its course. The sight of such a drastic policy would
convince people of the government's determination to end the inflation and therefore of
the need to renegotiate existing contracts. This process might be facilitated by legislation
which required renegotiation of wage and debt contracts.
The idea of Shock Treatment is gaining increasing attention among economists who
fear the failure of gradualism. It is not yet on any government's agenda. But spreading
discussion of the subject, and thought of how to manage a policy of bringing inflation
to a quick and definitive end, may help to make shock treatment an eligible option,
preferable to comprehensive controls or economic collapse, if Reaganism and That-
cherism do not succeed.
The clearest lesson of this recital is that countries which are not yet far gone along
the inflationary path should be sure to avoid or reverse any movement in that direction.
It is much easier to do that than to get back to stability once the inflationary process is
45
well under way and embodied in public thinking. For other countries, notably the U.S.
and Britain, the situation is obviously much more difficult. Still, despite what has been
said earlier, there is reason for hope in both of these cases. There seems to be some
tendency in American economic policy toward greater realism than was evidenced in the
initial formulations of Reaganism. The proposal for a very large tax cut which created
much of the worry about the possible inflationary consequences of the program may
not be adopted and the Administration is being more cautious about leading the
American people to expect that the inflation will be overcome quickly and without a
transitional period of slow economic growth. As it becomes clear that the initial
program is not causing that decisive change of inflationary expectations that was
desired, the Administration and the Federal Reserve may yet undertake more persuasive
commitments. Reaganism should not be regarded as a finished product but as an
approach still in process of development. In Britain also there are signs of learning from
experience how to carry out Thatcherism more effectively and the possibility remains
that the program will survive politically.
The economic problems of the U.S., Britain and the other industrial democracies
cannot be viewed complacently. But our economies are strong enough to survive these
problems, understanding of the necessary policies is growing, and the public seems more
willing to support those policies than has been true in the past, or than politicians
thought was true. There is much for national leaders, public and private, to do, hut the
task of restoring stability and reviving growth can be accomplished.
*
Performance of the Industrial Economies
Rise of Output per Labor Hour - Annual Rate
1960-73 1973-79
U.S.A. 3.1 "lo 1.1 "lo
Canada 4.2 l.O
Japan 9.9 3.8
U.K. 3.8 1.9
France 5.9 4.2
West Germany 5.8 4.3
Italy 7.8 1.6
Rise of Consumer Prices - Annual Rate
1960-73 1973-80 1979-80
U.S.A. 3.2"7o 9.2"7o 13.5"7o
Canada 3.3 9.3 10.2
Japan 6.1 9.7 8.2
U.K. 5.1 16.9 18.0
France 4.6 11.1 13.3
West Germany 3.3 4.7 5.5
Italy 4.7 16.8 21.1
Unemployment Rate ("lo of Labor Force)
1960-73 av. 1974-80 av. 1980
U.S.A. 4.9"7o 6.8"70 7.1 "lo
Canada 5.3 7.3 7.5
Japan 1.3 2.0 2.0
U.K. 2.9 5.5 7.6
France 2.1 5.0 6.5
West Germany 0.7 3.3 3.3
Italy 3.2 3.8 5.9
46
"How Can The Western Economies Put Their House in Order?"
Working Paper Prepared by Dr. Alfred Herrhausen,
Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A. G.
The way the global economy has developed over the more recent past and the way it
is currently moving is characterized, to a growing extent, by imbalances and unstable
situatioqs. These disquieting phenomena often raise the very basic question: Are we,
indeeCI,' still and really in control of these developments? It is typical of today's
discussion on this fundamental issue that discussion is polarized, with one party
claiming that market mechanisms have failed dismally whilst the other party hotly
maintains that the state and politicians just can't cope. Economic recipes-both
theoretical and practical-on what to do conflict correspondingly, with some propo-
nents calling ever louder for g;overnment controls and dirigisme whereas others claim
that state interference is creating the very problems we bewail.
Economic processes and trends are normally too complex to be described in
undifferentiated simplified terms and many solutions to the problems thrown up by
such processes very often do not, therefore, come to grips with reality and produce the
desired results.
Having said that, I do, however, subscribe to the opinion that there are certain basic
patterns which subsist and continually shimmer through because these patterns and
structures are, today, at the very bottom of all economic activity. I perceive these basic
patterns in the struggle on how and to whom National Income is to be allocated-a
struggle for rewards and benefits which, nationally and internationally, takes place at
three different levels. This tussle for who gets what, or tug of war-call it what you
will-is going to be the determining factor in economic developments in the years ahead
and, to no small degree, in the social and political areas, too.
The struggles on the allotment of national income(s) can be listed as follows: (1) that
between the public and private sectors of the economy; (2) that between the factors of
production, labor and capital; and (3) that between developed and developing countries
round the globe. What the outcome of these struggles will be, struggles which to some
extent overlap, no longer depends on merely economic factors but, to an increasing
degree and in all three cases, on power pure and simple, power as the sheer ability to
dictate one's. will to the other side. But where does this lead?
(1) First of aIT; we witness in many countries a continually growing share of national
income appropriated by the state hand in hand with increasing state interference-and
this includes countries whose economies are basically market economies. One of the
reasons why this trend is so difficult to arrest is that existing theories unfortunately no
longer adequately explain the realities of a changed-and changing-society. Classical
ideas on the workings of a market economy, ideas to which politicians in the economic
field geared their actions and which for a long time enjoyed international currency, no
longer fully convince as to the desirability of a market economy. You see, the theory I
am referring to assumes that there is such a thing as a framework with its well defined
components and, in today's economic world, precisely the components of the "frame-
work" are subject to continual change and modification-this above all due to the
influence and power of organized interests, the pressure groups.
A number of bland assumptions have lost their credibility, assumptions such as:
comprehensive, readily available information for all in the market place; infinitely rapid
reactions by all market operators to changes in data, rational behavior by these
operators and, as a result of this and of necessity, built-in equilibrium in the microeco-
nomic context. What happens is that the theoretical coherence of the system becomes a
prey to repeated and ever-new breakdowns and malfunctionings which then have to be
47
repaired by the state in order to contain matters and ward off a real catastrophe, the
collapse of the system altogether. On top of this, we have the fact that many goods
which were hitherto "private" goods undergo a metamorphosis and become "public"
goods, and this means that the state has to engage in an additional reallocation in order
to ensure social harmony. And there is a specific social pressure at work propagating
this particular tendency; that is, in many countries it has become cheaper to promote
individual - indeed selfish - interests by using politics and political institutions than to
exploit the avenues offered by a market system for the improvement of one's position.
We often see the state, therefore, being expelled, quite deliberately, from its role as
guardian and preserver of a given framework into that of actively allocating welfare and
benefits. The final stage in this sequence is the resurrection of Bobbe's awesome
Leviathan. We are therefore faced with the urgent question: Can we do anything about
this development?
Yes, but only if we are prepared to learn the lesson preached by Parkinson: that is,
that the efficiency of a bureaucratic machine declines with increase in its size, whereas
that of a market increases hand in hand with growth in the size of that market. Of
course, it would be naive to jump to the conclusion that the main argument in favor of
returning parts of the public sector to private enterprise is the limitations of the state or
that limitations in the working of market mechanisms in themselves call for intervention
by the state through its bureaucrats.
Be that as it may, wherever private enterprise is somewhat more efficient and cheaper,
let it do the job. As Adam Smith said, the state in its role as guardian is much more
acceptable than the state as a producer. But perhaps the question as to who does what is
not the all-important question. Perhaps the way economic activities are organized in the
two sectors is much more decisive. If the state, wherever possible, would apply the same
organizational approach as private enterprise, it would then achieve a comparable level
of efficiency. And a more efficient state could very well mean less state involvement
generally.
(2) In the struggle over the apportionment of national income between the factors
ofproduction-labor and capital-we note that the social power wielded by monopolis-
tic trade unions is increasing rapidly with the result that the social balance of power is
now jeopardized. This situation is providing growing scope for unions to burden their
opposing group, that is, the entrepreneurs, with costs which entrepreneurs cannot
recoup in the market. This fact produces two concrete results: Materially, earnings
shrink due to wage increases which outstrip productivity growth and, at the qualitative-
formaf level, the freedom to make and take decisions is hampered and restricted due to
worker codetermination.
An additional aspect which has to be kept in mind is the following: Even if two
collective forces of equal strength are pitted against each other, there is no guarantee
that the colliding forces will exactly neutralize each other. This would only happen if the
conflict of interests were to be fought out as a straight confrontation between the
opponents. What can happen, however, and what often no doubt does happen, is that
the "warring" groups defuse their conflict by quite deliberately arriving at a modus
vivendi or by unconsciously adopting appropriate attitudes whereby it is left to some
third party to foot part of the bill implicit in such consensus. An example of this
strategy is the way in which, for years now, unions and emplo"yers have, through wage
settlements, fueled inflation-that is, have passed on some of the costs of such
settlements to other parties and, in particular, to parties whose money claims do not
move with the level of prices. This approach makes life easier for the wage bargainers.
The scientific view of the matter is then as follows: "The problem of how different
groups-for instance, unions and employers-relate to one another is defused where
friction occurs. The problem of intergroup relations will, however, then surface at some
48
other point within society. The favorable outcome in the struggle for a larger slice of
national income is only proforma at the expense of, e.g., the employer or union side. In
reality, the gains achieved have been 'looted' from those social groups which have no
defenses against depredation." In the final analysis, this boils down to a system of
organized irresponsibility". 1
Is there any way out of this dead end? It is not easy to find a satisfactory answer to
this question. Within a free and democratic system at least, one cannot resort to force
pure and.simple as a means of regulating the relations between organized interests. The
prospects of voluntary agreement by the various protagonists on some procedure for the
orderly reconcilement of opposing interests becomes, however, all the more improbable,
the clearer it becomes that, for the foreseeable future, there will presumably have to be
some "belt-tightening." Where do we go from here? To proscribe the manifold and
complex groupings and organizations would be a dictatorial and authoritarian measure;
at the same time, it would be rash and irresponsible to accept a situation in which our
welfare would, largely, be dependent upon the random clashes of organized power
groups. 1
The quest, therefore, for some other solution-a third solution-is inevitable and
cannot be sidestepped. Such a quest was maintained in Germany for a spell and met
with varying success. I am referring to an exercise that was labelled Konzertierte Aktion
("concerted efforts") and which took the form of a discussion between the trade
unions, industry and the government with a view to improved orientation. Such
exchanges were a component in the process of economic development, a third compo-
nent within that process and complementary to the mechanism of the market and the
struggles of the various pressure groups for a larger share of national income.
"Concerted efforts" was an instrument which drew attention to the general welfare of
the country and tried to impose some discipline on the forces just mentioned. It would
make sense if these talks were reactivated.
(3) In the struggle between mature and developing countries on how income in the
international context should be allocated-and the oil conflict is a feature of that
struggle-we are faced with a situation of truly global dimensions. It is probably no
exaggeration to maintain that this particular confrontation-alongside the East-West
conflict-is and will remain a central issue for the foreseeable future. "The outcome
here will determine what pattern of balance or tensions between the major zones of the
world will eventually emerge."' This process could be decisive for the whole future of
industrialized society. That is, and above all, it could be decisive for our own destinies.
Why?
Well, you see, as the continents vie with each other, the rest of the world has achieved
emancipation from the historical source from which it received its impetus leading to
new developments. It was in Europe that industrialized society took its origin, in Europe
with its rationalized structure geared to economic efficiency, with its technological
systems, labor organization, division of labor and with its copious flow of goods. From
the start, industrialization was bound up with the expectation that the system, our
system, would spread throughout the entire world and that this global conquest would
go hand in hand with a progressive "opening up" of the world generally, a world whose
segments would, of necessity, be linked to each other in peace by means of trade and
economic common sense. It was also generally held that that continent which had
conceived of industrialization in a global context would reap the benefits thereof. It was
similarly held that political leadership and cultural preeminence. would also be there
'"Ordnungspolitik und interkollektive Beziehungen" in: Warnfried Dettling (Publisher) Die Ziihmung des
Leviathan, Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft, Baden-Baden 1980, pp. 173,184.
'Hans Freyer: Theorie des gegenwiirtigen Zeitalters, Stuttgart, 1967 (OVA), p. 253.
49
where economic initiative was to be found. Progress ·was thus synonymous with the
propagation of European ideas and ideals throughout the world.'
Let us take stock. Universalism has established itself. And for just under a century
Europe enjoyed the lavish rewards of its industrial vigor. But this phase is now over, and
the pattern of events is no longer characterized by the dominating role of Europe and
America but by emancipation from such dominance. And it transpires that in a world
which has shrunk together and in which industrialization is under way, conflicts and
tension have not eased. Rather they are increasing. The spread of a secondary system
has not effaced the pluralism of our world. At best, it has veiled such pluralism under a
sort of skim. Under this veil, the aspirations of individual peoples and nations have
really gathered momentum and are now being enunciated: The distribution of the
benefits deriving from economic progress which favors the classical mature countries is
to be modified and the global economy put on a new footing. This new order of things
aims expressly at a revised shareout. Countries endowed with raw materials are now
putting in their bills and impoverished countries lacking in resources are demanding
aid-categorically. Charity will not do in this situation. We are not faced with pleas but
with strident demands.
At the same time, I am no proponent of the "ethics of renunciation" about which
one hears so much today and which preach that mature countries should "tighten their
belts" and thus leave more scope to accommodate the claims of developing countries. In
a recent O.E.C.D study, the point was made that "in coping with tomorrow's
challenges, technological progress will be a prime determinant and not a peripheral
factor." And we can expect technological progress to be achieved in future, too, mainly
in those areas where a deep-rooted and long-standing intellectual tradition exists with a
special aptitude for producing creative responses to new situations. This intellectual
tradition is our inheritance, that of Europe in the widest sense of the word. This
tradition cannot find expression in renunciation, in passivity. It calls for active and
progressive application. This active approach is a must-and this is something Hans
Albert• has drawn attention to-for the simple reason that the very tools with whose
help problems can be tackled were developed, for the most part, in tackling earlier
problems. We cannot allow the technological-cultural know-how embodied in the
solutions devised by a society for earlier problems to lie dormant. It must be mobilized
if it is to retain its vigor, mobilized not only in our own interests but precisely in the
interests of the cjeveloping countries. The growth prospects of such countries depends,
directly and indirectly, upon the (growth) impulses we can give. Our entire industrial
and technological resources are-within the framework of the international division of
labor-a prerequisite, too, for the progress of underdeveloped countries. Such indus-
trial and technological resources-without which underdeveloped countries cannot.
advance-must continue to grow and this calls for a high level of innovation and for an
even higher level of capital investment. Growth is and remains an imperative. In the
absence of growth, we will probably not succeed in achieving a stable international
economic system.
These observations, of course, say nothing about the nature and structure of the
growth to be achieved. A call to simply increase the output of goods and services does
not define these goods and services and tells us nothing about where these goods and
services ought to be produced. Having established further growth as a desirable goal,
the North-South conflict is reduced, speaking economically, to the problem: Who does
what?
'cf. Freyer: Ibid, p. 252 et seq.
'Hans Albert: Traktat uber rationale Praxis, J.C.B. Mohr, Tlibingen, p. 24 et seq.
50
I
I
f
l
Are we going to be successful in finding a peaceful solution here? I feel this will
depend very much on how convinced we are and also on how we manage to convince
others that "solving crises by cooperation"' is the better approach. Short-term advan-
tages to be achieved by resorting to confrontation are the greatest obstacle in this area.'
In the final analysis and notwithstanding any temporary advantages, confrontation is
productive of negative results. We must learn to think and act in a longer-term context.
Let me mention a related aspect: We will have to surrender a number of possible
benefits to coming generations. Otherwise, the "outer limits"' will see to it that we
actually •have less to enjoy, the richer we become.
Another aspect is this: Global problems and issues call for global solutions and
responses. Aggressive or isolationist bloc policies are an antithesis to this. In a world
conceived of as a unity, something we are approaching more and more, nobody can
escape the general destiny. A global approach to things is not synonymous with dull
uniformity. The world is not a monolithic bloc. We need its diversity, a diversity in
harmony.
1
It is not my intention to generalize unduly and, therefore, appear noncommittal.
With regard to the burning problems raised by the question "How shall we put our
house in order?", I would like to draw one single conclusion. One can take this
conclusion as being representative of many others which could lead back to the
distributional issues identified in my remarks. The,conclusion is as follows: A growing
proportion of national income appropriated by the state, an increased measure of
dirigisme, together with socio-economic group conflicts and the North-South problem,
all go to promote inflation which is now virulent throughout the world.
It can be proved-and has been demonstrated-that a nominal increase in the growth
rate for consumption by the state goes hand in hand with a rise in the index of factor
costs; competition for available labor and union power ensure that wage rates move
upwards in a parallel fashion in both segments of the economy-in the progressvie area
of private enterprise and in the nonprogressive domain of the state. And the increase in
productivity in the private sector of the economy is the minimum for such upward
movements. Normally, productivity in the public sector of the economy will lag behind
that achieved in the private sector. This means that opportunity costs are continually
generated in the public sector, costs which are not balanced by some real benefit. This
phenomenon is often referred to as the "cost malady of the public sector" and has been
pinpointed as a cause of inflation.'
A similar situation obtains in the struggle between labor and capital for a larger share
of national income. Wage rate increases practically always outstrip growth in productiv-
ity and will certainly do so when the inflation rate is higher. In such a case, the trade
unions strive to ensure that wages are maintained in real terms. This implies nominal
wage increases at least on a level with the inflation rate. This means that all the time
more is being distributed than is actually produced. This, of course, fuels inflation.
At the international level, we see something similar in the struggle for benefits. For
almost 10 years now, importing countries have been faced with significantly steeper
prices levied by oil and raw material producing countries. Importing countries have
therefore very often taken measures which have been favorable to inflation: the transfer
'MesaroviC/Pestel: Menschheit am Wendepunkt. 2. Bericht an den Club of Rome zur Weltlage, Deutsche
Ver!agsanstalt, Stuttgart, 1974, p. 134 et seq.
Ibid.
'The expression was coined by Maurice Strong, Director of the United Nations' Environment Program.
'Rupert Windisch: "Staatseingriffe in marktwirtschaftliche Ordnungen" in Streissler/Watrin: Zur Theorie
marktwirtschaft!icher Ordnungen, I.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tlibingen, 1980, p. 307.
51
of resources in real terms meant a cutback in demand and a leak in liquidity. In order to
balance this and avoid a fall in employment, some countries resorted to an increase in
the domestic supply of money. This meant expansion in aggregate nominal demand
within the economy and inflation gathered momentum. This, again, had repercussions
on the exports of oil-importing countries. Their export prices climbed to the detriment
of oil producing countries. The price of oil sank in real terms and the advantage enjoyed
by oil-exporting countries in reallocation in real terms declined. Oil producers reacted to
this chain of events by fresh increases in the price of oil. This, of course, was escalation
to a new level and the next escalation is already in sight. Yes, in sight-unless people are
prepared to recognize that the new share-out in real terms in favor of oil-exporting
countries due to an increased oil price is inevitable and that, on the home front, there is
appreciably less for employers, unions and the Welfare State to allocate.
This brings us back to where we started from. Further economic and political
problems could be interpreted in a similar fashion: things like the national debt, deficits
on current account, unemployment, a weak competitive position, protectionism and
other issues which are characteristic of the current situation. Some of these issues will be
dealt with in our discussion.
Before I close, may I make an observation on method: We live in an era faced with a
multitude of acute and obvious problems and worries all crying for solutions. Some
may feel that a very basic approach, such as the one I have adopted, is all too
theoretical and out of touch with reality and that strong medicine, swiftly administered,
in the form of effective crisis management is the more urgent need. Whether such
medicine is going to do the job will depend very much on how thoroughly the causes of
the malady have been diagnosed. Diagnosis, however, is a theoretical preliminary, a
prelude to action. Walter Eucken, too-the founding father of the "Ordoliberalism"
school of thought and of the German social market economy-first published his
"Fundamentals of Political Economy" in 1940 before following up with his "Principles
of Economic Policy" in 1952.
* *
DISCUSSION
Discussion of this topic revolved around the contrasting views of the two working
papers. The German author focussed on the distributional struggle-at the national and
international level-among "well-muscled pressure groups," which had largely super-
seded the workings of the impartial market. The state itself was increasingly active in
the mai:ket, no longer limiting itself to establishing a framework. At the same time,
wage bargainers-especially trade unions-aimed to improve or sustain the real income
of workers even in the face of declining output. In short, we had become preoccupied
with the distributional function of the economy at the expense of allocation and
stabilization. Our problems-inflation, unemployment, slow growth, price instability,
external disequilibria-were traceable to that, and we had to get away from squabbling
about how to divide the pie and to concentrate instead on how to make it larger.
The American author agreed on the need to revive real growth in production, but he
emphasized that, in his country anyway, the distributional changes of the last generation
had been supported by a general consensus. Taxing, spending and regulatory programs
had been undertaken with faith in never-ending high growth. Those policy errors could
now be recognized, and therein lay the hope for their cure.
President Reagan's economic program offered an example of one country's current .
1
attempt to put its house in order, and this was the subject of extensive discussion.
Several American participants alluded to the mood in their country favoring economic
52
\
reform: government's share of the national product was seen to be too big, government
regulations had become onerous and expensive, and confidence in the "fine tuning" of
the economy had been lost. People were prepared to support whatever measures were
necessary to bring inflation under control and to bolster the nation's military position.
But this program would involve short-run sacrifices, and there was disagreement in the
U.S. about how these should be apportioned among the citizenry. It had to be noted,
first of all, that even among those who supported the rest of the Reagan program there
were reservations about the wisdom of the proposed personal income tax cuts (or, more
accurately, reduced tax increases). It seemed like a gamble with unattractive odds. If the
Administration turned out to be wrong about people's propensity to invest their tax
savings and thus stimulate the economy and gross tax receipts, the country would be
hard put to get rid of persistent inflationary budget deficits. Business tax cuts might be a
more straightforward way of promoting productive investment.
Other American participants expressed broader opposition to the Reagan program,
alleging that increased defense spending was to be financed by unjustified cuts in social
programs. During the interval while we awaited the translation of investment into jobs,
food and shelter, what would be the fate of the American poor-not just blacks and
Hispanics, but whites as well? A national budget was not the same as a private
enterprise budget. It was a public document shaped over years by philosophical
concepts. The Reagan program was unfair in that the burden was to be inequitably
shared. It was an ideological budget that went beyond the economics of "getting the
house in order." One participant said that President Reagan's 51 per cent of the vote
was "not a mandate to turn back 50 years of social history."
A rebuttal to this was that the social programs being cut were ones that most people
felt were not effective, and not worth their cost. Moreover, the main approach would
not involve cutting out whole programs as much as reducing eligibility for them. A
substantial stimulus to the economy would result from reducing the cost to business of
complying with government regulations, which was estimated at $120 billion a year.
Some European participants voiced concern about the Reagan program, notably that
defense increases combined with tax cuts would prove inflationary. Could one really
count on changed expectations to produce a change of behavior? Had sufficient account
been taken of the consequences to the world trading system if the program failed? A
Canadian and an American expected President Reagan to make full use of his
leadership to mobilize public opinion and to bring about attitudinal changes, especially
regarding inflation.
The state's growing share of the gross national product was causing concern in all of
our countries. In Sweden, for example, the public sector budget had risen in recent years
from 43 to 65 per cent of GNP, with a very negative effect on the economy. Austria
seemed to constitute the exceptional example of a high public sector combined with
relatively low inflation and unemployment, but it was pointed out that the public sector
there was large not so much in terms of the annual budget as in state participation in
industry-which was nonetheless run on a businesslike basis. The relationship between
the size of the public sector and the inflation rate was not entirely clear. Certainly,
budgetary deficits contributed something to inflationary monetary policy, but the most
damaging effects of a growing public sector were not nominal but real: the diversion of
resources from more productive uses and the disincentive to investment caused by
repressive tax levels. The percentage of GNP taken by taxes was not an accurate
measure of the public sector, though. Many public sector goals were being achieved by
mandating private sector spending, which never appeared in government appropriations
(e.g., the U.S. Clean Air and Water Acts).
A Belgian was troubled by implications that we faced a rather brutal choice between
an unbridled market economy and a statist economy (or "organized irresponsibility" as
53
it had been called). This was like a choice between cholera and the plague. The state
need not aim to replace private enterprise, but each sector had a role to play.
The decline in productivity and economic growth was arguably one consequence of
the growth of the public sector in recent years. It aggravated our other problems, such
as defense spending and unemployment. Growth rates were now flat at best in the U.S.,
and down in Japan, Britain and elsewhere. Other causes of declining growth varied
from country to country, but they included inflation, energy prices, the cost of
environmental and safety regulations, and changing values in society. A Frenchman
viewed the break in growth rates as more than a passing phenomenon. .It signalled a
radical structural change. It would take time and effort to define a new type of growth,
based in part on cybernetics and the biological sciences. The capitalist world needed a
"bold new program" to counter outmoded Marxist doctrine.
But, as an American pointed out, there were rigidities and irreversibilities in our
system which could not be corrected without considerable pain. It would not be as easy
to retrieve our lost productivity as it had been to dissipate it over the decades. Although
we could not expect miracles, the emphasis on enhanced productivity and growth
through the "old time religion" of economic orthodoxy was to be welcomed. Some
Europeans, however, were uneasy with the overtones of "supply side" economics. The
"stagflation" of the seventies had changed economic behavior in ways that were not yet
fully understood. The "semireligious aspect" of both monetarism and Keynesianism
were simplifications of the past, according to an Austrian. His country-like Germany
and Switzerland-was skeptical of high interest rate policies, with their depressing effect
on housing and energy development. The best approach was a policy mix with accents
on fiscal restraint and an incomes policy supported by the social consensus. A Briton
agreed that demand management was still a necessary instrument in combatting
"stagflation". But prescriptions that worked in one country would not always work in
others. American productivity could not be boosted by starting the day with calisthenics
and group singing as in Japan, and some of the Austrian practices might not be
successful abroad.
Political aspects. None of our countries, though, could expect to get its economic
house in order without some measure of social consensus. It was the misfortune of
political leaders that they were often unable to mold or to hang onto that consensus
long enough to see the vindication of what were essentially sound economic programs.
Presidents Ford and Giscard were cited in this regard, as was Mrs. Thatcher, who was
seen to have lost a valuable 18 months before coming to grips with the cost of the public
sector. It was important, then, that Mr. Reagan move vigorously before the political
cycle turned against him.
Would the center hold? That was the key political question for the eighties, according
to an American. If people found no credible explanation for inflation, unemployment
and slow growth, they were apt to look for scapegoats and villains, with the risk that
implied for our democratic processes. If our leaders wanted public support in the task
of putting our economic houses in order, they had to consult with the citizens and enlist
their understanding. In the debate about inflation, for instance, we had to break out of
the narrow framework of economists who put all the blame on the central bankers. The
results of the French and U.S. elections showed that people were looking for a new
faith. The consequences of their not finding it would beset us throughout the decade.
As other speakers said, we had to be skeptical about the alleged limits of political
feasibility and tolerance. In the long run, good economics made good politics.
* *
*
54
\
\
IV. PANEL ON CURRENT INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ISSUES
* * *
"Current International Economic Issues"
Background Paper Prepared by Jhr. Emile van Lennep,
Secretary-General of the O.E. C.D.
(1) General. The links between economic policy and foreign and security issues are
stronger than before. Equally the management of the economy (inflation vs. unemploy-
ment, etc.) brings economic policy close to the heart of the policy debates on
maintenance of democracy and of the market system. Although problems have changed
and have become more political, the existing international economic institutions should
remain the framework for consultation and action.
(2) Economic policies and trade. For the industrial democracies there is no way to
avoid a painfully long period of too high unemployment. It is essential to prevent the
resulting pressures from leading to a further erosion of the market system. Increased
protectionism, subsidization of employment, etc., will make the inflation problem
worse and the prospects for a sustainable economic recovery doubtful. Export credit
competition has escalated during the past year; this should be brought under control.
(3) Japan. There have been criticisms in the U.S. and Europe of Japanese export
policies. It might be more appropriate for the U.S. and Europe to accept free trade with
Japan despite the differences in productivity performance, working hours, etc. These
differences will be corrected by real income and exchange rate changes. For her part,
Japan should accept real income and exchange rate changes, as well as making an added
effort in such areas as aid to developing countries, and thus assume the kind of
responsibilities in the functioning of the multilateral economic system that corresponds
to her economy power.
(4) Interest rates and exchange rates. There is a strong common interest both in
reducing U.S. inflation and in enabling low inflation countries in Europe to moderate
the rise of unemployment. The U.S. authorities are right in insisting on the essential role
of monetary policy in bringing inflation down. The Europeans are right in asking for
less volatility of U.S. interest rates and a smaller U.S. budget deficit.
(5) Ene~gy:-'Higher energy prices have made a major contribution to reducing energy
and oil use per unit of GNP. For the coming years, it is likely that there will be a
balanced situation in the oil markets leading possibly to a period of declining real oil
prices, benefitting our economies. In this period, industrialized democracies should
avoid the kind of complacency that we saw in similar circumstances in the 1970's;
should strengthen considerably the policies on stocks in order to prevent another oil
price shock; and should gradually take up contacts with the surplus oil producing
countries in order to develop some common understanding and responsibilities for the
longer term energy supply and demand.
(6) East-West trade and payments. There has been effective ad hoc cooperation
among Western countries on financial assistance to Poland. There are, however, no
systematic consultations on the evolution of East-West trade and payments relations.
(7) Development assistance. Industrialized donor countries should recognize that aid
to developing countries can be motivated by humanitarian, economic and foreign policy
concerns. It is not useful to argue whether one motivation is better than another. Instead
we should concentrate on the effectiveness of aid in achieving its objectives. Develop-
ment does not depend primarily on aid but on the policies of the developing countries.
Aid should be linked more systematically to appropriate economic policies, trade
55
policies, treatment of foreign investment, etc., in developing countries. Donor countries
should not leave this entirely to the IMF and World Bank.
(8) Recycling and debts. The recycling of OPEC surpluses to developing countries is
going much better than many expected and this should continue though risks and
uncertainties are considerable. The role of banks should continue to increase, but other
flows, in particular through capital markets, direct investment, and above all the IMF,
should become of increasing importance. Debts and debt service of developing countries
are again rising. While some individual developing countries are in serious trouble and
the days of borrowing at negative real interest rates are over, there is no general debt
problem.
(9) The international economic order. Industrialized countries should, of course,
contribute to reducing the particular weaknesses and vulnerabilities of the developing
countries. Developed and developing countries also have a common interest in promot-
ing an open trading system, productive investment, transfer of technology, and proper
sharing in the international decision making. However, the industrialized countries
should also identify much more systematically their own interests and responsibilities
with respect to the vulnerabilities in the functioning of the world's economic system.
These include energy, access to strategic materials, as well as food security, fragility of
the financial system, risks to the world's eco-system and social and cultural tensions in
rapidly changing societies in developing countries. These issues are not "North/South
issues" but the industrialized countries should together identify the actions they can take
and the countries (developing or socialist) with whom they might cooperate to achieve
their objectives in relation to the different specific issues.
(10) The North/South dialogue. The O.E.C.D. countries have in principle accepted
the idea of "global negotiations" in the framework of the United Nations. These global
negotiations are desirable in the eyes of many; others think they are not desirable but
unavoidable. More should be done by the industrialized countries to ensure that these
negotiations can be conducted in such a way and on such issues that both sides might
derive satisfaction from the outcome, and that the solidarity of the industrialized
countries can be maintained during the negotiations.
* * *
DISCUSSION
East-West economic relations. A German participant summarized the proposed gas
pipeline agreement with the Soviet Union, which was expected to be concluded in the
autumn of 1981. It followed the format of existing Russian contracts with Germany,
Italy, France and Austria, but was much bigger in scope. The USSR would supply
Western Europe with the equivalent of 30 million tons of crude oil a year-or 600,000
barrels a day-for 25 years, beginning in 1984-5. The Soviets would bear about 90 per
cent of the total investment in the project (the transport system alone-from Western
Siberia to the eastern borders of Western Europe-costing $15 billion). In return,
Russia would earn by the second half of this decade more than $10 billion annually in
hard currencies, a not inconsiderable help to her economy. The Russians would
purchase pipe, compressor stations, and other equipment in Western Europe, against
credits for 13 years or less, on which the interest rates were still under negotiation.
Assuming Western Europe's energy needs in 1989 were covered 17 per cent by natural
gas, and 25-30 per cent of that were Russian, the degree of energy dependence on the
USSR would be only around five per cent. So if the Soviets cut off the supply for
political reasons, the effect would not be dramatic.
56
·An International speaker referred to the "marked lack of enthusiasm" in some
quarters about this deal, as it was bound to affect attitudes toward dealings with the
Soviet Union, especially in the Federal Republic. A Frenchman found it completely
inconsistent with the feelings of mistrust about the Soviets expressed in the previous
day's discussion. Others pointed out that no energy-importing country could avoid
risks, and that on balance this contract involved tolerable risks that were less disadvan-
tageous than some of the alternatives, such as undiminished dependence on OPEC. In
Russia; •the deal appeared to have the approval of both the neo-Stalinists and the
technocratic modernizers. Was not some degree of economic interdependence a Sensible
element of East-West policy, an incentive to Soviet restraint? Unfortunately, most
European countries were too often unwilling to talk multilaterally about East-West
economic relations for fear of losing trade. So in general there was no clear impetus
away from bilateral dealings.
Energy. Recent talk of an 9il glut had led some to predict that a period of declining
real oil prices might lie ahead. An American disagreed, pointing out that excess usable
commercial inventories were now probably no more than 10 days' worth. It was not the
physical facts of the situation that had changed so much as the perception of the need
for inventories, and perceptions could suddenly change again with events in the Middle
East or even in the U.S. Congress. In the longer run, there was still greater uncertainty,
as perhaps half of all production by the year 2000 would come from reserves not yet
found. All this suggested that the trend of real oil prices was up, though probably not at
the 29 per cent annual rate of the late 1970's.
Japans per/ormance posed a number of problems for the world economy. Virtually
all of her growth in 1980 had come from a surge in exports; this year it would come
more from domestic demand, which was healthier. The proper response to Japan's
success was not trade restrictions and bilateral deals. Japan had to be kept in the
multilateral system and persuaded to adjust by way of her exchange rate and domestic
demand level. We did not have to imitate the Japanese in order to have free trade with
them, according to an International participant. An American argued, though, that we
had to try to learn from the Japanese, who had a superior management system. If one
laid down 10 criteria for well-run industrial companies, the Japanese would probably
reflect more of them that the rest of us. The role of government in their success had
been exaggerated by their critics. Unless we learned to compete effectively with them,
the threat of protectionism loomed. Another American suggested, though, that the
Japanese may have become champions in a dying sport: heavy industrial capacity,
which might be "the wave of the past."
Trade and protectionism. We were on the brink of an export credit subsidy war. It
was a waste of resources to spend national budgetary funds to try to get export orders
away from other countries, rather than trying to increase employment and productivity.
Unless some sign of agreement appeared soon, the Reagan Administration seemed
prepared to leave the system and move to unlimited subsidization, which would benefit
no one.
Interest rates and exchange rates. One had heard a lot of talk lately about the dollar
strengthening because of higher U.S. interest rates. But an American was troubled by
the overemphasis on interest rates as an explanation for the course of recent history;
many other influences had been at play. The enhancement of the dollar's value meant
simply that the arbitrageurs would ensure a widening of the margin between spot and
forward rates of counterpart currencies, such as the DM. And that widening could be
achieved either by lowering the spot value of the DM or by increasing its future value.
To predict which of these would happen, one had to analyze the fundamental factors
beneath the surface. Perhaps the market had been doing a better job in the foreign
exchange field than it had in Wall Street in judging the future.
57
Some Europeans were concerned about the "interest rate war." A Briton saw it this
way: International liquidity tended to flow toward the countries with high interest rates,
i.e., those which sought to combat inflation, not by controlling the growth of money,
but by keeping its price high. That in turn pushed up the value of their currencies, which
left comparative monetary performance as the only factor that had no effect on
exchange rates! In this sense, the market was "rewarding vice, not virtue." The
combination of a high dollar, high interest rates, and high oil prices was having a
depressing and disruptive effect on the world economy, particularly for the oil-
importing LDCs.
A Belgian sympathized with the plight of the Americans, who were "damned if they
did and damned if they didn't" in their exchange rate policy. But could the U.S. really
expect increased military spending from allies whose economies were being throttled by
excessive interest rates? An American referred to foreign demands that his government
"do something" about the interest rate, the exchange rate, the inflation rate, the
unemployment rate and the growth rate. This was a classic case of an insufficiency of
instruments. The U.S. Administration felt that the government should intervene to
achieve those objectives that could not be well served in any other way, and to let the
market function in such areas as exchange rates and interest rates. A Swiss intervention
advocated a middle ground between fixed exchange rates and the detrimental "benign
neglect." A German responded that such a flexible band was synonomous with the
"managed float."
Recycling and debts. The private capital and credit markets had done a remarkably
good job in dealing with the international imbalances following on the breakdown of
Bretton Woods and the oil price rise. The net size of the Euromarket had quintupled
over the past decade, from $150 billion to $750 billion. (On a gross basis it was probably
twice that big.) But it was questionable whether the market could cope as well with the
effects of future oil price increases. We had to be careful about the degree and timing of
pressures which might be applied by the IMF, the World Bank and others on developing
countries for domestic adjustment. 'It was commendable to try to "sell" the market
system to those nations, but pressures brought to bear on them in an extreme or
indiscriminate way could jeopardize hopes for the democratic system in the Third
World.
A Greek speaker called for increased recycling of funds through direct investments, as
some of the Arabs were doing in India. A flow of funds to places with a receptive
attitude could help transform technology transfers into high productivity growth,
resulting in greatly expanded markets for the developed countries.
The North-South dialogue. An American participant said that most members of the
new Adminstration were profoundly skeptical about fashionable theories concerning
economic and political development. Contemporary modes of dichotomous thinking
opposed, for example, North to South, East to West, developed to underdeveloped, in
the same way that academics had spoken for· years of bourgeois vs. proletariat, elite vs.
mass, capitalist vs. working class, etc. Instead of illuminating reality, these grand
theories tended to distort it. They were more useful for propaganda purposes than for
policy making, because economic development problems were specific to a particular
time and place, and solutions to tliem had to be similarly specific. It was not helpful, in
thinking about the Third World, for instance, to lump together the Chinese merchants
of Southeast Asia, Indonesian peasants, Indian villagers, oil-rich Arabs, Latin Ameri-
can slum dwellers, aborigines and nomads-and then to expect to come up with some
sort of policy relevance.
One could be skeptical also about theories linking economic development and
political change. These things were related in indeterminate ways, and it was unbecom-
ingly immodest to presume that political democracy was likely to be nurtured by certain
58
\
\!
economic policies. Most grand dichotomous theories of history reflected a blend of
utopianism and guilt.
All this did not mean that the Reagan Administration favored bilateral approaches,
but it did suggest that the emphasis would be on policies tailored to concrete
situati"ons-contextual rather than global, experimen'tal rather than dogmatic, piecemeal
rather than holistic. In short, we needed more complex models in the North-South
dialogue.
This·1m'plication of "total ad hocery sent shivers down the spine" of at least one
International participant, who feared it would spread around the globe and mask selfish
unilateral policies. Others who had nothing against a pragmatic approach in principle
argued that we had to come to grips with a practical political reality: Whatever -the
differences among the developing countries, they shared a mood of rising expectations,
and they would continue to act together in the Group of 77 (which now numbered
actually 120). These countries were important to us for practical economic reasons: as
sources of raw materials and as future markets. Moreover, the ex-colonial powers not
only knew these peoples well but felt a moral obligation toward them. (The Europeans
saw their Lome Agreement as a kind of burden-sharing with North America of the -·
worldwide responsibility for geostrategic stability.) Even if we did not subscribe to all
the demands for a "new economic order," we had to pursue global negotiations with
these people, and it was essential that these negotiations be well prepared. We could not
just flatly reject their rhetoric; we had to demonstrate a change of heart. The tone with
which we dealt with them was important, and current U.S. attitudes and styles were
worrisome (even though they might be attributable to budgetary constraints). "We've
got to walk on tiptoe here," as one Briton put it. An American, who sympathized with
the development aims of the Group of 77, asked nonetheless if we should not expect
from them-if not support-at least some recognition of the complexity of political
issues. It was statistically improbable, for example, that in UN voting the U.S. was
always wrong and the USSR always right.
Our cooperation with the Third World did not have to be confined to global
negotiations, however. There was room for bilateral and trilateral arrangements, and
the unique role of multinational companies in accomplishing technology transfers was
mentioned.
International ec..onomic cooperation. The role of summit meetings as an instrument of
consultation and cooperation was the subject of lively debate. One view was that they
were indispensable, and should be longer and better prepared. Another was that, on the
economic side, their agendas should be limited to a few specific issues (although an
objection to that was that many issues were intensely interrelated). This provoked the
further suggestion that the economic agenda at summits "should be held down to zero."
The speaker could not imagine that leaders of the major powers did not know exactly
what they wanted to do, or that they would be influenced by others.
On the subject of international economic cooperation in general, one school of
thought was that it often led toward dirigiste solutions, and toward harmonizing at
average rates instead of emulating the countries with the better performance. We needed
less government intervention in the market place. Rejoinders to this were that the
market did not always know best, or that "it knew the wrong thing" (e.g., the evolution
of the exchange rate of the pound in recent years). Other speakers took a less dogmatic
approach, advocating international economic cooperation where it was necessary and
feasible. The work of the OECD was cited as an example of successful consultation.
The West usually performed better in cooperation than in conflict, according to a
Portuguese participant. Big, medium-sized and small countries all had a role to play,
which could not be fulfilled simply by the dictates of the "lords and masters."
59
60
The potential. political consequences of our failure to resolve the present economic
crisis were cause for alarm. The "healing process" might be too slow for our democratic
systems to endure, a Dutch speaker said. If we indeed required "shock therapy," a
summit meeting could lay out the lines of action and entrust the administration of it to
"the experts."
* *
*
V. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
Foreign policy prospects under the new U.S. Administration. An American partici-
pant sketched out the background of the recent U.S. election, and indicated some lines
of direction for the future. President Reagan's abnormal landslide was doubly signifi-
cant as the Republicans had been a minority party since 1932. He had been a "long
shot" candidate, representing neither the business nor political establishments, and had
built his own coalition, including many voters not traditionally attracted to the
Republi'cah cause. Probably the crucial issues had been economic-inflation, unemploy-
ment and excessive government regulation-but a dramatic turnabout in foreign policy
had also been foreshadowed. Polls showed that a large majority of voters favored
higher defense spending and a larger role for America in the world. This marked the
end of the post-Vietnam mood of national withdrawal. America had passed through an
"identity crisis" which had lastc;d a decade and a half. There was a palpable new self-
confidence in the country, not unlike what had been felt in France in 1958. Although
foreign policy had played a significant role in the election, the extraordinary concern
since then with domestic affairs reflected theAdministration's conviction that a restored
U.S. role in the world had to rest on a restored economy. But reinforcing the alliance
through close, detailed consultation had a high priority, reflecting the view that Soviet
expansionism was the greatest threat to world peace.
How did the new Administration intend to approach its handling of foreign affairs?
"Carefully" was the answer. Policies for Africa, for Central America, the Persian Gulf,
the law of the sea-all were under review. The principal outstanding question concern-
ing America and its allies, the speaker concluded, had to do with Europe's role outside
the NATO alliance area, where the threats to supplies of oil and other natural resources
was greatest.
A Dutch participant intervened to say that unfortunately there was little time for a
leisurely review of policies by an incumbent administration. That was more appropriate
for an institute like Brookings.
Another American speaker contrasted the change in Senate chairmanships with the
strong continuity of foreign policy personnel from previous administrations, which
suggested that the U.S. remained committed to the world responsibilities it had assumed
over the years. A compatriot remarked drily that Republicans "took some getting used
to" but it was worth the trouble, as they would be more powerful after the Congres-
sional reapportionment based on the 1980 census. (Over half the U.S. senators,
incidentally, had held that office less than five years, a significant change from the old
days.) To use a football metaphor, American politics was played within the 40-yard
lines, i.e., it moved back and forth no more than 20 yards on a 100-yard field.) Some
clue about the likely direction of U.S. foreign policy could be drawn from these
Administration views: (a) that the eighties would be a most dangerous decade as the
Russians-pessimistic about their longer-term prospects-would be more tempted into
risky adventures; and (b) that the preceding Administration had gone further than any
other in cultivating the Third World, and had failed. But we should not expect the draft
to be restored-within the first few years anyway-by an Administration which decried
coercion, and which felt that improving the reenlistment rate was the key personnel
problein for the U.S. forces.
The discussion brought forth a wide variety of reactions from non-U.S. participants.
America's new-found self-confidence was welcomed. Its European allies had been
longing not so much for any particular point of view from the U.S. as for clarity and
constancy. Some thought that the Carter Administration had done a good job of
consultation, and fears that the new Administration might not do as well had been
allayed. One could not yet be sure exactly what the Reagan team stood for, but they
61
seemed willing to keep an open mind until after consultation, which was encouraging.
There was still a danger of polarization on some issues, though, and the way the U.S.
chose its words and presented itself in the months ahead would do much to determine
"whether the alliance remained respectable." For all the talk about pragmatism, this
Administration seemed markedly more ideological than its recent predecessors. Ironi-
cally, President Reagan was likely to be criticized for doing what Europeans had for
years advised the Americans to do: be less concerned with their image and their
popularity.
In answer to some specific questions, an American participant replied (a) with respect
to China, that the U.S. would observe the requirements of the Shanghai Communique
and the terms of the Taiwan Relations Act; and (b) that the new Administration, which
was rethinking a number of foreign policy problems, would not be stampeded into
action until it was ready to act. It hoped that this would be understood by its allies, with
whom it was prepared in turn to be patient.
Analyzing the French election results. A Frenchman reviewed the implications of the
recent elections in his country. The causes of President Giscard's defeat-because it was
that more than a victory for M. Mitterand-were manifold: the economic crisis; the
split in the majority; the strategy of M. Chirac; and the accumulated effects of many
years in office.
If, as seemed most probable, the left prevailed in the legislative elections, President
Mitterand could not avoid putting into operation his campaign program, with all that
that implied. One could only hope that he would try to limit the risks of precipitate
action that would cause disequilibrium. It was a mistake to expect that M. Mitterand in
office would be radically different from M. Mitterand in opposition. As perceived by
the French speaker, his philosophy was essentially Marxism tempered by Keynesianism,
with a strong dose of suspicion about "big capital." One could count on an early
stimulation of the economy, with an accompanying increase in GNP, consumer
spending, and the size of the national budget. This risked setting off a new round of
inflation. There would be an emphasis on protectionism and the nationalization of
certain sectors.
On questions of foreign policy, it was harder to make predictions. The criticism which
M. Mitterand had addressed to President Giscard about the Polish situation presaged a
certain firmness toward the Soviet Union, but that would be balanced by other
tendencies. The country's natural interests would help maintain the Franco-German
relationship, but one had to admit that the charm had been broken. M. Mitterand
favored the enlargement of the European Community, as a "club" to which any
democratic country could aspire, although there was no doubt that he would like to see
it more socialist. He would not feel exactly at home with his policies in contemporary
Britain or Germany. Human rights would be more heavily stressed, and policy changes
had already been announced about South Africa and Central America, which paralleled
in some ways President Carter's early program. But there was little likelihood of
military intervention in Africa in the near future.
President Mitterand was fundamentally a nationalist, un vrai jranr;:ais. Although he
had travelled, he was not at heart an internationalist, and his lack of knowledge of
foreign languages would contribute to his feeling of isolation. He was not a man to back
down in the face of reversals, and one could expect him to persevere in shaping his
notion of the Fifth Republic. As for the French citizenry, they had immediately and
calmly accepted the verdict of the election, which was evidence of their political
maturity.
Crises outside the NATO area. An American reference to Europe's disinclination to
get involved outside the NATO area led a Briton to recall the situation in the late 1950's,
when British forces had been stationed around the world in defense of Western
62
interests. Among other factors leading to the withdrawal of those forces had been U.S.
pressure. One remembered also Suez, and the repeated short selling of sterling on the
foreign exchanges in those days. Current debate about the proposed intervention force
should keep that historical background in view. An International participant lent his
support to this statement.
An American speaker recalled that many senior officials in the U.S. administration at
the time had had serious doubts about Britain's withdrawal from its overseas bases.
Looking ahead, he said that the buildup of American forces in the Arabian Sea showed
that b-Oth President Carter and President Reagan had understood how important the
area was to the U.S., even if Europeans might be more dependent on it for oil. As long
as the Palestinian situation remained unresolved, though, the Arab Gulf states would
not permit the establishment on their soil of Western bases,. But it would not be wise for
the U.S. to seek to set up the kind of outposts that the British had had, for example, in
Bahrain.
As the U.S. now shouldered the major burden for the security of that region, it was
to be hoped that its allies would support American efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli
dispute, and would moreover bolster their own military efforts at home in Europe.
Future consultation among the allies would be particularly important in other areas of
the world, such as Iran, where the eventual passing of the Ayatollah Khomeini might
invite Soviet intervention. And as the Afghanistan war continued, the allies ought to be
consulting each other about aid to the insurgents, and about how to treat Pakistan, over
whose territory such aid would have to pass.
* *
*
In his closing remarks, the Chairman observed that these discussions had underlined
the fact that the Western democracies were going to be up against the greatest challenges
they had faced since World War II. Each of our countries had a contribution to make
toward safeguarding peace and welfare. We had to take advantage of the strength of
our open societies, of their capacity to learn and to adapt to new situations and
problems. The maintenance of freedom would require a readiness to sacrifice, determi-
nation and a strong will-above all the will of governments backed by national
consensus. Achieving this would take a renewed daily effort.
Meetings like Bilderberg played a useful role in the forging of our will-not by
mobilizing any particular sentiment but by helping to create a body of enlightened
opinion, which was the mainstay of governmental action.
The Chairman concluded by thanking all those whose capable and generous efforts
had assured the success of this meeting, especially the Swiss hosts, led by Dr. Victor
Umbricht. An American spoke for all the participants in expressing gratitude for the
Chairman's skillful work in presiding over the conference.
*
* *
63
