l
.,,
t
J
-
l:i
~
~
~
~
~
0
{'
\
~
-
N
0
0
N
Ci
z
N
»l
z
~
-,
I
:r:
1-<
0
r')
;..
<t:
:::E
;..
..-I
..-I
1-<
z
<t:
:r:
u
z
0
>-
0
z
·~
~~ - -.
D8t;>
)
· ·· --~·- ·---;--
~' - • ;
/ ·"'11 -- .. ··-
f .~:;-;·Q ' ' ··! !I U! A;-;:,~:
7,
' .)~
1 '~'1 7 ,., . ~ ·> \
\ , .. I i. ,, ' . l
\"''---.!.:.'!'.~
i) r::-,.....
b.J.)
2-0C' z.
r.rJ()·-r
- \ ~
LC Control Number
1111111111111111111111111111111111
2 2003 435443
I
<~ }
'I
I
l
i
,
l>
I
' )·
I>
I
I.
~
"'>
;f ''').
BlLDERBERG 50TH ~ MAY 30TH ~JUNE 2 ND 20 tl2
Introduction ·-:,:
,>-~ : ; ·- ...: ..
. .·.·.·
~ ,•.
The fiftieth Bilderberg Meeting .was held at the West-
fields Marriott, Chantilly, Virginia,·fmm)'v1aY·3dth-.June
2nd 2002. There were 115 participants from ~ocountries.
The participants represented government, diplomacy,
politics, business, law, education, journalism and insti-
tutes specialising in national and international studies.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity. not as rep-
resentatives of their national governments or employ-
ers.As is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit
frank and open discussion, no public reporting of the
conference took place.
This booklet is an account of the 2002 Bilderberg
Meeting and is distributed only to participants of this
and past conferences and to prospective participants of
future conferences. It represents a summary ofthe panel-
lists' opening remarks for each session, and of the com-
ments and interventions in the subsequent discussion.
3
...
BI LDERB ERG 50T H <$> MAY 30T H-JUNE 2ND 2002
LI ST OF PARTICIPA NTS
HO N ORA RY C H AIRMA N
-- ~--
lkl''""' ETIENN E DAVIGNON Vice-Chairman, SocieteGenerale de Belgique
PA RT I C I PA NT S
unitu:i:.r,,•c..~orAnl.:ric.:.. PAu L A. ALLA 1RE FormerChairman a nd CEO, Xerox Corporation
""'""·' A. CHARLES BAIL LIE Chairmanand c EO,TDBank Financial Group
c""'""''"' EDWARD BA LLS ChiefEconomic Advisor to the Treasury
"'""''' FRANC ISCO PINTO BALSEMAO Professor ofCommunication
Science, New Un iversity, Lisbon;Chairman, IMPRESA, s.c.r.s.
h;m" J EAN DE BELOT Ed itor-in-chief, Le Figaro
unud ~t.,re..~orAmnica C . FR ED BERGSTEN Director, Institute for International Economics
'"'w"' joHN G. BERNANDER Di rectorGeneral,Norwegian Broadcasting
Corporation
c..n.d;>C ONRAD M ~ BLACK Chairman, Telegraph Group Limited
Jntc:matJon:~.l FR ITS BOLK EST E I N COintnissioner, European Con1mission
'"""'"' ANTO NIO BORGES Vice-Chairmanand Managing Director,
Gold man Sachs International
unttcd~tate..ofAm.:ri<J CHAR L E S G. BOYD President and C EO, Business Executives for
NationalSewrity
"""" H ENR I DE C ASTRI ES Chairman oftheBoard,AXA
s1
-.m j UAN LUI S C EB RL.\N CEO, Prisa{El.Pais)
''·""'' BERTRAND COLLOMB Chairman and cEo, Lafarge
swnwl;md l ASCA L C o u c HEP1N Federal Councillor; Head ofthe Federal
Department of EconomicAffairs
c"" "'''·"" RA l. F DAHREN DO RF Member, House ofLords;Former Warden,St.
Antony's College,Oxford
uni~<:JStaTc:~'1fAmcricJ KENNETH W. D AM Deputy Secretary, us Department ofTreasu1y
c"'"' GE ORGE A ~ DAV ID Chairman ofrhe Board, Coca-Cola H~ B.C.S.A.
Unitcd"TJits of Amr:rl<.<i J
Vl I C H E L A. DAVI o~W E I L L Chairn1an, Lazard Frf.res & Co.
4
··.~ · ..:;. ] .. -to
.,_ ;,
I
I
"?
I
...,
I
!
I
....
' :>
...],.
"
"\.1
...
I
'
BIL DE RB ERG 50TH <$> MAY 30TH -JUNE 2N D 2002
LI ST OF PA RTI CIPAN TS
r"'''Y KEMAL D ERVI Minister ofEconomic Affai rs
UnitcdsratesofAmcrica j O HN M . D E UTCH Institute Professor, MIT
uni"d " ;"""'" "'"'" VI ET D. D1 NH Assistant Attorney-General for Office of Policy
Development
u nitedStatcsofArnerica THOMAS E. DoN I LO N Executive Vice President, Fannie Mae
'"'YMARI O DRAGH 1 Vice-Chairman and Managing Director, Goldman
Sachs International
uni tedSraresofAmerica STUART EIZENSTA T Covington & Burling
D<"""'' ANDE RS ELDRUP Chairman oft he Board of Directors, Danish Oil &
Gas Consortium
Uo it<dSw esofAmoci<<O M ARTIN s.FELDSTEIN President and CEO, Nationa l Bureau of
Economic Research
Ponoc•' ELISA GU IMARAES FERR EIRA Member of Parliament;Former
Minister ofPlanning
u nitc:dStau:sllfAmcnca THO M AS S. F O LEY Partner,Akin,Gum p,Strauss, Hauer & Feld
'"""'"'onol ADR IAN FORT ESCUE Director General,justice and InternalAffairs,
European Commission
c,n;•d' DAVID FRu M American Enterprise Institute; Former Special Assistant
to President Bush
'';'"" J EA N-Lo u 1s GERGO RI N Executive Vice-President, Strategic
Coordination, EADS
Uni>
<dS""""'Am<o ioo PAUL A. G lCOT Editorial rage Editor, The WaH Street]ourna!
unued statcsofAlllcnca ALAN GRE E NS PAN Chairn1an, Federal ReserveSysten1
Th'N"h"''"d' RIJ KMAN W .J. G ROE N1NK Chairman ofthe Board,ABNAMROBank N.v.
A,.,., AL FRED Gu s EN BAU ER Member ofParliament;Chairman,Social
Democratic Party
lho N<th« l,nd< VI CTOR H ALB ERSTADT Professor of Economics, Leiden University;
Fonner Honora1
y Secretary General ofBilderberg Meetings
uni"d'"'" ofAonwo;• CA RLA A ~ HI LLS Chairmana nd cEo, Hills & Company, lnternational
Consultants
5
lliLDERRERG 50TH <@> MAY JOTH -JUNE 2N D 2002
LI ST OF PARTICIPA NTS
UnitedStaft;q1fAmt:J'ICJ J I M HOAG LAN n Associate Editor. The Wnsh.i-ngton Post
Umtl~d:-tar.:\ofAmt•ric.r ALLAN B. HUBBARD President, 1'8A Industries
Urll ted"t:ttt'sorAmcnra KA Y BAILEY HuTCH I SON Senator(Republican.Texas)
lkl''""' JAN HUYGHEBAERT Chairman.AJmanij N.Y.
G<comony WOLFGANG ]SC HINGER Ambassadortotheus
LhHt~dst:ttc~ofAmenc,r C HARLE S A. JAMES Assistant Attorney General for Antitrust
Llnt rerl"r:tre(nfAmcn...:r JAMES A. JOHNSON Vice-Chairman, Perseu s, L.LC
Ulllted stat..:... ofAmcric:r VERNON E. JORDAN, JR. Managing Director, Lazard Frercs & Co. LLC
llnlledSr<~tc\!l.l\ml·ncJ HENRY A. KISSINGER Chainnc
m.KissingcrAssociates,lnc.
TI1cNcrhcrbnch EWALD KI ST ChairmanoftheBoard,!NGN.V.
llwNcoheohnd' G F. RA RD _I. KLEIST ERLFE President and CEO, Royal Philips
Electronics
'"'m'"" H 1LM AR KOPPER Chairman ofthe Supervisory Board. Deutsche Bank AG
""'"d'""""fAm""'·' C HAR LES KRAUTH AM MER Columnist, Tlte Wasftingto11 Post
u""''"'""'"'·
'"''"'' HENRY R. KRAVIS FoundingPa rtner,Kohlbcrg Kravis Roberts& Co.
tJnit l" ' "'all·•;tlfAmt·ncj M ARJ Ej OSEE KRA VIs Senior Fellow, Hudson Institute, Inc.
'"'''"'""'" ANDRE KUDE LSKI Chairman of the Board and CEO, Kudelski Group
tJnue<t~wtc,(ltArnenc;• JOHN]. LAFALCE Congressman (Democrat, New York)
lTmtcdSt:JII:;,of Arnerict jAN LESC H LY Chairman and CEO, Care Capital, LLC
'""""' ANDRE Li:vv-LAN G FormerChairman, Paribas
,..,,.,,"' MAURI CE LIPPENS Chairman. Fortis
unitt·dST:I!c~ofAnwricJ JE SS 1CA T. MATHEWS Presiden t,Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace
United St;J(C~ nfAmenc.t TERRY McAuLIFFE Chairman, Democratic National Comnlittee
UnitedSt:tiC\Ofr\mcnu wILL lAM J. McDONOUG H President a nd CEO, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
'I
"'" RAMON DE MIGU EL Secreta1yofStatcforf-oreignAffairs
6
<(' '}>
41. ~
4~
"'~
~l ~
...>
:'\
..;: ~
A'\
I
I
~>
"'~
/~
BILDERBERG 50TH <@> MAY 30TH -JUNE 2ND 2002
LIST OF PARTI CIPANTS
- - - - - - ·- - - -- -
umtcdStatt·~ nfAmenca ANDREA M 1TCH ELL Chief Foreign Affairs Corre~pond ent, NBC New~
''""" Do M1N1QuE Mo ·is1 Deputy Director. French Institute of
International Relations
'""" THIERRY DE MONT BRIAL Director. French Institute of
International Relations
"""'d'"'"ofAm'"" MICHAEL H. M OSKOW President. Federal Reserve BankofChicago
No~"' EGIL MYKLEBU ST Chairman, NorskHydroASA
F;nlond JoRMA OLLILA Chairman oftheBoardand cm,NokiaCorporation
""'"d' SYLVIA OSTRY Distinguished Research Fellow, Center for
International Studies, University ofToronto
Tmkey Bi.iLEND0ZAYDINLl CEO, KO<; HoldingA.~.
'"'""";onol TOMMASO PA DOA-SCH IOP PA Memberof the Executive Board.
European Central Bank
Gm« ALEXIS PAPAHELAS Foreign policycolumnist.TOVIMA
unitcdSt.u..:s ofAmcnca FRANK H. P EARL Chairman and CEO, Perseus, L LC.
Uni tt·dStdt..:.sofAmcnc<~ R ICHARD N. PE R LE Resident Felto\v,Amcrican Enterpri.'e lnsti tutc
for Public Policy Research
"''m"'YRuPRECHT POL ENZ Member ofParliament,cDu/csu
Unttcd Statc~ ofAmerica CLYDE V. PRESTO WITZ, JR. Presiden t.EconomicStrategy lnstitute
untted St:~tcsofAmcrica MARK RACI COT Chairman, Republican National Committee
un itcctStatesofAmeri.:a FRANKLIN D. RAt N ES Chairman and CEO. Fa nnie Ma e
Aum;, GERHARD RA NDA ChairmanandcEo, BankAustriaAG
un,,~dSt;uc'r,fAmerica STEVEN RATTN ER Managing Principal, Quad rangle Group LLC
c,..,d, HEATHER REISMAN Prcs identandcFo,lndi ~oBooks&Musiclnc.
Un 1
tcd St~ Tc~ ofArncrica
Sp.nn
DAVID ROC KEFEL LER Member,JrMorgan InternationalCouncil
MATIAS RODR IGUEZ INCtARTE E'\ecutiveVicc-Chairman.Banco
Santander Central Hispano
c"""';";" ERI C ROLL SeniorAdviser,uos Warburg Ltd.
7
BILDLR BERC SOTII ~ MAY }OTH-JUNE 2ND 2002
LI ST OF PARTIC IPA NTS
un!ll.:d:.'"'· ~o, ,\111<"1 ""' CH A RLIE RosE Producer, R
oseCommunications
r'"'"' Ou v1ER Rov University Professor and Researcher,CNRS
LinHni:.t,•ln oJAnH'rlc.• DONALD H. RUM SFE LD SecretaryofDefense
,.,,,,., bzD EM SAN BE RK Director, Turkish Economic and Social Studies
Foundation
"""'""' J URGEN E. SC HR EMPP Chairman ofthe Board ofManagement,
DaimlerChrysler AG
'" "''"' EKKEHARD SCHULZ Chairman,ThyssenKruppAc
...'"'" Louis SCHW EITZER ChairmanandcEo, Renault s.A.
Denm" k T0GER SEIDEN FADEN Editor-in-chief,Pol.itiken
"·""' ERNEST-ANTOINE SEILLIERE Chairman and cEO,CGIP
"""'' L1 LI A SHEVTSO VA SeniorAssociate, Carnegie Moscow Centre
unit.:J state.~ otAmenc... H ENRYS 1EG M AN Council on Foreign Relations
u""'""""' "tA"''""' GEORGE SOROS Chairman,Soros Fund Management
umtcd "'"~ufA"'"'" jAMES B. STEIN BERG VicePresident andDirector,ForeignPolicy
Studies Program, Brookings Institution
No~•Y JENS STo LTEN BERG Leader oftheOpposition (Social Democratic Party)
umwd ~l"tes ofAmcnc., LAWREN CE H. S U MMERS President, Harvard University
lccl•"d PETER D. SUTHERLAND Chairman and Managing Director,
Goldman Sachs International; Chairman, BPAmoco
,,,I,,J C HRISTOFF ER TAX ELL President and CEO, Partek Oyj
unncdSt.clt:..\ofAaH:nc.~ G. RI C H A RD THOMAN SeniorAdvisor,EvercorePartnerslnc.
" "'" "s"'"ofAmwc. jO HN L. TH ORNTON President and co-coo, The Goldman Sachs
Group, Inc.
Fml'"" TE IJA H. T11 LI KA INEN Director ofResearch, Centre for
European Studies
sw,deo MICHAEL TRESCI-I OW Chairman, Ericsson
'""" J£A N-C LAUDE TR! CHET Governor, Banquede France
8
<
"
i
<(
, }.>
..~
.....
«?
I
I
I
~";>
I
I
I
-(:5>
i
•
I
<{(
I
I
"
~
I
I
BILD ERBERG 50TH ~ MAY }OTH -JUNE 2ND 2002
LIST OF PART ICIPANTS
swi•·
,"l'nd DANI ELL. VASE LLA Chairman and cEo,NovartisAG
uni•«lst"" ofAm"'" LODEW IJK j .R. DEVIN I<- Chairman, Global Health Care Partners,
Credit Suisse First Boston Private Equity, Inc.
Aumi' FRANZ VRANITZKY Former FederalChancellor
sw,don jACOB WALL EN BERG Chairman ofthe Board,Skandinaviska
Enskilda Banken
Canada KEN NET H WH YTE Editor,TheNationa!Post
c'"' """'" GARETH W ILLI AMs Leader, House ofLords; Member ofthe Cabinet
1
""'""1>0"'1 jAMES D. WOLF ENSO HN President,The World Bank
c"m'"YKLAUS ZuMWINKEL Chairmanofthe Board ofManagement,
Deutsche Post AG
RAPPORTEURS
c"'"""'"" R.JOHN MI CKLETHWAIT United StatesEditor,TheEconomist
c""""""' ADR IAN D. WOOLDRIDGE ForeignCorrespondent,TfreEconomist
I N ATTEN DA NCE
--~ ~-~ -
"" N
"I""'""' MAJA BAN CK Executive Secreta1y, Bilderberg Meetings
Unitcd~ratc~ofAmcrica MI C HAEL J. FARR EN Vice President of ExternalAffairs, Xerox
Corporation;Adviser, American Friends ofBilderberg, Inc.
Untrcd States ofAmcric.a STEV EN S. LEE LocalOrganizer 2002
9
rJ')
0
z
-
N
r-
0
0
~
N
~
a
z
z
0
~
N
;;..
...J
...
"'
....
...J
z
0
1-
0
-
0
;J
z
01
-
~
-.
<r:
"
0
l:
'-
~
l:
u
f-
1-
0
~
0
z
~
("')
;;..
~
<r:
::E
0
....l
-
~
If'
I! IL DLKBI:I{(; SDTH ~ MAY }O T H - J UNE 2ND 2002
A(;ENDA
• The Consequences of the War Against Terrorism
'P""k
"'' • Dominique Moi:si
Richard N. Perle
Moderator : VictOr Halberstadt
page : 15
11 • C
orporate Governance: Does Capitalism Need Fixing?
'"'"''kcrs : Frits Bolkestein
Franklin D. Raines
Modcraror • jurgen E. Scbrempp
page : 2 1
111 : The C
hanging Nature of the EU Within the Western Alliance
Speakers • Stuart Eizenstat
Peter D. Sutherland
Modera.or : Etienne Davignon
page : 26
1v • Have Civil Liberties Been Unnecessarily Eroded?
Sp.:<Jkers : Viet D. Dinh
: Adrian Fortescue
Moderator : Franz Vranitzky
page : 31
v : Th~ Influence of the Extreme Right
Speakers : Ralf Dahrendorf
Paul A Gigot
: Charles Krauthammer
Moderator : Bertrand Collomb
page : 35
v1 : The Middle East
speaker> : Ramon de Miguel
: Henry Siegman
Moderato' : Henry A Kissinger
page · 41
.>:::.
12
~
•7
~~
.....
·r
~
~
B l lD E RB E R G 5 01 11 ~ /\·1AY }O I I I · Il JN I 2NJ> lOOZ
AGENDA
v11 Current Affairs
Speaker : Donald H. Ru msfcld
Moderator • Etienne Davignon
f.logc · 45
vm . Post-Crisis Reconstruction/Nation Rebuilding
Speakm • Thierry de Montbrial
:james D. Wolfensohn
Moderator • Conrad M. Black
page : SO
1x • Prospects for the World Economy
Speakers : William J. McDonough
: jean-Claude Trichet
Moderator : Hilmar Kopper
page : 54
x : Trade: The China Effect
Speakers : Carla A Hills
: Sylvia Ostry
Moderator : Kenneth W. Dam
page : 59
x1 : The Influence of Domestic Issues on American Foreign Policy
Speakers : Terry McAuliffe
: Mark Racicot
Moderator : Marie-josee Kravis
page : 64
13
...r,:ffi!..,, :..
~.
<'t
11· .4;~
,(1<lp
'">
.(;;<!'
<;;''"'~
·"
(·-,.
<":>
•'>
•">
14
,,.
B ILD ERBE KG 50TH ~ MAV } O T H-_I UNL 2ND 2 00 2
Consequences of the War
Against Terrorism
The moderator began by stressing the impact of the war
against terrorism on the transatlantic alliance. The
debate duly reflected the current divisions, with Ameri-
can participants emphasising the military side of the
war and the necessityof eradicating terrorism, and Euro-
pean speakers preferring to focus on the deeper causes
of terrorism and warning against oversimplicity. The
issue of Iraq seemed to crystallize these differences.
~ Europe and the United States are figh ting
( FIRST \ ·
PANELLIST the same enemy m the name of the same
values. But behind their common values--
and their common vulnerability- lurk important differ-
ences. America is at war. Europe is not. Europe has a long
history of dealing with low-intensity terrorism. America is
belatedly discovering its vulnerability to terrorism at the
peak of its power. The Roman Empire (with which America
is so often compared) could keep the barbarians at the gate.
Last September the barbarians managed to strike at the very
heart of the United States.
Each side tends to define the threat in different ways.
America emphasises military security. Europe emphasises
the need to complement military security with a political
approach. There is a danger that America's growi ng power
will not keep up with the growing complexity of the world.
And there is a danger that the war of words being waged
across the Atlantic will make co-operation much more dif-
15
IIIL D ERBERG 5 0 T H ~ MAY }OT H - JU N E 2ND 2002
ficult, particularly given the tendency to condemn the
other side for what it is rather than just what it does. Amer-
ica cannot go it alone. It needs help from Europe in intelli-
gence gathering.
There is no doubt that the world would be a safer place
without Saddam Hussein. But can you get rid ofhim swiftly
and elegantly? The region may get yet more dangerous after
a war on Iraq. Europeans differ with America on Iran
(where they see a possible end to the rule of the mullahs) as
well as on the emotional subject of Israel. They also disagree
on the nature of the war on terrorism. A stable world is also
a just world. Terrorists are armed with ideas. You cannot
fight them with force alone.
~ America and Europe are undoubtedly
I SECON D \ d . b I h
PAN EL LIST 1 engage 111 a common att e. But t ey are
~ approaching this common battle very differ-
ently. In the wake of September nth the Bush administra-
tion decided not to distinguish between terrorists and the
countries that harbour terrorists. It also decided that it was
no longer feasible to treat terrorism as a matter of law
enforcement. That pair of decisions will drive many of the
differences between Europe and America.
Can the United States go it alone? We want and need
help. Europeans will help, for instance by providing intelli-
gence information. But the United States {unlike most of its
allies) has the ability to take the war against terrorism to the
terrorists, and it may be forced to go it alone in exercising
this ability. It will be much quicker if we all do it together.
Saddam has invaded his neighbours. He possesses chemical
weapons. He is feverishly working to become a nuclear
power. His ties to terrorist organisations force us to consider
the possibility that he will distribute those weapons to ter-
rorists. Can we wait for this to happen? The United States
has no choice but to deal with Saddam: the right to self-
defence must include the right to preventative action.
16
--r:,. J.l--::.:. : --·
..,,
,
'¥
'I
<
..
.....~
<;
THE C ON SEQUENCES OF TI-lE WAR AGA I N ST TERROR I SM
President Bush's "axis of evil" speech caused misun-
derstanding as well as consternation in Europe: he did
not mean to imply that all the members of the axis are all
the same. There is clearly a struggle going on inside Iran.
But at the moment the countty is firmly in the control of
the mullahs. The debate is whether we should change Iran
by pursing rapprochement with the mullahs or by siding
with the opposition.
As for the idea that terrorists are armed with ideas,
these are not the sort of ideas that we can expect to debate.
Many bright Muslims are sent to religious schools while
they are still teenagers. They are kept isolated from women
and beaten if they cannot recite the Koran correctly. The
adolescents who emerge from this process are deformed
human beings, capable of doing terrible things. Debating
with them is not enough; we need to find them and deprive
them of the territory from which they operate.
A Briton warned against understating the
degree of co-operation between Europe and
the United States. A few stray speeches and
demonstrations should not blind us to the fact that there has
been a deepening ofties since September nth. There has been
intensive co-operation over finance and intelligence. Europe
will also tow the line on Iraq. An American emphasised the
importance ofco-operation in dealing with terrorist financ-
ing. You cannot bomb a foreign bank account. Another
American emphasised the importance of co-operation in
dealing with moderate Arab countries. These countries don't
want to have terrorists in their midst. But they are often reluc-
tant to come forward. Europe, with its solid relations with the
Arab world, could play a key role in encouraging these coun-
tries and winning the battle for hearts and minds.
But there were clearly tensions between the European
and American approaches. One American asked how
Europe's policies had changed in the light of September
17
,.,,_.JiiL ..if!li..~~"C.>ii;~.N.JoO.M::< .......1-,···
I!II.PEilBLKG 50TH ~ r..l/\Y JO rH - JUNE 2ND 200 2
11th? He also worried that Europeans were too influenced
by the desire to appease their domestic Muslim popula-
tions. Another American asked whether "a war on terror-
ism" was rea lly the right response. Doesn't it mean that we
will be at war forever? We are up against an invisible enemy
that will never disappear. America should not treat Septem-
ber uth as a licence to do wh<-ttever it wanted.
Most participants were less concerned about the
notion of war, but they raised questions about how it was
being conducted. A French participant worried about the
sophistication of the American response. During the Cold
War,America successfully divided the Communist block, by
for instance supporting anti-Communist trade unions.
Now, America is launching a war on too many fronts- and
in doi n~ so it is driving all Muslims into the enemy camp. A
Danish participant worried that America's unwillingness to
take responsibility for nation-building in Afghanistan set a
dangerous precedent for its conduct in Iraq. Polls show
there is no real difference of values between the West and
the Arab world; rather there is a difference in perception.
Arabs simply deny the Western account of what happened
on September 11th. An essential part of our strategy must be
a gigantic information war. An American argued that Amer-
ica needs an economic dimension to its policy-much as it
did after the Second World War. The general economic fa il-
ure of the Arab world is feeding into frustration. Failed
states can be bought and rented.
Much of the discussion focused on Iraq. An American
said that most American moderates think that the regime
in Iraq must be changed. A Briton pointed out that Ameri-
ca's military strength has doubled in the ten years since the
Gulf War while Iraqi strength has halved. He argued that
the West should seize the opportunity to set up a successful
government in Iraq as a beacon to the rest of the region:
look at all the good that flowed from the occupation of
Germany and japan after the Second World War. Europe
18
•"'-
">
~~
_,,
J:"'?')
..~.
...,~
··l!'>
. ~
•:'>
•"'>
.:· ~
!>lV;'"''
THE CONSEQUEN C ES OF TilE WAR AGAJN". TERRORl'M
should be careful not to give the impression that it was
neutral in such a conflict.
Others were more sceptical. An American stressed the
huge risks involved in toppling Saddam- not least the risk
in setting a precedent for unilateral action. A successor
regime might be even more convinced of the need to
acquire nuclear weapons. Surely inspectors would be bet-
ter? Another American, while agreeing with the aim of get-
ting rid of Saddam, worried whether the circumstat~ces
were right. What sort of regime will replace Saddam? Who
will lead a new government? And how will we get out of
Baghdad once we are there? There is no point in waging war
if the region is left less stable and less democratic after-
wards. The second panellist replied that, with more sup-
port, the Iraqi National Congress might offer a good alter·
native leadership. Iraq, which once had a flourishin g
middle class, is a more promising candidate for nation-
building than Afghanistan. A~ to the idea of setting bad
precedents, failure to remove Saddam would be disastrous.
Several people raised the question ofTurkey. One Turk
pointed out that his country was paying a huge price to
help fight terrorism. Another said that there was a growing
realisation in his country of the evils of radical Islam, and
he criticised the European elites for not tackling fundamen-
talism in their cities. The second panellist argued that
Turkey should benefit from the removal of Saddam. One
way Europe could help the war on terrorism would be to
improve its relations with Turkey (in the long run by wel-
coming it into the European Union). The first pancllist
warned that it was just as important for Europe to integrate
its own Muslims as it was to integrate Turkey.
In his concluding remarks, the second panellist com-
plained that those who questioned the idea of a war on ter-
rorism always failed to offer an alternative. Terrorists will
never go away. But we can diminish their numbers. This
19
...
TH E C O NS EQ UEN C ES O F T H E WAR A G A INST TER RO R IS M
should certainly include more than just war. But we have to
realise that some people can only be stopped by incarcera-
tion or worse.America certainly needs to do more to win the
hearts and minds of moderates. But, even ifyou win a high
percentage of those hearts and minds, you will nevertheless
be confronted with a small percentage of people who can do
a great deal of damage. In this Europe and America should
be united. A year ago eve1
ybody was worried about the
transatlantic split over ballistic missile defence.
The first panellist accepted that American resolution
since September nth had made the world a safer place, but
worried that American insensitivity might lead to a clash of
civilisations. Europe has a role to play in making sure that
fewer Muslims join the madmssahs. On Iraq, Europe is not
neutral, but it is difficult to deal with Saddam ifviolence is
still escalating in the Middle East. Similarly, there is an eco-
nomic component ro the problem. Above all, Europe can
bring a sense ofhistory. Europe has a long history of dealing
with ·'the other': America needs Europe for practical as well
as philosophical reasons.
20
....
""'
'
•::>
Bl lDERB E RG 5 0 T H ~ MA Y } OT II - J UNE 2N D 2 00 2
Corporate Governance:
Does Capitalism Need Fixing?
The moderator pointed out that the subject of corporate
governance, once worthy but dull, has grown in both
importance and drama-not least because of the Enron
scandal. Some speakers groped towards the idea that
there was a well-defined, international set of rules that
could be applied to all businesses. But others poured
cold water on this idea, explaining that capitalism
thrived on different structures.
The way in which companies are run is pro-
voking more interest than ever. Well-run
companies outperform indices. The prob-
lem is that every country in the European Union has a differ-
ent set of rules. Nevertheless, the Union has introduced 40
corporate-governance codes. There are two main lessons
from the failures so far. First, no national system is inherent-
ly better than all the others in terms ofstructure: it all comes
down to practice. Second, self-regulation is not enough.
There are five areas of corporate governance where
markets have failed. They have not provided adequate
supervision: too often, the C EO is the chairman as well.
They haven't produced a common set of accounting stan-
dards. They haven't forced analysts and auditors to be inde-
pendent. They haven't been able to discipline bad boards.
And, lastly, they haven't been able to restrain the unwar-
ranted increase in c Eo pay.
21
BILD I· RBERG 50 r1-1 {p. MAY }OT! I - J UNE 2N D 2002
The European Union's review produced two main con-
clusions. First, although there are substantial differences
between different capitalist systems (such as the number of
boards), governance codes are broadly similar, so the differ-
ence between the structures does not matter too much. Sec-
ond, it is not worth having a single European code. It might
well be useful to have rules improving mandatory disclo-
sure and shareholder rights. The key point about good cor-
porate governance is that it cannot be achieved by either
markets or regulators alone.
~ The current public interest is entirely justi-
SECO ND \, fi d . d fi . J"k
PANELLI ST le . Enron IS a e 1t1111g event, I e Water-
-~ gate. What went on at the company was out-
rageous; even worse \vas the position taken by the
company's board, which claimed that it did not know what
was going on. Business across America has condemned this,
but it has harmed business everywhere.
Capitalism always needs fixing. That is part of the
process of creative destruction. But much relies on your
answers to certain basic questions about capitalism. When
it comes to pay, do you want to encourage egalitarianism,
or do you make to make bosses more entrepreneurial? Do
you care about growth or stabi lity? The main priority of big
American corporations has been to create wealth for share-
holders, which requires incentives for bos~es. The American
concept of the CEo 's job is correct. The board's responsibili-
ty is to select the cEo, not to run the company. The board
should also be independent (particularly its committees
responsible for compensation, auditing and corporate-gov-
ernance). But it would be wrong to set precise rules for who
has to meet and when.
The same approach should be applied to auditors, who
have mistakenly begun to see themselves as professional con-
sultants. In fact, their role is to provide independent num-
bers. Every company that hired Andersen now has a worth-
22
ot'~
'"'
<"":>
'\
•·""'
<:">
,,-..
4,:~
( -""\
-\
"'"'
0
• •;r,;_,
v~
-.,.
~~.:.::;.:;..~~;-~ ,I _;:t;,
CORPORAT E GOVERNANC E : DOFS C/\ PI .IALI:-.Jvl N r FD !· 1\IN t.:·?
Jess audit. On compensation, ifyou want a boss to act like an
owner, then you cannot pay them hourly, but the focus on
options has entailed an over-reliance on one particular num-
ber. There have to be multiple components. Of course, a suc-
cessful corporate governance system has to involve rules. but
fundamentally it is about spreading best practiccs.
~ An American fi nancier began the discus~ ion
\ DiscussiON ) by stressmg that there had been no systemic
~ breakdown. That said. he thought that busi-
nesses had failed to give investors the accountability they
craved. A loss of investor confidence would make it harder
to raise capital. He suggested a number of w:~ys to ree1ssure
them. Directors should all be independent; the only insider
on the board should be the CEO. There should be a formal
split between auditors and consul tants, with auditors rotat-
ed. The auditor's report should e'>:plain where companies
have strayed from accepted practice and also disclo~e any
conflicts of interest.
A Briton admitted that he was drawn towards the sec-
ond panellisfs dislike of hard rules. But he had his doubts.
In politics, we have had two centuries ofexperience in build-
ing checks and balances. Business does not have that struc-
ture. It is particularly difficult to see how you can secure both
independence and expertise. The second pan ell i~t agreed on
this latter point. The offset for independence is often Jack of
knowledge. Jf auditors are rotated forcibly. they wi ll not
know in the first year, and not care in their last year.
An American politician focused on the Enron mess.
which he argued had been coming for some time. He pin-
pointed a number of causes: a compensation system that .
put so much stress on options; poor oversight from the
directors; inadequate auditors; flexible accounting stCln-
dards; and deplorable stockmarket analysis where ''Strom~
Buy" needed to be decoded to mean ''Hold". The second
panellist argued that the problem with the analysts wets to
23
BI L D E RB E R G 50TH ~ M AY J O Tii - .JUN E 2ND 200 2
do with incentives, particularly the lack of transparency.
What went on was close to the common crime of fraud
A Canadian worried that there was now an "avoidance
industly" that existed to help bosses around such con-
straints. A Frenchman blamed this industry for the use of
off~balance sheet instruments, and he made a special
request for transparency. The first panellist replied that the
solution for the avoidance industry was better standards.
The European Union has looked at the issue of auditor
independence: it recommended that after seven years
auditing staff, but not auditing firms, should be switched.
Various speakers brought up the subject of differing
corporate governance standards across the Atlantic. A Ger-
man asked about stock-option accounting and goodwill
accounting. The first panellist argued that the important
thing with stock options was that they must be accounted
in one way or another, even in Silicon Valley. Several speak-
ers wondered about the convergence of European and
American rules. The first panellist reassured the questioners
that work on convergence was progressing, albeit slowly.
Some people, he added, claim that international account-
ing rules, which are based on general principles, might have
prevented Enron in a way that the American tick-the-box
system did not. The second panellist, by contrast, worried
about the obsession with common accounting standards.
They did not really exist within the United States, let alone
across the Atlantic.
A European academic took issue with the idea that
Europe and America have the same goals. In the United
States, boards are supposed to represent a diverse group of
shareholders. In Europe, they often have to deal with a limit-
ed number of large shareholders, so the governance issues
revolve around protecting the smaller minority sharehold-
ers.A Dutch participant praised Europe's two-tier system. In
his view, companies should bear in mind four different
24
(
....,;
..
'
•./
?
y
CO R PORATE GOVE R N A NC E: D OES C API TAL I SM N EED FI X I NG?
sorts of stakeholders: clients, shareholders, employees and
society. An American businessman pointed to a recent
transatlantic merger that prompted disagreements within
the board about the role of the CEO and about the use of
stock options. The second panellist admitted that tensions
between different sorts ofstakeholders was a daily challenge
for companies, but he still maintained that in the long term,
the interests ofstakeholders and shareholders converged.
A French businessman worried that the current focus
on rules could rein in entrepreneurship. Corporate gover-
nance should not be seen as risk prevention. It would be a
tragedy if the result was a system where investors fell into
the habit of suing whenever they lost money. The modera-
tor seized on this point: it was essential to craft a system
that still gave chief executives the freedom to make money.
The first panellist commented that capitalism without
bankruptcy is like Christianity without hell.
The debate ended on a slightly more optimistic note. A
Frenchman pointed out that non-listed private companies
seemed to work very well. Another European businessman
blamed most of the current problems on individual acts of
dishonesty. An American who has served on many boards
pointed out that in general things were getting better. There
used to be no outside directors, no women, no blacks, no
talk ofcorporate social responsibility. So the big worry is that
the remedy may be more painful than the crime. The second
panellist agreed strongly with this. American capitalism is
just coming to the end ofa decade-long experiment in trying
to make managers act more like owners. It has generally
worked, but with one or two spectacular failures. As for talk
of regulatory disintegration, the regulators have not left the
field. The people who stepped over the line will pay.
25
~~'"P'c\'.~
r;;t:
B t LDI RBI·. R(; SOT !! ~ ,'\·1/\Y 30TH - JUN E 2ND 2002
The Changing Nature
of the European Union Within the
Western Alliance
The moderator started the discussion by asking:"Does it
matter if the United States and the EU disagree?" Whilst
everyone accepted that this was an issue, many American
participants argued that co-operation was less important
than supporting the right policy. The first responsibility
of the United States, they argued, was to follow its own
interests. Many Europeans were more worried: America
cannot be an aIa carte multilateralist, and it should not
abandon the internationalist stance that has served the
world so well since the Second World War.
~:
. PANELLIST !
~
There is a poisonous atmosphere ofmisrepre-
sentation in the Atlantic world. There is an
appalling lack ofknowledge about the Euro-
pean Union in the United States.The EU is actually one ofthe
great unrecognised successes of the post-war era-an unpre-
cedented example ofnations voluntarily poolingtheir sover-
eignty.The internal market has not created a fortress Europe,
as many feared; the introduction of the euro has gone
remarkably smoothly. Now it is about to expand to include
30 countries and soom people. Its already creaky decision-
making process wil lbreak down unless it is reformed.
Friction pervades transatlantic economics and politics.
The two regions have a different attitude to merger policy:
the Eu looks askance at bigness per se, while America is
26
/''>
',')
•''~
.(~
oF")
("'''
'>
<' '~.
,:')
.{>,
I
('}
< '}
1"!-!L C I IANGINC N ·\lt l R ! t ) l
f H F [ U VV IT H I N T! I I' V\' r ''"J "I. R N \ I I I .
·\ N ( I
concerned with competition. Both sides Z~ rc to hl;tmc for the
growing trade tensions: the EU for its resistance to (;M
foods, and America for a series of terrible dec!SJOm on lu m-
ber, steel, textiles and agricultural subsidies.Th in ~s ;~rc even
worse on the political front. The Ell instinctively ritvours
multilateralism; the United States does not. Europe's under-
investment in defence is also a real problem. In '9')3 It w:1s
American leadership that prevented more ethnic clea nsing
in the Balkans.
The aftermath of September uth provided an opportu-
nity to glue the alliance tighter together. There has been a
good deal of real co-operation. But America did too Iittlc to
involve Europe in the war (despite the first ever invocation
of NATo'sArticle Five). The next stage ofthe war may be even
less co-operative. This will expose long-standing differences
on the best way to deal with rogue states.One solution might
be to divide responsibilities, giving a militaty role to the us
and a nation-building one to Europe. Although the Euro-
peans spend less on defence, they spend more on foreign
aid. America should have a healthy respect tor European
sensibilities and engage in proper consultation.
~ The simple answer to the moderator's ques-
r SECOND \1 • d , .f h d h , d
i, rANELLIST ) tlon- oes 1t matter 1 t e EU an t e Umte .
~ States disagree?-is that it does. Nobody has
a monopoly on being right. America must see that its uni-
lateralism is contributing to a rising tide of anti-American-
ism around the world. Being the biggest kid on the block
demands self-restraint that has never characterised domi-
nant powers in world history.The Allies must be allowed to
disagree with the United States-and the United States must
be willing to take that disagreement into account.
However, the Europeans must also recogn ise that they
are far from perfect. The European project is losing some
momentum (though European support for multilateralism
has been more consistent than America's). Europeans some-
27
U JL D ERUER G SOT J-1 ~ MAY JOTH - J U N E 2 ND 200 2
times come across as self-righteous. The EU is deformed by
the common agricultural policy. That said, the Europeans
have real grievances with America. America is unwilling to
restrain itself in pursuit of the common good. Leading
Americans have made incendia1y statements about interna-
tional institutions (such as George Schultz's call for the abo-
lition of the IM F). The Bush administration has taken a suc-
cession of deeply regrettable decisions over agriculture and
steel. Add the disagreements between the allies over the
Middle East and you have an explosive situation.
Europe is hobbled by its lack of a common foreign and
defence policy. America should see the development of a
common European policy as being in its interest. There is a
need to recognise the importance of being frank. The Union
faces a critical series ofchallenges at the moment:expanding
eastwards, adapting its institutions and dealingwith general
alienation. It also needs a common external policy, which
would also create a more balanced internationalsystem.
.~ The discussion began with two speakers
' DiscussiON illustrating the gap across the Atlantic. An
~ American thought that multilateralism was
a red herring: people who worry about American unilater-
alism are usually worried about specific American policies.
America should be willing to pursue a good policy even if it
is not endorsed by an international show of hands. Ameri-
ca, which is not a collection of countries like the EU, is right
to refuse to sign bad treaties, like the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty, and also right to be sceptical of multinational
institutions, such as the United Nations. This view was
countered by a Frenchman, who stated the case for multilat-
eralism. The key question is whether the Americans want to
build a world where they could feel at ease, even if they no
longer possessed such unique power. Unilateralism will not
help to create such a world.The global impact of ditching so
many treaties- even if those treaties are not all perfect-
28
<~..>
u
<~
«.
""
'
T H E C H ANG I NG N ATU R E OF
T H E EU W ITHI N Ti l E W ES T E R N AL LI A NC E
could be catastrophic. The second panellist agreed: you can-
not have aLa carte internationalism.
Several participants looked at the changing nature of
the EU. ATurk said that the EUfaced a fundamental choice:
should it become a Europe-wide nation state? Or should it
become a building block of a global government? Turkey
has been a member of NATO for years, and any backsliding
on admitting it to the EU would be devastating. A Por-
tuguese participant asked about the compatibility between
enlarging the EU and producing a more coherent foreign
policy. A Frenchman worried about the capacity of the EU
to absorb so many new countries. The second panellist
replied that nobody seriously believed in a Europe-wide
nation state. We are talking about a hybrid.We do not know
how enlargement will change the process, let alone where
the process will end. The first panellist agreed with the idea
that institutional reform was now essential. Without politi-
cal reform, the decision-maki ng process will break down.
Other participants returned to the transatlantic rela-
tionship. An American argued that the Eu and the United
States are closer than some people imply. Both want to see a
two-state solution to the Palestinian problem, and both
want to see an end to Saddam. But Americans have lost
their sense of what Europe means. Another American
thought that Europeans should ask themselves about their
own contribution. European foreign-policy institutions are
still unformed. In the wake of September nth America dealt
with individual nation states rather than the EU.
This opened up a debate about the structure of the
alliance.An American economist, noting that the collapse of
communism had removed the alliance's conceptual founda-
tion,suggested turning the us and the EUinto a sort ofc2. The
fi rst panellist thought this was an interesting idea, but he
doubted whether it was practical: after all the European Com-
mission is not even included in the G7because ofopposition
29
··'r.".•:-:: ~Jt\'Z~
1 /IF C II AN(;I N C N/\rURI OF
I II r L ll V
V I I I I II'/ r I I 1-. WE'"' ERN ALL I 1\ N C E
from mcm berstates.Another American fea red the first panel-
list's proposed d ivision ofresponsibi lity between Europe and
America might reinforce their differences. lfthe Europeans do
not participate in m ilitary solutions. they will become even
more hosti le to them- and the same goes for America and
nation-buildi ng. The first panellist defended his idea on the
grounds that it would be a division of power between senior
and junior partners, rather than an absolute split.
An American clai med that whilst Americans confined
their uni lateralism to international affairs., Europeans were
will ing to interfere with America's domestic affairs, for
instance with the death penalty. The first panellist retorted
that American courts were equally extraterritorial: look at the
Holocaust reparations. An American said that the relation-
ship between the central banks had never worked better: wit-
ness the co-operation after September nth. A Briton wished
that the Europeans would stop exaggerating the dangers of
American policies. But other Europeans were more worried
about America. An Austrian said that a great deal had been
invested in the Alliance over previous decades. A Dane said
the world was used to something better than the crude pur-
suit of national interest from America, a country that had
expressed its policies in universalist terms since the Second
World War. A German claimed that the biggest issue was
Europe's loss of power. The Cold War preserved the illusion
that Europe was the centre ofglobalaffairs. Europe is keen on
embracing multilaterialism to cope with its weakness.
The first panellist concluded by accepting that the w
and United States had d ifferent perspectives, but he main-
tained that America had to be more sensitive to the Eu's
problems, and that it had to help the Ev's eastward expan-
sion. The second panellist argued that there was a price to
be paid for global leadership: you are held to a higher stan-
dard than other people are. Yes. the Americans need to be
more humble and considerate, but the Europeans need to
be less incoherent and divided.
30
I
.{''}
).,
I
I
I
<>'>
I
I
~·~
I
I
!
<\
~
/ ·:>
I
I
i
...
">
I
I
I
)')
!
..,.,
~ ;.~...'l:'>'J:
Blt DERBERG 50TH ~ MAY 30TH - JU NE 2ND 2002
Have C
ivil Liberties Been
Unnecessarily Eroded?
How does a democracy hold to its principles in a battle
against terrorism? The moderator recalled Benjamin
Franklin: "They that give up essential liberty for a little
temporary safety deserve neither liberty nor safety:'
Most of the speakersfrom both sides of the Atlantic con-
ceded that the war against terrorism had changed the
balance between security and liberty; but they argued
that the change wasnot excessive.
~ Civil liberties in America have not been
I FIRST . \ d d Th , . h b
\ PANELLIST J ero e . e government s o i i11 as een to
~ hang on to our fundamental values: indeed
it was those values that came under attack on September
nth. As Edmund Burke pointed out, order and liberty need
each other. In the past eight months, the United States has
realigned its society to free up its law enforcement. That
process has required a few new laws, but they have been
introduced without destroying liberties.
Much of our work has been updating law to the latest
technology, to allow us, for instance, to pursue the terrorists
into the digital world. But we have retained the same pre-
cautions that we used to apply to the analogue world. We
have tried to im plement a culture of information sharing
between agencies. The usA Patriot Act removed legal imped-
iments to intelligence sharing (e.g., from wiretaps). The F BI
is now allowed to use private-sector data-mining services.
Lastly. we have tried to get rid of red tape.
31
BIL D ERBERG 50TH <$> MAY } O T H - JUNE 2N D 20 02
In each case, the American government has laid
emphasis on adhering to freedoms. There is not a choice
between liberty and security. It is about thinking outside the
box, but not outside the constitution.
~
Civil liberties have not been eroded in
I . .
1 rANELLIS
T Europe either, though for different reasons.
~ Terrorism is an old threat in Europe. France,
Germany, Spain, Italy, Britain and Ireland have all had to
confront this issue for some time. Unsurprisingly, there was
thus less need to change things after September nth.
The Eu's version of the usA Patriot act was more to do
with enhancing co-operation. For instance, the European
arrest warrant sounds like the sort of thing tha$ would set
libertarian alarm bills ringing; but it is reallyjust a practical
way to speed up cumbersome extradition processes. Human
rights were already on the Eu's agenda. The charter of
human rights is now under discussion.The issue is also con-
nected to enlargement. The Union is now bringing in coun-
tries where such liberties were until recently a rarity.
There is one wrinkle: immigration. In Europe, immi-
grants have not been as welcome as they are in the United
States. The events of September nth may stall that debate.
Immigrants deserve civil liberties as much as anyone.
~ An American financier tried to use the issue
\DiscussiON j ofcivil liberties to counter an argument that
~ was put forward in a previous session: that
unilateralism is acceptable when it is right in every single
case. There is not much point in an eternal war against ter-
rorism if it undermines the principles for which the United
States stands. Globalisation is lopsided. It has produced
rules fo r trade, but no international laws for maintaining
peace and public goods. America is the strongest power, so
it has special responsibilities. By refusing to accept the need
for multilateral arrangements, America is saying that might
32
V'
«,>
I
..,
!
<:.;?
I
I
....~
I
I
i
I
· ~
y
I
I
I
I
'(
''l'
I
I
HAVE C IVIL LIBER T I ES BEEN UN NECESS ARILY E ROD E D ?
is right. The campaign for an open society in communist
countries must now ~urn to the United States. The attorney-
general's claim that those who opposed the usA Patriot Act
were giving aid to terrorists demonstrated this.
Several speakers examined the international dimen-
sion. A Portuguese participant asked about the Internation-
al Criminal Court. He also wondered whether there had
been any increase in co-operation between the EU and
America. An Italian asked whether civil liberties could be
defined and enforced worldwide. The Balkans intervention
was partly based on this idea. A European journalist sug-
gested that the real civil-liberty challenges do not revolve
around domestic citizens; they have to do with foreigners.
The second panellist "
felt strongly that third-country
nationals should have the same civil liberties as nationals.
There is a concern that people will automatically link immi-
gration and terrorism. One form of protection is that the
laws are being imposed by democratic governments. There
has been more co-operation at an international level. One
transatlantic problem is cyber-crime, where there are differ-
ences on data protection. Another factor to bear in mind is
the death penalty, which means that the Europeans are more
guarded about information-sharing and extradition.
The first panellist agreed that the international angle
was important, but that did not translate into automatic
support for an International Criminal Court. Milosevic is
being tried by an ad-hoc tribunal. With immigration, the
emphasis should be on simply applying the existing law. If
that law proves to be too restrictive, then it can be looked at.
Contrary to news reports there has been no indefinite
detention offoreign suspects by the United States, and there
has been no preventative detention.
Some participants wondered about the effect on specif-
ic liberties in the United States. An American asked about
33
''Ol',-.oe"'.,;:..o::·" '"
H AVE C I V I L LIBERliE S BEl:N UNNECE SSAR IL Y ER ODED?
the FBI's ability to follow suspects into places of worship,
and also about racial profiling. Another American pointed
out that Congress has not officially declared war. It thus
risks repeating the mistake it made with Vietnam. A Cana-
dian disagreed: the problem with liberties is that the West's
enemies have exploited them. A Dutchman said it was pos-
sible to adjust things delicately. He pointed to an w direc-
tive on money laundering, which charges lawyers to report
suspicious activities, but only under strict conditions.
The first panellist thought that the concept of war had
been overused: witness the "wars" on drugs and poverty. In
this case there was a real attack, but one carried out by a net-
work of individuals, rather than a nation state, so the nor-
mal principles of the just and unjust war do not apply.
There has been a declaration by Congress that the United
States is under attack. You cannot fit terrorism within a tra-
ditional criminal justice model. On the specific question of
entering places of worship, constitutional rights are vital.
On racial profiling, interrogating people from suspect coun-
tries is mainly about old-fashioned detective work.
34
{').
,("'i!\.
"'~
""
("~
-"")
~ '
/)
<'-
l
.,
,....,.
,.'\>,
BILDERBERG 50TH ~ MAY 30 TI! - JUNE 2ND 20 (12
The Influence of the Extreme Right
This issue caught fire because of the French and Dutch
elections-and the success of Jean-Marie le Pen and,
posthumously, Pim Fortuyn. Most of the speakers agreed
with the moderator'sassessment that the success of the
right was the result of the unwillingness of the estab-
lished centrist parties to tackle tough issues. As for
America, nobody seemed to have much time for the idea
that George Bush headed a far-right administration.
This session introduces a new element into
FIRST ) d' . h l l
PANELLIST our Jscuss1on: t e e ectorate. Europe's e ec-
toral preferences are changing, allowing
new political stars such as Jorg Haider and Pim Fortuyn to
emerge, and opening up for debate hitherto taboo subjects.
This is only superficially a move to the right. It is essentially
a revolt against traditional political parties. The last two
decades saw the rise of first neo-liberalism and then third-
way politics. Now we see a backlash not just against these
positions, but also against the system that produced them.
The symptoms include low turnouts, demonstrations and
the rise of unorthodox candidates.
These unorthodox candidates are cashing in on frustra-
tions with traditional parties. Traditional parties have
ceased to be "membership communities" and become little
more than conveyor belts to elite jobs. Traditional parties
have also failed to ask tough questions about things like
immigration (which people in Europe increasingly see as a
threat to their well-being). The mainstream candidates in
35
~ILD E R B E R G 50 T H ~ M AY JO T H-J UNE 2N D 2002
the German election regard it as a badge ofhonour that they
have agreed not to discuss immigration. But immigration is
one of the foremost questions in people's minds.
This has given extreme candidates a chance to attract
votes-a chance that the right has seized. This represents a
huge failure of traditional parties- not least because there
are good liberal arguments on all of these subjects.
~
The influence of the extreme right in the
. PANEL LI ST United States is zero. It is at its lowest point
~ in three decades. Most Europeans probably
think that George Bush represents the extreme right. The
New York Times has even made that case. This is nonsense,
not least because there is an American equivalent toLe Pen,
Pat Buchanan, who received a mere 1% of the vote in 2000.
Buchanan opposed immigration, while Bush tried hard
to reach out to immigrants during the election. Buchanan
supported protectionism. Bush has made scandalous deci-
sions on steel and farms, but for short-term political reasons
rather than any anti-trade ideology; indeed, the administra-
tion is pursuingfast-trackauthority.Buchanan isan isolation-
ist. By contrast, the Bush administration is interfering all over
the world. The far right committed political suicide when
Buchanan seceded from the Republicans in 20 00. Most Amer-
ican xenophobia now finds its expression on the far left.
Europeans think of Bush as a right winger because of
his unilateralism. But unilateralism is a means, not an end.
The aim is not to retreat within a fortress America. The Unit-
ed States rejected the landmine treaty precisely because it
wants to mainta in its many entanglements with different
parts of the world, such as Korea. It did not withdraw from
the AB M treaty because it wanted to withdraw from the
world. It needs a missile shield so that it cannot be deterred
from interferi ng in the world by the threat of nuclear
weapons. Unilateralism is not isolationism.
36
'.;>
'"'
y
\f
I
T HE I N FlUE NCE OF T H E EX TR E ME R I G HT
One reason why the far right is so irrelevant
in the United States is George Bush's success
in stitching together a centre-right coalition.
He provided tax cuts and pension reform for economic con-
servatives, judicial nominations and, increasingly, bioethi-
cal decisions for social conservatives. The war on terror is
now gluing together a centre-right coalition that has not
existed since the end of the cold war. The right is as unified
as it has ever been since the mid-198os. That makes it diffi-
cult for a fringe candidate to get an opening.
The galvanising issues of immigration and trade do not
have the same impact in the United States that they do in
Europe. During the election campaign Bush took a strongly
pro-immigration stand. He took the anti-immigration
groups in his party head on: witness his remark that family
values do not stop at the Rio Grande. On trade, the steel
decision was undoubtedly bad, but it was a tactical deci-
sion to please trade-union states.
The alleged emergence ofthe extreme right in Europe is a
straw man invented by the left to explain its own failures. Le
Pen's success reflected a revolt against the establishment and
the disarray ofthe French left.Pim Fortuyn, a Thatcher-loving
gay libertarian who opposed Muslims because oftheir intol-
erance, was hardly a conventional far-right extremist.
~ A Dutch participant started the discussion by
(DiscussiON ) outlining the political situation in his coun-
~ try. Pim Fortuyn generated a groundswell of
opinion in favour of a vague political party, before he was
murdered. His political party, without a leader and a pro-
gramme, then won a sixth ofthe votes. Why·?The established
coalition had muted political debate and taken the passion
out ofpolitics. It was also a victim ofits own success in reduc-
ing the government deficit and unemployment, an achieve-
ment that gave people more time to worry about immigra-
tion and security.
37
-
BILDERBE R G 50TH <@> MA Y 3 0TH - JUNE 2ND 2002
A French businessman pointed to two causes of his
country's failure to assimilate immigrants. Its hostility to
affirmative action means that there are no prominent Mus-
lims in politics or business. But itsaddiction to political cor-
rectness means that there is no proper discussion of prob-
lems like crime. The elite's refusal to admit that immigration
might entail problems has alienated working-class voters.
An American pointed to the importance of globalisa-
tion in the debate. He noted that both Congress and the
country have been split down the middle over the issue. The
single variable that explains the popular split is education:
people with university degrees almost invariably like glob-
alisation and people without them fear it. A significant
number of blue-collar workers will lose 40%of their poten-
tial lifetime earnings as a result ofglobalisation, and many
more are frightened that they might. These people would be
much keener on globalisation if the government were to
help the losers through things like trade-adjustment pro-
grammes. But they carry political weight: every American
president for the past 40 years has made concessions to pro-
tectionists in order to obtain trade authority.
Two other participants focused on attitudes to globalisa-
tion. An American questioned the idea that the European
anti-globalisation movement was concerned about the losers
from globalisation. All the evidence shows that developing
countries that open their markets improve their standard of
living.An American asked whether there isa distinction to be
made, in respect of internationalism, between the White
House and the rest of the Republican Party. There are plenty
ofRepublicans in Congress who boast about their unwilling-
ness to visit Europe and their hostility to international aid.
Several participants thought politics was in a state of
Aux.A Dane pointed out that European electorates have lost
a succession of anchors, such as class loyalty and the cold
wa r. This has set the voters free. A Canadian pointed out
38
~
,.
T HE INFLUENCF O F THE EXTRE ME RIGH T
that opinion polls show that both Europeans and Ameri-
cans have been losing confidence in all political institu-
tions since the mid-1970s. Such anomie has found political
expression in Europe: what sort of expression has it found
in America? Another Canadian argued that party labels
could be misleading. People who display the classic features
of fascism-willingness to resort to street protests. a senti-
mental worship of nature, a belief in economic collec-
tivism, and anti-Semitism-are probably in the majority in
Europe. They just happen to be called the left.
Several participants linked Europe's rising social anxi-
eties with its over-rigid labour policies. A French participant
argued that high youth unemployment is a breeding ground
for extremism. This is a problem that Europe could solve if
only it were brave enough. An American argued that the cen-
tre-right would be the continent's defence agai nst the
extreme right if it could force Europe to pursue structural
reform. An Austrian argued that unemployment- and rear
of unemployment-was turning people against globalisa-
tion. People have the impression that there are more losers
than winners.They also have a growing sense that they have
a choice between identical options- the centre-left and the
centre-right. A Canadian asked whether we can defuse the
far right quickly?
A couple of speakers tried to compare America and
Europe. A Norwegian pointed out that there were two routes
to power in much of Europe: winning votes and fo rmi ng
coalitions. Right-wingers have been invited into coalitions
in the Netherlands and Austria, but in France and Norway
they remain isolated. An American pointed out that the far
right is divided over the Middle East (the American version
supports Israel and the European one opposes it).
The second panellist agreed that political correctness
was a huge problem.The more mainstream parties refuse to
address issues of race and ethnicity, the more those issues
39
THE I NFLUENCE OF T HE EXTREME RI GH T
become subterranean. He accepted that presidents always
have a hard job obtaining fast-track authority, but noted
that they get it if they want it badly enough. On anomie, he
was dubious: one of the most marked consequences ofSep-
tember nth has been an increase in trust in political institu-
tions. On coalitions, he pointed out that the American polit-
ical system makes it almost impossible for third parties to
succeed. They sometimes materialise around a galvanising
issue- as with Perot- but they disappear as soon as the
main parties absorb that issue.
The third panellist had little truck with the idea that
the American fa r right is pro-Israeli. Buchanan is critical of
Israel. The religious right may be pro-Israeli but it is hardly
hard right. He pointed out that America is not trending
rightwards on any of the major issues-immigration, trade
or globalisation. This argument reflects a vague sense that
Bush is a cowboy. But it has no substance. As for the idea
that America is becoming isolationist, this rests on confu-
sion between isolationism and unilateralism. Congress may
be isolationist on trade on occasion, but this reflects local
issues. One of the wonders of American histozy is that it is
not more isolationist than it is. The root of Europe's resent-
ment ofAmerica is not that country's rightward drift; it is
Europe's resentment at the sheer scale of American power,
unprecedented in histozy.
The first panelJist observed that the European Union
used to be a project ofthe right. Now it is a project of the left,
driven in large part by a desire to preserve the welfare state.
Most of the protest movements remain immensely fragile.
On the other hand, the tendency to turn to non-political
expressions of frustration is a source of worzy. The rise of
protest politics might lead to creeping authoritarianism,
with tiny elites taking most ofthe real decisions in secret.
40
~
~
B IL DE RB ERG SO TJ-1 <$> M AY 3 0 T H - JUNE 2ND 2002
The Middle East
Predictably, there was great disagreement on this sub-
jed. Most American participants remained suspicious of
both the Palestinians and the Saudi peace plan, whilst
Europeans argued that America could do far more to
push the Sharon government towards peace.
. The idea that Ariel Sharon has changed is
FIRST '
0
hful I 0
k' h d d l'f' .
PANELLIST 1 w1s t 1111 mg. He as evote a 1et1me
to very clear goals: preventing a viable Pales-
tinian state from emerging, and keeping the settlements. He
has become more subtle about achieving those goals: wit-
ness his refusal to condone Netanyahu's dismissal of a
Palestinian state. Although he has opposed nearly every
peace plan, Sharon has cleverly presented his intransigence
as part of America's war against terrorism. He has ignored
opportunities that a more dove-like leader might have
seized, such as the aftermath ofOperation Defensive Shield.
Arafat has been Sharon's best possible ally. Palestinians
expect their leaders to resist the occupation (the younger
leaders are even angrier about the occupation than their
sen iors). On the other hand, Arafat is aware of the interna
tiona! commun ity. The issue of reform is difficult. The Pales-
tinians want a simpler intelligence and military structure-
but to resist Israel, not to crack down on terrorists.
American diplomacy has been disappointing. So far
Bush has given no sign that he is prepared to go beyond cri-
sis management. He has defined neither the goal nor the
roadmap. That is why Oslo failed.
41
RI LDER OER G SO rt! ~ M·\Y JOTH -_I l)NE 2ND 20 0 2
~ The Middle East is a good case study of
I SECOND I I . d' . . . . h
\ PA NELLI ST
1 transat ant1
c IVISIOns. Amenca IS muc
'-....___....-. more pro-Israeli, not only because of the
power of the Jewish lobby in Washington, but because Sep-
tember 11th made a strong impression on the American peo-
ple. The approach of the European Union has been more
balanced. Europeans strongly oppose suicide bombers, but
they a l~o dislike Israeli use afforce against civilians.
The Middle East has not been a priority for the Bush
adm inistration. The European Union has devoted more
attention to the problem, not least because it gives so much
money to ~upport the Palestinian Authority. It is also a ques-
tion ofgeography: whatever happens there wi ll affect Europe.
Sharon is not interested in any discussion involving
international participation. His main priority is to get rid of
Arafat. Arafat continues to be an icon for Palestinian peo-
ple, but he looks backward. The Arab states are focusing on
the Saudi proposal. The EU has been waiting on America.
The w's position is based on three principles: that there is
no purely military solution; that the principles of peace are
embedded in the Oslo process; and that outside help is
needed. The immediate problems are to restructure the
Palestinian Authority, to set up a peace conference, and to
arrange emergency aid for the Palestinians.
~ The moderator began by defending the Bush
I o1scussror• : administration. The deadlock predated the
\_________..) administration, and, back in 2001, it was not
obvious that an outsider could bring much to the table. Of
course, Bush was preoccupied with Afghanistan. When Euro-
peans talk about a greater American role, they really mean
simply imposing the Saudi plan. But Sharon is not the only
obstacle to peace. The margin for survival for Israel is slim.
The country is militarily strong, but politically and psycho-
logically weak. It needs to know that the Arab pledge to
respect Israel is for real. There are decent reasons to be scepti-
42
TI-lE M ID D L E EA~ T
cal about Palestinian intentions towards Israel. The present
crisis was caused by the keenness to have a comprehensive
solution in 2000. Such a solution does not exist: no Arab
leader can give up the right to return; no Israeli leader can
give up Jerusalem. The immediate goal should be co-exis-
tence not peace. The Bush administration needs to define
those goals,and then work out details such as the settlements.
The idea that settlements were a mere detail infuriated
the first speaker. Altogether, Israeli settlements now occupy
some 42% of the West Bank. But the next American speaker
defended the Bush administration and attacked moderates
who imagined that you could somehow have both a secure
Israel and a viable Palestinian state.ACanadian also picked
up on this point. Israel had to deal with a hostile Arabic
world. Seven weeks ago, the number one song in Egypt had
a chorus about destroying Israel. Many of the Palestinians
claiming the right to return come from Lebanon.
A German speaker wondered whether a fraction of the
$8 billion in military aid that America gives to Israel, Egypt
and jordan could be diverted to economic purposes, partic-
ularly developing the Jordanian economy to provide jobs
for Palestinians. A Frenchman argued that America's war
against terrorism must also prevent future terrorists. The
Middle-Eastern crisis is plainly increasing Muslim extrem-
ism. But the Europeans also have to start doing things: for
instance, examining exactly what Palestinian schools do
with European Union money, and also withholding money
from Israel if it continues to build settlements.
Several Americans examined the Palestinian Authority.
One asked who would replace Arafat. What would happen if
Israel returned to its 1967 borders, the international commu-
nity compensated Palesti nians for the right to return and
East jerusalem was split up? Another American argued that a
solution had to guarantee Israel's security. The Pale~tinian
Security forces are supposed to help Israel; they patently do
43
THE M ID DLE EA ST
not. Would an international security force make sense?
Another American thought the keywas co--operation between
the Palestinian, Israeli andJordanian security forces.
One German, looking for ways to dampen Palestinian
terrorism, wondered whether co--existence was realistic,
without Israel going back to the 1967 borders. Polls show
that Israeli voters think that a settlement based on the 1967
borders is the only real way out. A Frenchman worried that
fea rs about Arab intentions towards Israel became a self-ful-
filling prophecy. It is plain that the parties themselves can-
not reach peace. So you need international involvement. It
is possible to imagine an international force protecting the
Palestinians from the Israelis, but not the Israelis from
Palestinian terrorism. One American feared that it would
soon be his country and Israel versus everybody else. How
can the White House's thinking be changed? If it can pres-
surise Iraq, it can also pressurise Israel and Palestine. A sec-
ond American was puzzled by Arafat: why had he refused
the deal at Camp David? A third wondered whether extrem-
ism on both sides would radicalise Israel. A Greek asked
what impact a war in Iraq would have on the Middle East.
The moderator said that the debate should not be about
American engagement, but about European involvement.
The Europeans need to get more out ofArabs. Asolution will
only emerge after a period ofco--existence. The second speak-
er repeated the charge that America had ignored the Middle
East during a crucial period. Yes, the Afghan war mattered
more, but peace in the Middle East was part of the same
struggle. The Eu's position was not a mystery: it was based
on the Oslo peace process. The first speaker took a similar
line. Israel has a right to counter terrorism, but it has to offer
something more. When it denies people legitimate rights, it
creates 3.5m potential terrorists.The Saudi initiative is good:
it recognises Israel fully. Oslo failed because it never spelled
out the goal of the process. Ten years later, the Palestinians
will accept incremental progress, but not incremental goals.
44
BILDERBERG 50TH ~ MAY }O TH - JU NE 2ND 2002
Current Affairs
The current affairssession focused on America's war on
terrorism. Several of the speakers argued that America
had been better at stamping out existing terrorists than
preventing future ones from emerging; they also wor-
ried about the state of the western alliance and the Mid-
dle East. The panellist defended American policy in all
these respects.
The war on terrorism is a global undertak-
ing. Sixty-eight countries are participating in
a variety of different ways. Al-Qaeda and the
Taliban have not given up. But the Taliban no longer gov-
erns Afghanistan and al-Qaeda is in retreat. Many countries
are helping to reconstruct Aghanistan, with Britain leading
the local peace-keeping force, Germany training the police
etc. The best sign ofsuccess so far is that refugees are moving
back into the country.
Several things are clear. First, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction is pervasive. Countries that
possess these weapons are helping other countries and ter-
rorists to acquire them. It is not just probable that terrorist
countries and organisations will acquire these weapons. It
is certain. Second, people who fly aeroplanes into the Word
Trade Centre are willing to use weapons of mass destruc-
tion ifthey can get hold ofthem, killing not three thousand,
but tens of thousands of people. You must constantly think
about mitigating the effect of terrorism, about improving
intelligence-gathering, and about going after the terrorists.
45
-
B I LDE /U lERG 50T J-I <@:> MA l' JOT l-1 - J U NE 2ND 2 0 0 2
There are different ways of dealing with terrorism. It is
one thing if it is a country, quite another if it is an area that
is not under the control of government. There are places
(like Somalia) where you cannot go after the government
because the government is too weak to control its territories.
~ The discussion initially focused on Pakistan
l DiscussioN ) and India. Two Americans asked about Gen-
~ era! Musharraf. Can he control the Kashmiri
extremists or even his own military and intelligence agen-
cies? How great is the threat of a possible nuclear war? Has
the Pakistani army helped militants cross the frontier? The
panellist replied that the Pakistani intelligence agency con-
tained pro-Taliban elements. But Musharraf has changed
the leadershi p of his intelligence agency. He also enjoys a
relaxed relationship with the military, as befits a profession-
al sold ier. The proportion of the population that wants to
turn Pakistan into a more militant state is probably below
10%. The leaders of both countries understand that nuclear
weapons are more than just big bombs-that they will cause
extraordinary carnage and long-lasting damage. As for the
line ofcontrol, Pakistan must do what it claims it is already
doing, and stop the movement of militants. Musharrafhas
taken a few faltering steps.
The second questioner also asked about NATo's future
role. The panellist said that most NATo countries were
involved in Operation Enduring Freedom. More than half
the ships involved at any given time are non-American. But
it is hard to formalise relations with the allies. In a set-piece
war, a clear set of agreements with other countries would
make sense. But it is impossible to formulate anything but
general agreements when you are fighting a fluid war in
which the enemy moves around many countries. You need
coalitions of the willing. You need to cast your net as wide
as possible- to take advantage of every kind of possible par-
ticipant you can get on the face of the earth.
46
·-·
.. -
C UR RENT 1\F FA I RS
An American asked why the United States could not do
a better job of creating organisations to deal with cata-
strophic terrorism.The head ofthe homeland security office
has no budget control. The intelligence services are hopeless-
ly fractured. The speaker thought that the situation was get-
ting better. A country that has two big oceans and friendly
neighbours to the north and south is constitutionally unpre-
pared for a sneak attack. America has no domestic intelli-
gence-gathering apparatus and it is highly sensitive to civil
liberties. Structural changes are needed. A Frenchman wor-
ried about the world's ungoverned regions. How do you
counter terrorist activity in those areas, particularly cities?
The panellist admitted that rooting out urban guerillas was
very difficult.
A Norwegian pushed the panellist on the lack of under-
standing across the Atlantic. Why are we failing to share
information? And what can we do to build a bri d ~e across
the Atlantic? The speaker said that there was no single Euro-
pean view,just as there is no single American view. StilL we
are engaged in an unprecedented amount of intelligence-
sharing. From an intelligence point of view, the problem is
not what we don't know, nor even what we know that we
don't know, but what we don't know that we don't know.
Neither multilateralism nor unilateralism are virtues in
themselves. Producing the right answers is a virtue. Euro-
peans have fallen in love with unanimity for its own sake,
rather than as a tool for producing the right solutions.
An American asked about Afghanistan: when Kabul is
in better shape than the rest of the country. why does the
administration oppose the extension of peace-keeping to
the rest ofthe country? He also asked about the Middle East:
do we need to give greater emphasis to addressing the griev-
ances of Arabs? The speaker described the security situation
in Afghanistan as uneven. But refugees are returning to
many parts of the country, not just Kabul. It is wrong to say
that America opposes the expansion of the security force~.
47
BILD!oR B L RG 5 0 TH <@> M A Y }OTH - J UNE 2N D 2 002
America is doing a huge amount (along with its allies), rang-
ing from pursuing its enemies to building up the country's
civil infrastructure. America can only do so many things at
any one time. As for the Palestinians, they undoubtedly
have grievances. We should not allow the weakness of their
leadership to blind us to this fact. We need to find a way for
the neighbouring countries, Egypt and jordan, to put a rib
cage into the Palestinian authority. We need to find some-
where where aid can go without being wasted.
A Turk asked what progress has been made in reorgan-
ising defence expenditure in the light ofthis new threat. The
speaker admitted that America was adjusting imperfectly.
Bureaucracies and contractors are resistant to change. It is
going to take an enormous amount ofeffort and persistence
to get things right. The enemy is going to use asymmetric
threats to turn the balance of the world to their advantage.
Several speakers focused on al-Qaeda. A French partici-
pant asked about the fate of the top al-Qaeda people. The
speaker explained that around so-6o% of the top so al-
Qaeda and Taliban were still at large. Regarding the rest,
half are dead and half are in captivity. An American asked
how many orher al-Qaeda-like groups exist. The speaker
pointed out that there were public lists of terrorist organi-
sations and states. Some organisations are local, some glob-
al; some are focused on a specific issue, some are more fun-
damental. It is the lethality of the organisation rather than
its size that matters: small non-state entities can suddenly
acquire powerful weapons.
Other looked to the terrorists of the future. How do
you stop them, asked a Swiss. The speaker replied that
every government had an obligation to adjust to the new
security environment. Musharraf, for instance, is trying to
persuade Islamic schools to teach their students something
useful, rather than persuading their unfortunate students
that the ills of the world are all somebody else's fault. A
48
CU RRE N T AFF A I R S
German pointed out that countries that have been success-
ful in the fight against terrorism have pursued a double
agenda: capturing the fish and draining the water they
swim in. Surely there should be a social and economic
agenda? The speaker conceded that fighting terrorism was
not simply a military task.
An American argued that America's influence around
the world was being eroded as a result of the Middle East
impasse. He worried that resolving the problem was not a
priority of the administration, and that American policy
had been captured by Ariel Sharon. Another American
questioned the speaker's assertion about the corruption of
Palestinian authority. Only a little foreign money has been
misappropriated. Corruption enters the picture with tax
money rather than aid. The speaker argued that the amount
of aid that goes to the Palestinian authority was modest
compared with the amount of inward investment that
would arrive there if the Authority weren't so corrupt. He
said that you can only solve the Middle Eastern problem in
stages. The president and his secretary of state have been
engaged from the outset. But the problem has flared up
throughout our lifetimes. He dismissed the idea that Ameri-
can policy had been captured by Israel and reminded every-
one that Israel only has a very narrow margin of error.
The last questioner, from Europe, suggested that it was
time to review the mechanics of consultation between
Europe and An1erica. The panellist replied that both NATO
and the EU seemed good mechanisms for consultation. One
problem is the shortage of time. He welcomed ideas about
improving the mechanics, but insisted that the best way for-
ward was to be open and forthright.
49
-
- -
--··
BILD E RBER G SO TJ-1 ~ M A Y }OT H - JUN E 2 ND 200 2
Post-Crisis
Reconstruction/Nation-Building
Most of the participants accepted the idea that institu-
tional failure was an important precursor of both war
and poverty. Some people wondered whether there was
a way to modernise old structures, such as the Marshall
plan or the system of mandates. But others were scepti-
cal not just about specific proposals but even about the
idea of nation-building itself.
Talking about nation-building presupposes
Fl RST \ h h . . d b fi k
PANELLIST 1 t at t e nat1on ex1
ste e ore. It ta es cen-
turies to bui ld a nation. Many states are not
nations. In the Middle East, Turkey, Egypt, Iran and conceiv-
ably Israel are the only nations. Iraq is a nation in process.
Algeria is not a nation; Morocco is. Some nations are not
states: the Kurds are an example. We are still sorting out the
end ofthe Ottoman Empire,decolonisation and the collapse
ofthe Soviet Union.
Nation-building is thus a very ambiguous concept. It
includes peace-keeping and economic aid. But it can only
work when something existed before. The relentlessly men-
tioned Marshall plan worked because it was rebuilding
mature nations, notably Germany. So history is very impor-
tant when you look at nation-building.
So too is the time. Fighting the war against terrorism is
a long-term strategy.Over the past few months nation states
have actually got stronger- particularly Russia and China,
so
)
•
nni?f'V•zm·
sqg
PO ST ·C R I 51S R EC O N ST R UCTI ON / NAT! ON · REBU I L DI N G
whose respective problems of Chechnya and Tibet have
gone away. The international community should spend
more time fighting poverty and illiteracy.
~ When the fighting ends, the international
( P~~~L~~T J institutions are drawn in. One recent exam-
~ pie is East Timor- a small island that has
just adopted Portuguese as its language, where 40% of the
inhabitants are illiterate and 40% live on under 55 cents a
day. lt has political problems with both indonesia and Aus-
tralia. East Timor could not build itself. so the international
community gave it aid.
Afghanistan is a much bigger place, with zsm people. lt
has borders with a lot of other countries, many of them
vague (there are no road signs in the Khyber Pass).There are
also plenty of internal splits.The conflict has now reached a
point where the main powers that defeated the Taliban
want to get out. Money is not available for security or to com-
bat drug lords.This is symptomatic. Once a conflict is over,
the world quickly loses interest. The outside world treats the
end ofwar as the beginning ofthe nation.
The work is only just beginning in the Congo. In the
West Bank and Gaza, the World Bank spent $3.5 billion to
build infrastructure, but we have failed. There has been a
total loss of confidence. Better health and education are
subject to building a decent state. In short the theoretical
approach to rebuilding states is na'ive. It is easy to declare
the end of conflict; but nation-building is extremely diffi-
cult and often fails. More than half the countries return to
conflict within f1ve years.
An Italian began the discussion by returning
DiscussioN1 to the problem of definition. A nation was a
cultural notion, the state a political one.
There are only around 200 sovereign states, but 6,ooo lan-
guages. Another complication is that there are very few
51
BILDERBERG 5 0TH ~ MAY 30TH - JU NE 2ND 2002
states where sovereignty is fully concentrated at the nation-
al level-and rightly so, because the correct level of govern-
ment varies from problem to problem. So nation-building
is an ambiguous concept; what matters is that there is a
recognised rule of law and a proper social contract. A Briton
agreed: nation-building is too ambitious. The only thing
that outsiders can do is to build institutions, particularly a
modest sized independent judiciary, though even that pro-
vides no guarantee (Zimbabwe started with good judges).
A Dane wondered whether the issue of nation-building
was too rapidly dumped on international institutions.
Maybe it was time to give the responsibility to nation states,
perhaps giving outsiders a mandate to rebuild states. A Ger-
man argued that many African countries were unable to
administer their countries. Most of them know what good
governance is, but they do not have enough qualified civil
servants (even in South Africa). It would be good to have an
example to show to Zimbabwe. A Canadian also agreed: in
places like Afghanistan, the West is dealing with a tabula
raza. There is an urgent need to build up expertise. Other-
wise, the backlash will be serious.
Others were more sceptical. An American pointed out
that everybody always talked about Marshall plans for dif-
ferent countries, but none of the results look similar to the
Marshall plan. Were there any good examples? He also
attacked the idea that the private sector would invest early
on. Another American though that the international com-
munity had to be aware of its limitations. The rule of law is
crucial, but so is security. We can change regimes, we cannot
build security. A Portuguese, recalling the complaints that
the UN had faced even in East Timor, wondered how to
make civil society work better. An earlier session suggested
leaving nation-building to the Europeans: does that make
sense? A Spaniard pointed to the desolation in Argentina. lt
now has 21 different currencies. He thought that the IMF
had played a part in Argentina's downfall.
52
~
•
POST -CRI S I S RECO N STRU CT ION /NA TIO N - REBUILDING
The second panellist pointed out that institution-build-
ing was not limited to conflict-ridden countries. Five billion
out ofthe six billion on the planet live in places with inade-
quate infrastructure. At Monterrey, these poor countries
pledged to build capacity in this respect. The problem with
conflicts is that once the conflict is resolved, the outside
world's attention disappears. In many parts of Afi-ica, there
is no tradition of law, so we are building institutional struc-
tures from nothing. But the outside world is seldom excited
by institution-building. People are not giving help. On the
specific question ofArgentina, the panellist thought the IMF
had been blamed too much. The Argentines were complicit
in their own ruin: there was too much corruption and
cronyism. As for the private sector, yes, business people are
cautious, preferring to enter countries only when institu-
tions are built. Economic growth is at the core of bringing
about effective nation states.
The first panellist noted that shared sovereignty was
one of the things that the European Union was trying to
achieve. It was trying to build a new sort of state to deal
with the modern world, and so it was an interesting model.
The Union might also solve the problem of nation-building
for some countries: the former Yugoslavia can find institu-
tions in the EU . The idea of reintroducing mandates is inter-
esting. Many Africans want to be recolonised, so we have to
reinvent some framework to do that, but the period of the
mandates was not an easy one. The Marshall plan worked
only because of what the states were. With Argentina, there
is plenty of blame to be shared on all sides.
53
•
Bll.DERBER G SO TII ~ M A\ } ClT I-1 - JUNE 2ND 200 2
Prospects for the World Economy
This session saw a division between different profes-
sions. Economists and central bankers tended to argue
that the underlying economic picture was healthy. Busi-
nesspeople concentrated on the gradually falling stock-
market. Both groups singled out America's current-
account deficit as a particular problem.
~ After ten years of expansion, the American
I -. FI_
RST __ \
\ rANELLIST
1 economy slowed from an average annual
~ growth rate of 2.8%at the end of 2000 to 0.5%
a year later. This made for an unusual recession. It was not
very steep-a negative swing of just 2.3%. Personal con-
sumption slowed by just 0.7%. This time a dramatic slow-
down in the consumer sector did not happen, though there
was a substantial slowdown in business investment.
What is happening now? GDP grew by a robust 5.6%in
the first quarter of this year. Personal consumption held up
very well, and the low savings rate improved slightly. Ener-
gy prices have risen, but not as much as they did in zooo.
Business investment is weak but beginning to turn up. In
earlier recessions the ratio of inventory to sales jumped; this
time it stayed where businesses wanted it. Companies can
manage their inventories much better than in the past. In
the heyday of growth, America produced 3m new jobs a
year. Since the recession started it has lost 1.6m jobs. That
has helped keep a lid on labour costs and inflation.The real
Fed Funds Rate is positive- but only just, at about half a
percent. Fiscal prudence remains very much in fashion.
54
~
}
t
~
PROSPECTS FOR THE WORLD EC ONOMY
Forecasters predict that the economy will grow by 3.5%
next year. One source of concern is the current-account
deficit, which stands at 4.3% of GNP and obliges America to
suck in a gigantic quantity of capital. This situation is cer-
tainly manageable, but it is hardly desirable. As for house-
hold borrowing, debt service in relation to income is man-
ageable by historical standards.
The most important thing to look at is productivity. ln
1973-95 productivity grew at 1.4% a year. Since 1995 it has
grown at 2.6% a year. Productivity growth remained at the
higher level during the recession-and the evidence sug-
gests that something structural did indeed change. Infor-
mation technology is producing signif1cant improvements
(e.g. in retailing and banking). The consensus is that the
rate at which productivity cCin grow without inflation tak-
ing off has risen.
~ lt is difficult to diagnose the state of the
( SECOND \ h h
', rANELLlST ) Euro-zone economy w en t ere are so many
~ major structural changes, particularly the
introduction of the euro. The Euro-zone slowed down in
2001. All its major economies are resynchronising.There is a
resynchronisation between Britain and the Euro-zone, and
there are also asymmetries in trade between the Euro-zone
and America. Exports of goods from the Euro-zone to the
United States account for 2.7''/n of the Euro-zone's cor;
exports to the Euro-zone account for just 1.1% of American
cor. That said, Britain and even the transition economies
are more important sources of external demand than the
United States to the Euro-zone.
The weakness of the euro helped push up oil prices in
local terms. The Euro-zone was also hit in 2001 by a decrease
in investment. There is a good chance investment may now
look up. In terms of productivity, the Euro-zone has done
worse than America since 1996, having previously outper-
formed it. It may be able to catch up.
55
BJL DE RBERG 50 TH ~ MAY 30T H - J UNE 2 ND 2 0 02
The growth rate in the first quarter was a disappointing
0.2%, but the leading indicators are much more positive.The
consensus is that the Euro-zone will grow by 1.3% in 2002
and by more than that from 2003. The average growth rate
for the first five years of the Euro will be 2.35%. Still, the
Euro-zone cannot be content with that. The economy is
being restructured: witness the number of mergers and
acquisitions. But Europe needs to shift the balance between
job protection and job creation. That change will be
painful. It will also entail a change in the culture.
.~ A Spanish banker praised macro-economic
' Disc ussioN management on both s1des of the Atlantic:
~ western economies seemed to be rebounding
strongly after a limited recession. So why was everybody,
especially the stockmarket, so pessimistic?Several other peo-
ple contrasted the optimistic mood of the panel and the
more doleful countenance of the business world. A French-
man wanted to explore the falling stockmarket. Were
accounting practices to blame? Or the risk ofmore terrorism?
And what lessons have central bankers learned from Septem-
ber nth? Another Frenchman asked about the dollar's
exchange rate with the euro. A Dutchman wondered why
business was not more optimistic ifthe underlying economy
was so healthy. An American suggested a solution to the
conundrum: technology is great for consumers but not so
great for producers. Perhaps markets are reflecting that fact.
Two American economists summed up their perspec-
tives. One raised the question of the global outlook. (The w
and the United States account tor only 4o-5o%of the world
economy.) He pinpointed the question of the current-
account detlcit. The United States has to import foreign cap-
ital to the tune of $4 billion a day. But the dollar is begin-
ning to decline. The question is how far will it go. The other
economist was a little more positive. The United States did
have a recession: employment fell for twelve consecutive
56
,.
~
"
9-
~
•
+
P R O S PE C T S FOR T il E WORLD ECON OM Y
months. But strong productivity growth has limited the
symptoms of the recession. The two clouds are the low sav-
ings rate and the current-account deficit. A gradual decline
of the dollar relative to the euro, combined with a return of
the savings rate to its traditional level, should allow Ameri-
ca to deal with both of those imbalances
Another American questioned his country's continued
commitment to fiscal discipline. In Congress both parties
are competing to spend money: look at the disgraceful farm
bill. The rise in domestic spending has almost approached
double digits for the past four years. Spending on defence
and homeland security is also surging. A few years ago
Americans were talking about reforming entitlement pro-
grammes; now all the talk is about expanding them. The
government's share of GOP, after falling for several years, is
beginning to grow again.
The second panellist admitted that it was an age of
great uncertainty. Business should see a boost in investment
thanks to improvements in the way that companies handle
their inventories. But he had also been struck by the pes-
simistic attitude of chief executives. A strong euro, he felt,
would inspire confidence. But people are wrong to think of
a strong euro countering the dollar. It is not a zero-sum
game. Co-operation between the Federal Reserve and the
European Central Bank survived the test of September nth.
But America's current-account deficit is not sustainable.
The first panellist argued that business pessimism was
based on poor profits in the past two quarters.Such gloom is
excessive. Fixed investment does not generally pick up until
after two consecutive quarters of revenue improvement.
Another act of terrorism would certainly depress the situa-
tion, but central bankers have proved that they are good at
damage control. He also repeated his argument that fiscal
responsibility was now embedded in the fabric of political
America, citing the elimination of the contract for the Cru-
57
PRO SPECTS FOR TH E WOR L D ECO NOMY
sader and opposition to tax rises as examples of prudence.
As for the American current-account deficit, the first panel-
list pointed out that money had been quite happily flowing
into the United States in the past. It is not clear why this
should change. The problem is not pressing, but it should be
fixed. The best solution would be for other countries to press
ahead with structural reforms so that capital would flow to
the rest of the world rather than migrating to the United
States. If America can increase its savings rate and bring
down its current-account deficit, that would make an
already healthy economy healthier still.
58
~
•
~
~
~
~
}
~
I
'~
•t~
B I LDERBER G 50T II <$> M AY }OTH - J U NE 2ND 2002
Trade: The China Effect
What does China's entry to the World Trade Organisation
mean for China, the world economy and the WTO? Most
speakers felt that the fuss about China joining the WTO
was warranted, but there was disagreement about the
risks involved. Some foresaw considerable upheaval
both inside the country and around Asia.
FIRST
PANELLIST
China signed its protocol of accession last
December. China's leaders. who know the
huge challen~e of restructuring its state-
owned enterprises, wanted to consolidate this process of
modernisation before passingcontrol to the next generation.
The debate over China's entry to the WTO was raucous.
It seemed wrong to have a World Trade Organisation that
did not include a fifth of the world's people.A safe, prosper-
ous China is in all our interests, not least because China has
borders with 14 other countries and holds a seat on the U N
Security Council. That said, it is a huge challen~e to the trad-
ing system. America has a $100 billion deficit with China,
and the figure for the EU is nearly half that amount. Asian
countries are worried at the way that investment is flowing
into China, building up its export capacity.
This is part of the process of globalisation which politi-
cians have as yet not explained very well. The poorest
nations should be given better access to western markets.
Trade is better than aid. So there are challenges stemming
from China's accession. But, as the saying goes, better a dia-
mond with a flaw than a pebble without one.
59
HI LD ERBE!<(, 50 1 II ~ M AY 30 T H -JUNE 2N D 2 002
~ There has been a lot of:vork on the effect of
. PAN ELLIST the accession on specihc countnes, such as
~ Mexico, but not much done on the effect on
the WTo . The WTO is ve1
y different from the GATT. The
Uruguay Round moved the focus to domestic politics, and
to institutional reform. The WTO inherited a strong dis-
putes-settlement mechanism. It has set up a two-tier system.
Can China provide the info rmation on, say, food safety?
The wTo's standard for transparency is based on the Ameri-
can Administrative Procedures Act. It emphasises indepen-
dent regulatory agencies, freedom of information and judi-
cial review. It is also relatively adversarial, but it had no real
impact on GATT, which was about border controls. China
may not be able to publish all its laws and regulations for 20
years. Many laws are state laws; some are just normative doc-
uments. There is no separation of powers: no concept of an
independent judiciary. It is rule by law, not rule oflaw.
Optimists say that, under pressure from business, laws
will emerge. But China has already violated some aspects of
its accession. The West is taking a tolerant approach. But
can China really be treated differently? The country that is
most concerned about China is India. A tough western poli-
cy will be seen by China as a political attack.
~. The discussion began with solicited contri-
•DIScussioN ; butions from three people who know China
\...____) well. The first speaker, an American, thought
Hu Jintao was a difficult man to judge. He behaves like the
CEO of a large American corporation. Mao had the legitima-
cy of the revolution. Deng had the legitimacy of reform, and
Jiang Zemin was anointed by Deng. The Chinese have an
economy that is far ahead of the political process. The Com-
munist Party resembles the PRI in Mexico. The Bush admin-
istration is not at ease with China: it still sees it as a potential
competitor, even though it will not be a mi litary rival for a
generation. China does not fit into the slot vacated by the
6o
•
~
•
•
~
~~
--1'
'iY
v
<:}'
TRAD E : THE C HINA EFFEC T
Soviet Union. Taiwan could present a problem, but, given
China's excitement about the 2008 Olympics, it would take a
severe provocation for China to renew that struggle. The
challenge for America this century is to create and manage
an Asian system in the same way that the British managed
Europe in the 19th century.
An international banker, who had just returned from
China, said that he had never seen the country so confident.
The WTO, the Olympics, and the World Exposition: all these
things have made the outgoing leaders feel secure. They are
much more willing to discuss difficult issues, like minori-
ties, corruption and Aids, though they are still sensitive
about human rights. China's population will cap out at
about 1.5 billion. The immediate challenge is to tackle
poverty. The government's answer is a "Go West" policy of
opening up the country. Technology will also play an
important role. The current leadership has devised a plan;
the next generation will implement it.
This theme was also captured by the third speaker, an
American economist. Jiang Zemin sees the wTo accession
in the context of China's "deep sleep", the era when China
turned inward and was overtaken by the West. China does
not want to miss the current era of globalisation. WTO entry
is a reason to modernise: it has already changed 150 laws.
One challenge will be relations with Japan. Last year there
was a minor trade war between Japan and China. China
has now reached a pact with ASEAN to have free trade in 10
years; Japan has not. By contrast, China poses a far smaller
threat to countries like Mexico (it cannot make everything).
Yet there is a far-Dff worry that you could end up with two
trade wars-one between China and japan in Asia, and one
between Europe and America in the West.
A European banker agreed with the idea that China
was overtaking Japan. It still takes time for western busi-
nesses to get into China, and there are difficulties dealing
61
1 ~ T,;;; nrre'"
W1Y1Wttn , ....,.
, ,.,• .'
. -.· ~~-·.-· ··" .~
~ nee rrnrzrmrrwern rnre .,m;rxtt'iitr:·· w
a
B ILUERIJERG SDTH ~ MAY JOI H - JU NE 2ND 2002
with joint-venture partners. But he was relatively optimistic
about Taiwan: Shanghai is crawling with Taiwanese busi-
ness people. An Irish participant agreed. With China, it is
important not to confront, but to engage. The negotiations
over the WTO stretched back over 18 years. Already China is
attracting huge amounts of FDI. The experience in Hong
Kong has been better than people expected.
Others were less optimistic. One American thought that
China had huge economic domestic problems. There will
be economic pain with wTo accession, which will also
make the gap between economic and political reform all
the more noticeable. A central banker thought that the crux
of China's challenge was creating economic structures. It
has huge numbers of state-owned enterprises, which have
social responsibilities. The leadership has used WTO mem-
bership to galvanise the younger generation. But China is
still wedded to a hard currency. An American pointed out
that China was a huge importer: how would it use that mar-
ket power over its Asian neighbours? A Frenchman was par-
ticularly worried about Japan.
Several speakers discussed America's position. One
politician used the accession vote to argue that the impor-
tance of passing fast-track had been exaggerated. At Seattle,
Bill Clinton tried to get the rights of human capital on the
table. An American thought that China would not cause as
much trouble for American workers as Japan had in the
198os. Accession will be a bigger problem for American busi-
ness people: they have been told that they can get into
China and will be angry when they find their way still
blocked. The real challenge though will come from the
developing world: China will chew up a lot of investment.
Pressure must be brought to bear on Beijing to pursue more
than just an export-led strategy.
A few speakers looked at the wTo itself. A Portuguese
participant asked about the organisation's future direction.
62
it
..
)>
I!>
}
-~
?;·
~
I
,
,
)..,
/jt
TRAD E : THE C HI NA EFFECT
How will it adjust to social issues and the environment?
Should it press ahead with enlargement, or should it first
come up with a different set of rules? A Norwegian pursued
the environmental issue further, noting that China had
problems of its own in this regard.
The second panellist thought that the rule of compara-
tive advantage was not really applicable to China because
of the state structure. Japan is indeed a problem. So are the
state-owned enterprises, which still account for the bulk of
assets and investment. Reform has slowed because of the
social problems. As for China's leverage in the region, Bei-
jing is well aware of this. The leadership is already seeking
out intellectual property in fields such as software and
biotechnology.
The first panellist argued that the fast-track bill was
essential. With China there were certainly huge risks, but
there were also grounds for optimism. There are already
some signs of political liberalisation. Yes, China is using
power over imports to change things. But China's private
sector is beginning to wield power too. China is using the
wTo system. The potential benefits outweigh the risks.
63
B IL DERBEKG 5 0 TH ~ M AY } O T H - JUN E 2ND 2002
The Influence of Domestic Issues on
American Foreign Policy
Asthe moderator pointed out, the conduct of American
foreign policy had come up in every session. Everybody
admitted that foreign policy was bound to be somewhat
influenced by domestic considerations, with several
speakers arguing that the influence was far too great.
By contrast, most people seemed to think that foreign
policy would not be a significant issue in the November
mid-term elections.
.~ The directi?n of foreign policy was one part
~ PAN ELLlST J of Amenca s foundmg documents. Amenca
~ was organised as a nation to do two primary
things: protect against aggression and ensure domestic tran-
quillity. Domestic issues clearly have a profound influence
on foreign policy. The country's ability to carry on a domes-
tic agenda depends on its ability to protect the country. Two
considerations weigh on the president's mind. The first is
that the planet is much smaller than ever before. The second
is that we are at a pivotal moment in history.
September nth has produced profound changes. One
of the basic presumptions in the constitution is that Ameri-
ca is reactive. But these days you have to be pre-emptive in
order to defend yourself. One attack can be so catastrophic
that prevention is necessary to preserve tranquillity. The
aim of American strength is to preserve freedom. People
cannot live in tranquillity unless they are safe from external
aggression, including terrorism.
64
THE I N FLU E N CE OF
DOM ES TIC I SSU E S O N A MERI C A N FO RE IGN POLICY
Throughout his administration the president has
focused on foreign aggression and domestic tranquillity.
The administration started on domestic tranquillity-hence
tax reform and education. But these days we cannot escape
from the focus on foreign affairs.
The United States faces very important elec-
SECOND ) . h" h b I f
, PANELLIST t1ons t 1s year. T e a ance o power
depends on one seat in the Senate and six
seats in the House. There are also 36 governorships up for
grabs. The omens are good for the Democrats, who did well
last year despite Bush being at the height of his popularity.
Foreign policy tends to play a role in presidential
rather than congressional campaigns. The parties are in
agreement on how to fight the war on terrorism. The
administration has sometimes inappropriately used for-
eign policy to shore up its domestic position. American
politicians are inevitably influenced by domestic consider-
ations. Good politics does not usually mean bad foreign
policy: it is good foreign policy to make sure that Israel has
the wherewithal to defend itself. But we have to make sure
that domestic policy does not thwart foreign policy: most
American voters were probably against the Marshall plan.
The Bush administration's foreign policy has been guid-
ed by domestic considerations in two important ways. One
is its determination not to repeat the failures ofthe previous
Bush administration. The president has tried to solidify his
conservative base: one ofhis first acts was to ban funding for
abortions abroad. Bush's determination to go after Iraq may
also be influenced by his desire to expunge the greatest mis-
take ofhis father's presidency. Bush is also using foreign pol-
icy to go after Democratic voters, such as Latinos and steel-
workers. There is a huge amount of internal debate within
this administration, which gives power to political func-
tionaries such as Karl Rove. Bush has had to change his mind
on both nation-building and the Middle East.
6s
~
-
BILOFRBER G 50TH ~ M/\ Y }OTH-J UNE 2ND 2002
Most of the first speakers focused on trade.
An American asked what decision the Demo-
cratic Party would have taken over steel
given the upcoming governors' elections. And how does the
steel decision fit into a foreign policy based on the need to
promote tranquillity and protect against outside threats?
Another American noted that the Democrats' commitment
to free trade had weakened since Clinton's retirement. The
bulk of votes for fast-track came from Republicans. A third
American asked how the United States could generate a
political consensus in favour ofprudent policies outside the
military sphere. It is almost impossible to get a majority for
free trade among Democrats or a majority for international
involvement among Republicans.A Norwegian wondered if
America pursued any foreign policy on its merits alone.
The second panellist agreed that the steel decision was
political. Bush ran for president on a free-trade ticket, but
then deserted it. Steel is a difficult subject for Democrats
too, though Clinton was a firm free trader. In general, the
Democratic Party is in favour offree trade provided it is fair.
If Gore was in the White House, the same decision might
have emerged, but with modifications to help American
workers. The first panellist claimed that Bush still led a free-
trade administration. There are strong strategic reasons why
you need to be able to produce steel in America. Bush did
not visit Mexico first for domestic reasons. He did so
because he comes from a neighbouring state-and because
he likes the people.
Some speakers wondered whether support for the war
on terror really was bipartisan. A Canadian thought policy
would change if the Democrats won majorities in both
houses. The Democratic Party has not broken free from a
post-Vietnam mindset. Of the leading candidates for the
presidency only one, Gore, has given full-throated support
for war. The tide ofprotectionism that engulfed the Democ-
ratic House in the 198os is now engulfing the Senate. Surely
66
THE I NFLUENCE OF
DOMESTIC I SSU ES ON AM F. RI C A N FO RE IGN POL I C Y
a Democratic Congress would be more protectionist, more
doveish and more conspiracy-minded? A German won-
dered how far bipartisan support should go. Supporting the
administration's activities in Afghanistan is clearly right.
But does it extend to domestic efforts to gather intelligence
that conflict with privacy rights?
Several speakers found it hard to repress their cynicism.
An American called the two parties equal-opportunity pan-
derers: just look at the Republicans and the Miami Cubans,
and the Democrats and Israel. The Democrats in Congress
will not criticise Bush on steel for fear of offending their
political base. Another American suggested two questions:
what are the domestic constraints on American foreign pol-
icy in the Middle East? And what is the impact of the world
on domestic politics? Another American wondered how the
agricultural lobby had held on to so much pol itical power.
A bipartisan bill has just furnished farmers with yet more
subsidies, despite the fact that American consumers pay five
times the global price ofsugar, and sweet manufacturers are
moving abroad.
The second panellist thought that support for the war
on terrorism was bipartisan. The Democrats have stood
four-square behind the president on homeland security. But
support for the war does not mean that you surrender your
right to ask questions. The first panellist said that policies
on all sorts of vital areas-such as privacy- are in a state of
flux. The administration is tryin{to draw the line. This has
happened before, on everything from zoning to implied
consent laws, but never on issues of similar gravity.Agricul-
tural policy reflects a variety of concerns, including safe-
guarding America's "food-producing infrastn1cture." There
has been an extraordinary awakening to the rest of the
world since September uth-a realisation that the world i ~ a
very small place and that America has a continuing respon-
sibility to other countries.
67
~.i·V'· ;,_b~
