I,1
"
~
.l¢
~
jl
'
I
i.
:.
I·
.'
.1:
'·
~
"<t-.'.
;.I
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
'NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
~···
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
CAMBRIDGE
CONFERENCE
gr March - 2 April 1967
.,, --,1,
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
CAMBRIDGE
CONFERENCE
31 March-2April 1967
t
t
,1
_!,
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JosEPH E. JoHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
Johannes Meynen
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ARNOLD T. LAMPING
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ARLIOTIS, CHARLES
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARRAN, DAVID H.
BAUMEL, JACQUES
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BECKER, KURT
BEEBE, FREDERICK S.
BENNETT, Sm FREDERIC
BmGI, M. NuRI
BIRRENBACH, KURT
BROSIO, MANLIO
CASANOVA, JEAN C.
CLEVELAND, HAROLD VAN B.
CLEVELAND, HARLAN
*
*
*
ITALY
GREECE
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
FRANCE
FRANCE
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
TURKEY
GERMANY
INTERNATIONAL
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
3
COLLADO, EMILIO G. UNITED STATES
NEWHOUSE,jOHN UNITED STATES
COLONNA DI PALIANO, PRINCE GUIDO INTERNATIONAL
NIARCHOS, STAVROS S. GREECE
DANKERT, PIET NETHERLANDS
NOGUEIRA, ALBERTO FRANCO PORTUGAL
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES
NoRSTAD, LAURIS UNITED STATES
DIEBOLD, JOHN UNITED STATES
NYKOPP, JoHAN FINLAND
EAYRS, ]AMES CANADA
PECCEI, AURELIO ITALY
EDINBURGH,H.R.H.THEPRINCEPHILIP,DUKEOF UNITED KINGDOM
PERKINS, ]AMES A. UNITED STATES
FERRARI AGGRADI, MARIO ITALY
PESMAZOGLOU, jOHN S. GREECE
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s. CANADA
PIEL, GERARD UNITED STATES
HALL, SIR ARNOLD UNITED KINGDOM
PIORE, EMANUEL R. UNITED STATES
HARTUNG, HENRI FRANCE
PIRELLI, LEOPOLDO ITALY
HEALEY, DENIS w. UNITED KINGDOM
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
HEATH, EDWARD R. G. UNITED KINGDOM
ROLL, SIR ERIC UNITED KINGDOM
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES
RosTow, EuGENE V. UNITED STATES
H0EGH, LEIF NORWAY
Roux, AMBROISE FRANCE
HOFFMANN, STANLEY UNITED STATES
SCHMIDT, HELMUT GERMANY
HOGG, QUINTIN UNITED KINGDOM
SCHWARZ, URS SWITZERLAND
HOLMBERG, YNGVE SWEDEN
SHAWCROSS, LORD UNITED KINGDOM
HORNIG, DONALD F. UNITED STATES
SIMONET, HENRI BELGIUM
JACKSON, HENRY M. UNITED STATES
SNOY ET D'0PPUERS, BARON BELGIUM
KAYSEN, CARL UNITED STATES
S0RENSEN, SVEND 0. DENMARK
KEARTON, SIR FRANK UNITED KINGDOM
STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
KNOPPERS, ANTONIE T. UNITED STATES
TAVERNE, DICK UNITED KINGDOM
KoHNSTAMM, MAx INTERNATIONAL
TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
KRAFT, JOSEPH UNITED STATES
TIDEMAND, OTTO G. NORWAY
KYMMELL, JAAP NETHERLANDS
TRON' LUDOVIC FRANCE
LEFEVRE, THEO BELGIUM
UDINK, BEREND J. NETHERLANDS
LEGER, JULES CANADA
VITTORELLI, PAOLO ITALY
LuNs,JosEPH M.A. H. NETHERLANDS
WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
MARTIN, PAUL CANADA
WHEELER, Sm CHARLES UNITED KINGDOM
MATHIAS JR., CHARLES McC. UNITED STATES
WITHALM, HERMANN AUSTRIA
MATTH!ASEN' N !ELS DENMARK
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO GERMANY
MAUDLING, REGINALD UNITED KINGDOM IN ATTENDANCE:
McGHEE, GEORGE C. UNITED STATES
McNAUGHTON, JoHN T. UNITED STATES
CHIUSANO, VITTORINO ITALY
MERKLE, HANS GERMANY
MuNBY, RICHARD K. UNITED KINGDOM
MOYERS, BILL D. UNITED STATES
RoY, BERTIE LE NETHERLANDS
M UNTHE, PREBEN NORWAY
SCHELLE, CAREL]. VAN NETHERLANDS
MURPHY, ROBERT D. UNITED STATES
VERNEDE, EDWIN NETHERLANDS
NETHERLANDS, H. R. H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
4
5
INTRODUCTION
The sixteenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at St. John's College in Cam-
bridge (England) on 31 March, l and 2 April 1967 under the chairmanship of
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 88 participants from the United States, Canada and fifteen
Western European countries as well as from various international organiza-
tions. They consisted of members of governments, leading civil servants and
prominent businessmen, representatives of employers' organizations and trade
unions and important persons in other fields.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization they might belong to. In order to enable partici-
pants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were con-
fidential with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. a) Do the basic concepts of Atlantic co-operation remain valid for the
evolving world situation?
b) If not, what concepts could take their place?
II. The technological gap between America and Europe with special reference
to American investments in Europe.
*
* *
On opening the meeting, His Royal Highness The Prince of the Netherlands
asked participants to observe one minute silence in tribute to Mr. Fritz Erler,
a greatly valued collaborator ofBilderberg and member of the Steering Com-
mittee, who had passed away in the beginning of this year.
His Royal Highness then read a message he had sent to Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth.
The Prince informed participants that, for practical reasons, the order of the
Agenda had been changed. He, consequently, proposed to start the discussion on
the second item.
7
I. THE TECHNOLOGICAL GAP BETWEEN AMERICA
AND EUROPE WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE
TO AMERICAN INVESTMENTS IN EUROPE
The groundworkfor discussion ofthis item on the Agenda consisted of a paper
prepared by an American participant which was distributed before the meet-
ing.
The author of this paper began by emphasizing that there was undoubtedly
an imbalance in the production of "marketable" technology which favoured
the United States of America-the situation commonly known as the "tech-
nological gap"-and he considered that this gap was growing.
Differences in the production of technology were not bad per se provided
that technology was transferred through the industrial world. But transference
of "marketable" technology between nations was subject to many artificial
restraints. Before World War II the transfer of new technology took place
mostly through licensing whereas it was now mostly transferred by exploita-
tion through direct investment. This development had led to the existence,
growth and power of "international" companies, sometimes called "world
companies".
Although the West European countries needed this type of transfer of tech-
nology, it was understandable that certain fears and forms ofresistance against
this development should appear. The "take over" of national industries by
such United States world companies stimulated anxiety of foreign (United
States) dominance while the plans and objectives of such powerful "world
companies" (without national allegiance) might form a threat to national
economic independence as expressed in "national" economic planning.
Given the expected widening of the technological gap in important sectors,
it would be unwise to hamper technological transfer by deterring United
States industrial investment. At the same time, it was important that Europe
should develop sufficient technology of its own in order to establish and main-
tain a manageable balance of the two-way flow. This was an urgent problem
whose solution necessitated radical action iri respect of education, research
management and capital requirements which could only succeed in a frame-
work of greater European unity.
9
MANAGEMENT IS THE KEY
The rapporteur went on to say that the key point for Europeans to grasp if
they were to increase their own technological prowess was that superior tech-
nology was the result of superior industrial management and management
concepts.
Although the quality of management in many European firms was equal to
that of their American counterparts, American management of research in toto
was more advanced. The American manager seemed to be more aggressive in
giving practical application to new science and/or new technology and this
was of great importance.
The whole situation was aggravated further by the question of size. The
United States had 55 companies with sales of$ I billion or more and 248 with
sales of more than $ 250 million; Great Britain had 6 and 49 respectively;
Germany 8 and 27; and France I and 2I. The advantages ofsize were reflected
in such factors as safer risk taking, and hence greater venturesomeness, larger
investment resources for low-cost production and for marketing and advertising;
greater variety and depth of personnel; more technical integration. However,
only a predetermined part of the energies and resources of the larger corpora-
tions could be devoted to the exploitation of new opportunity so that a sub-
stantial body of the newly created technologies was available for exploitation
by others. In America, the small innovating industry exploiting new techno-
logy was stimulating both technology and the economy.
The Ig5o's witnessed the emergence of many new enterprises based on the
exploitation of the large amount of research and development performed
during the Ig4o's and Ig5o's. These new, technically-based businesses had as
their objectives:
I. the exploitation of a new product, process or service which had not yet
been commercialized, or
2. the development in their laboratories of a new product, processor service, or
3. contractual participation in the further development of a new scientific or
technological field.
It was significant that the overwhelming majority of these new ventures were
started in close proximity to prominent universities-which were centres of
research and development in the particular field of science concerned.
The very existence of these new businesses was a challenge to large compa-
nies to remain alert and aggressive. Despite many problems, there had gener-
ally been sources of risk capital to start and sustain them and entrepreneurs
with the drive to exploit the opportunity (although with too little seasoned
managerial skill to avoid some bad mistakes). The key factor, however, was
IO
the conv1ct10n that success could be really rewarding in financial terms.
The reasons for the fact that in Europe there had been no comparable rate
of formation of new, technologically-based businesses seemed to be
1. a lack of tradition of broad-based industrial entrepreneurship together
with a somewhat rigid social infrastructure;
2. a lack of venture capital for exploiting new technology;
3. ·the lack of an involved, committed government market for the products of
new research-based enterprises.
In the United States, the government was often the main or only initial
customer, thus providing market support at the most crucial stage in the
existence of the business.
QUANTITY AND QUALITY IN TECHNOLOGY
There were three major stages in the development of new technology. The
first was the idea stage, where an individual or group ofindividuals interpreted
available data in a new arrangement an speculated on the consequences. The
second was the basic evolution stage, where individuals, laboratories and in-
struments checked out the hypothesis. (If scientific ideas had potential tech-
nological application, they were reduced to practice; if the ideas were purely
scientific, they were mostly transferred through scientific publication; if they
had practical implications, they often became technical property, protected by
patents.) In the third stage, a proven idea was continued into usable technology,
which added many other dimensions to the problem-cost versus need; reli-
ability and stability, size, etc., often resulting in acceptable compromises.
While science was continuous, the progress of technology was often erratic and
time-conditioned because many technologies often had to be brought to-
gether for practical success.
Ifone of the technologies failed, the process was retarded. Superconductivity
was a current example of the problems of producing "usable" technology.
Dutch Nobel Prize Laureate Kamerlingh Onnes discovered in IgI I, as a by-
product of his "low temperature" achievements, that by chilling some metals to
the vicinity of absolute zero they became "super conductors". This was a
great scientific discovery and a basic technological breakthrough but "super-
conductivity" was only now-fifty years after its discovery-getting the type
of attention that would lead to its becoming a tool with practical applications.
This example ofthe interplay ofdifferent areas ofscience in contributing to tech-
nological progress was the rule rather than the exception, but due to new
revolutionary technology in data processing, retrieving and recognition and
II
communications, development ofmarketable technology was being accelerated.
It was therefore readily apparent that the development ofnew technology had
both quantitative and qualitative aspects, which could shed light on the nature
of the gap.
The rapporteur said that his main original observation was based on inter-
views with about ten American research directors of large international firms
who· all concluded that they were somewhat or far ahead of the rest of the
world with respect to a part or all of their fields of technology. He had put
this view to a group ofengineers and research directors in Europe and found that
they agreed. He was convinced that there was a "gap" and thatit was "growing".
The figures were impressive. In 1963 the United States of America spent
around$ 17.350 million in Research and Development versus Western Europe's
$ 5.750 million. Very recent figures suggested that this trend was continuing
($ 23 billion versus$ 9 billion in 1965). It was also reflected in the number of
actiye scientists and engineers (estimated at 436.000 in 1962 versus 150.000)
and the positive balance of income from licenses and royalties (about 5 to 1).
In addition, a good part of the positive trade balance of the United States
over Western Europe derived from export gains in research-intensive products.
It was largely hidden in the export figures of large United States world com-
panies to their subsidiaries.
Both the compilation and the interpretation of the figures, however, were
hazardous. For instance, some interpreters had suggested that due to lower
wages (now rapidly rising in Europe), the real ratio might be only 2 to 1
instead of 3-3.5 to 1 in favour of the United States-an argument which was
largely offset by the fact that America excelled in the management of highly
complex research projects, using automated, versatile laboratory equipment
and sophisticated approaches. Much of Europe's industrial effort was frag-
mented and often so small that the "critical mass" for a chance of success was
not even reached. A much more complicated argument centred around the
distribution of expenditure on Research and Development (R & D). In the
year 1964, out of a R & D total of$ 19 billion, the United States Government
spent $ 12.5 billion, industry $ 6 billion and colleges and universities $ 0.5
billion.
HOW MUCH "FALL-OUT" FROM SPACE AND DEFENCE RESEARCH?
Although direct "fall-out" might be limited, the indirect contribution was
very large. It was not generally recognized that of the$ 12.5 billion spent by
the United States Government, $ 7.6 billion was industry performed (60,%).
This provided industry with an immense pool of scientists and engineers well
12
versed in fields of research and technology of great importance to the future
ofindustrial technology and the interchange and mobility of these scientists and
engineers inside their own company and between companies guaranteed a sub-
stantial and essential "fall-out".
Moreover, the need for reliability in space vehicles had set new standards of
achievement: new materials-stable under extremely low and high tempera-
tures-would find their use in daily life as well; the fuel cell would prove
valuable in transportation in an age troubled by air pollution; the technology
of telemetry and metrology had been accelerated; miniaturized, solid state
circuitry was providing new opportunities for the electronics industry. Govern-
ment-sponsored research involved real disadvantages (the large numbers of
scientists tied down to government projects, the large amount of company
capital which must be committed and the diversion of management energy
and attention) but they were more than offset by the technological momentum
created by this type of government research.
The advanced position of the United States in most fields of physics-from
elementary particle theory to immensely complicated, computer-planned and
controlled systems-was reflected in leadership in a number of industries, such
as the aerospace groups, quantum electronics applications (solid state physics,.
laser and maser), computer technology, large new fields of instrumentation,
communication, micro-wave application and non-military use of atomic
energy.
In the field of chemistry, Europe was in a much better position-e.g,, in
the heavy chemical industry and in the exploitation of natural products, this
latter because American research had lost much interest in natural products,
preferring instead to synthesize new compounds to present-day specifications.
In the production of biological technology, the dominance of the American
pharmaceutical industry was evident, yet the fact that the Swiss pharmaceutical
industry was fully competitive in the development of new drugs showed that
a small country could be competitive through good management, if it special-
ized, ran its research well, had adequate long-range planning and re-invested
a large part of its profits wisely.
It was also important to emphasize that there were many important cases
where the two-way flow between Europe and the United States was in favour
of Europe.
Reverting to the three successive stages of research-
1. ideas;
2. basic, experimentally proven theory; and
3. development and application-
13
it could be said that whereas Europe originally dominated the first two phases,
today the United States in many sectors might lead even in these phases and
was dominant in the third phase, so important for the development of "mar-
ketable" technology. This development was one of the main causes of an irri-
tating phenomenon, the so-called "brain drain": the migration of scientific
talent from Europe to the United States. The belief that it was caused solely
by higher wages and more affluent living was not accurate.
THE "BRAIN DRAIN"
This serious problem was a symptom of the technological imbalance but
was also a reaction to demand in the United States. This demand was reflected
in the recruiting activity of American firms in Europe. The annual average
number of scientists and engineers migrating to the United States from
Western Europe between 1956 and 1961 was about r.300, of whom 965 were
engineers. As a percentage of the national output of 1959, 21 %of Netherlands
engineers and 17% of United Kingdom engineers left. Figures for later years
showed similar trends. As emigration was a serious, active decision ofmotivated
people, many of those migrants were likely to have entrepreneurial qualities.
What could be done about the "brain drain", and by whom? Responsibility
for ensuring that highly skilled technologists either did not emigrate, or re-
turned after studies abroad, was incumbent on the countries of origin. It was
neither desirable nor necessary for the United States to establish any form of
legislation as far as Europe was concerned (although some co-operation on
this problem with less developed countries might make sense). It was clear
that from a European point ofview the problem could only be solved by long-
range solutions: creating more attractive working conditions for scientists and
engineers and making better use of available manpower. This would necessi-
tate changes in the social appreciation of technologists, better and more effec-
tive laboratory management and especially higher starting salaries and op-
portunities for advancement.
EUROPEAN MEASURES TO BALANCE THE TECHNOLOGICAL IMBALANCE
The rapporteur stressed that Europe could not afford to let the technological
gap continue. There was a real fear of American technological dominance in
Europe.
In the light of overall figures, however, no such dominance as yet existed.
The United States gross direct investment in Europe in 1963 was only slightly
over 2% of the total direct investment. The highest investment in a single
14
country was in West Germany with 3.1 % and the lowest was in France with
r.4%- It was true, however, that in some specialized industries, United States
companies dominated or had a substantial share of the market (computers,
aircraft, carbon black, business equipment, pharmaceuticals). It was also true
that in recent years the percentage of new investment by American firms as
part ofthe total industrial investment had materi'ally increased. Europe wanted
a smooth transfer of technology and was prepared to pay for it, but it did not
want technological dependence. Above all, Europe would like to develop
sufficient technology itself.
WAYS OF DEVELOPING EUROPE'S TECHNOLOGY
From the long-range point of view, it was certain that Europe had to re-
structure its educational system. European education often produced small
groups of first-rate men but, compared with that of the United States, it did
not create and utilize that large body of scientists and supporting engineers
so necessary to technological output.
In the United States in 1960, more than 33% of the population had attained
secondary-level education and an additional 7·7% had had university-level
education; in the Netherlands, II% had received secondary education and
r.3 % a university education or its equivalent. In 1962 there were about
71.000 higher-education degrees awarded in France and 58.000 in West
Germany, compared with more than half a million in the United States. The
latest figures (1966) show.that 75%of the American male population between
20 and 24 years have now completed at least four years of high school.
There was a growing realization in Europe that the traditional educational
system was not geared to today's realities. The challenge in Europe today was
to provide broader education for more individuals without eliminating the
opportunity for individual accomplishment. American education had its
shortcomings but it also had its strong points, not the least of these being a
stronger emphasis than was usually found in Europe on teaching approaches
that caused the student to reason, construct and discover rather than memorize
and repeat.
Given the right incentives in the form of challenging professional opportuni-
ties, the educational tide could change with unexpected rapidity, as had been
demonstrated in the United States since World War II, but much preliminary
work remained to be done,
Industry itself, in the future, would be deeply involved in the educational
process, said the rapporteur, alluding to the application of electronics to teach-
ing. In the United States, several of the most progressive firms in the communi-
15
!•:
cations field regarded the whole area of learning and information usage as full
of promise, and some publishing enterprises were investigating the possibilities
of electronics.
A more direct step had to be taken to create size through European mergers,
preferably ofa trans-national character. Such firms could develop the manage-
ment attitude and the research facilities necessary for world competition. As
Professor van der Beugel had pointed out in his doctoral thesis: "The potential
danger of unhealthy competition due to the often larger size of the American
enterprises and their research has to be matched through larger European
production units." The question was whether Europe was on the right track
and would be successful in achieving a manageable balance.
The movement of European firms was towards national concentration rather
than trans-national European mergers. If the Common Market repulsed the
American giant world corporation and failed to establish European incorpora-
tion, the European movement might fall short of real integration.
However, to develop fully trans-national mergers, uniform European com-
pany law was needed, and this was now under consideration by the European
Economic Community. This, however, would have to be accompanied by a
harmonization of taxation, industrial laws and regulations, monetary institu-
tions, etc.
Europe was on the right track in setting up a number of trans-national re-
search institutions, such as the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN), EURATOM, the European Nuclear Energy Agency (ENEA), the
European Space Research Organization (ESRO) and the collateral European
Launcher Development Organization (ELDO), although most of these were
hampered by inadequate budgets.
It was extremely important that the Committee for Science Policy of the
OECD should be very active and skilful since it might be the best rallying
point for analysis and action. Much more had to be done by Western European
countries not only individually but also in concert in order to attack some
large sectors of technology.
NEW INITIATIVES: WILSON, OECD, FANFANI
Recently there had been some new initiatives. One example was British
Prime Minister Harold Wilson's plea for British admission in the EEC "to
create a new technological community in Europe'', the idea being .;to pool
the enormous technological inventiveness of Britain and other European
countries. This would enable Europe to compete in technology in a way that
16
f
:
!
'
I·
Ill
·~
1
I!
is now impossible and reduce its dependence on imports and the chance of
domination of its technology from outside".
The Fanfani·approach was not as yet known in detail but an outline was
available. The plan called for a technological agreement between the govern-
ments of th~ NATO countries as a first phase, with the possibility for other
governments to join at a later date. A technological organization should
promote initiatives, agreements and infrastructures necessary to foster Euro-
pean 'technological development for the next ten years. This proposal implied
the acquisition by European countries of technology without charge in the
case of government-owned technology (United States) and through payment
in the case of private patents.
Technology in the sense of industrial property (patents; know-how) was
America's biggest asset in meeting its responsibility in world affairs. From an
American point of view, the United States should preserve a technological
gap in order to protect its balance of payments. Hence, the attitude of some
United States government officials was to consider the matter as a "non-
problem" or to downgrade it. The author of the paper believed, however,
that the United States would gladly assist Europe to take certain steps to alle-
viate the problem. But to give away government-owned industrial property
in the form of technology to an affluent area such as Western Europe would
be unacceptable, especially at a time when at least one European country was
quite prepared to undermine the United States gold balance.
On the other hand, ifWestern Europe were to adopt a business-like approach
to the various forms of co-operation, it would find the United States receptive.
One aspect of such a business-like approach would be an objective attitude
towards the role which America's direct investments had in the transfer of
"marketable" technology. In a time of growing nationalism in Europe, the
question of whether this development was useful or not was decisive. Should
such investment be stimulated, controlled or hampered? Were there any new
solutions? ·
THE ROLE OF DIRECT UNITED STATES INVESTMENT IN THE TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY
Intensified American investment in Europe had undoubtedly made a posi-
tive contribution to Europe's growth and without such investment Europe
could not have remained a competitive, modern, industrial society.
Yet most Europeans feared certain consequences of American investment:
the size ofthe international companies, and the potency oftheir research effort
and monetary resources. The "international company" could be at odds with
national objectives and sovereignty, although the rapporteur stressed that most
17
of these fears were unrealistic. If Europe did not take new and radical steps to
arrive at new attitudes towards the development oftechnology, a tense situation
seemed inevitable while if a European technological will developed, the con-
tribution of United States international companies could be essential for total
success.
That international investment promoted economic growth was shown by
those European industries which, although nation-based, were internationally
operative, and would hold their own and be fully competitive. The only
question was which forms ofdirect investment were most profitable for Europe's
technological position. The fact that the "international" company thought
in terms of optimal "world-wide" profit considerations did not mean that it
failed to recognize that it was a guest in host countries.
American direct investment in Europe consisted of establishing wholly-
owned subsidiaries and branches through joint ventures with European firms
and sometimes through the acquisition of local firms. From the point of view
of the "international company" the wholly-owned subsidiary was usually the
best solution. A sort of balance had to be found between the so-called central
decision-making and the interests of the national subsidiary, as far as the host
country and local employees were concerned. One new way would be through
a true European holding company, in which Europeans could hold shares,
once that became feasible. The other alternative, that United States inter-
national companies could really become "international" by offering shares
on European stock exchanges, looked attractive, but would be impracticable
for a long time.
Joint ventures could be very useful, but the belief that they solved the basic
problem for foreign investment in the host country was unrealistic. The best
justification for joint ventures was an economic one: if the contributions-
technological, financial, available infrastructure, local management know-
how, long-range compatibility-were complementary and well-balanced
with the division of profits and good growth policy, they could be ideal.
Of all European countries, France probably pursued the most protective
policy against United States take-overs of its industries, but recently France
recognized that a more positive attitude was necessary to prevent its economic
competitiveness from being impaired. France could not afford to have inter-
national companies nestle around its borders with relatively free access into
France itself.
One point offriction could be removed: both American and European firms
should, in establishment and operations, compete on equal terms. .
I8
RESEARCH BY UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES IN EUROPE
Given the scieptific and technological tradition ofEurope and the availability
of outstanding scientists and engineers, many United States international com-
panies were now carrying out research in. Europe, but, if it was not to be a
"sham'', this required a "c1:itical mass" of personnel and facilities, as most
companies recognized.
Some European economists contended that such research created an "in-
visible brain drain": European scientists were drained away to work for the
interests of American companies, and this activity was of no technological
benefit to the economy of European countries. This contention had its weak-
nesses. In the first place, United States research laboratories imported research
management and therefore challenged European research to be competitive.
With the increased mobility of European industrial scientific perso.nnel, a
certain number of the researchers of the American institutions would later
join European firms, so contributing to a synergistic blending of European and
American research approaches. In the second place, systems could be worked
out so that the European research laboratories could charge royalties if
their inventions were used outside, thus providing tax revenue in the
country of origin. Present trends in taxation of international firms in the
base country and in the foreign country tended in that direction. Finally,
evidence was accumulating that scientists in European laboratories of Amer-
ican companies tended to remain in their countries. It was much more
important for European countries to create an environment, to offer tax
incentives and other stimuli for research to European and United States
companies alike, provided such research was genuine and not "camouflage".
Summing up, the author of the paper repeated that the technological gap
between the United States and Western Europe was a problem and one
which would become more serious. The gap had its origin in management,
organization of research, education, sociological structures and political con-
cepts. To keep the disparity manageable, Western Europe would have to
modify certain of its organizations and systems as well as certain attitudes.
This meant that greater European economic unity was essential to promote
larger firms and the necessary research. An overhaul of European technological
education was also implicit. Europe should continue to attract American .in-
vestments as a method of technological transfer. It also should find ways to
reconcile the world companies with national economic systems, to avoid eco-
nomic retardation. As the causes of the technological gap were deep rooted,
Western Europe could only be successful in its corrective efforts, if a general
Ig
political will were created to deal with the problem. For this, a greater political
and economic unity was a precondition.
Whether the impact of the new revolutionary technology on human values
was considered desirable or not, no turn back was possible. To remain in the
forefront ofproduction and trade-essential to preserve economic and political
power-Europe itself had to solve this problem in its own way.
*
* *
In the speech in which the author introduced and summarized his paper he
particularly indicated some of the lines which might be followed in the dis-
cussions on the subject which he described as a complex and urgent one, in-
volving many emotional overtones.
It was essential to clarify the semantics of the problem and to understand
that the convenient term "technological gap" referred to a disparity between
the· United States and Europe in respect of the development of marketable
technology in certain sectors. It was also necessary to dispel the notion that
the problem was not a serious one. It had perhaps been exaggerated but it
was nonetheless vital. Finally, the fears prevailing in Europe of economic
dependence on the United States while also exaggerated, were real and had
to be reckoned with, in their political implications.
The speaker suggested that the first question which the meeting might con-
sider was whether there was an "acceleration of the disparity", whether the
change was not only quantitative, but had qualitative aspects as well.
He went on to say that it was not generally recognized in non-scientific
circles that innovation could now be the result of the "directed forcing of
technological change" and this involved just those sectors where the United
States was dominant. It could therefore be assumed that the technological
gap would widen.
His second question would be how innovation should take place, assuming
that Europe wanted to produce enough technology of its own to be in the
forefront.
In this connexion, he mentioned an illuminating report issued by the United
States Department of Commerce: "Technological Innovation: its environ-
ment and management". This contained some important observations which
he felt would be of interest to participants:
a. Technology now made an important contribution to national economic
growth: three industries (television, air transport and digital computers)
20
which were virtually non-existent in 1945 currently contributed more than
$ 13 billion to America's G.N.P. and had added 900.ooojobs;
b. In a typical distribution of costs in successful product innovations only
5-rn% of such costs .fell in the category of "Research-Advanced Develop-
ment", but 50-80% had to be spent in the next two phases of "engineering
and designing" and "tooling-manufacturing" engineering.
While the basic invent~on was mostly achieved by a relatively small number
o(brilliant scientists, the second and third phases were carried out by large
groups of able technologists (B+ people).
This led to the question of whether Europe's educational system, while
producing a satisfactory number of A people (top scientists and technologists,
responsible for basic inventions) failed to develop enough of the B+ category,
who were i:esp~msible for 40-80% of the necessary effort. Was this due to a
system of selection and exclusion? Was it true that Europe did not create an
environment (sociologi~al appreciation, financial rewards, etc.) calculated to
foster the creation of such a "middle class" of technologists?
Emphasizing that the small firm and the independent inventor were im-
portant in the development of marketable technology, the rapporteur said
that such small firms needed to be close to academic centres ofgood technology,
they needed eager entrepreneurs who were also technologists and they needed
bankers who were ready to invest risk capital.
Reverting to the question of education, he asked whether the use of "elec-
tronic equipment" in European education could alleviate and solve the problem
of B + manpower.
With regard to the "brain drain'', the author of the paper suggested that
the meeting might consider whether sociological appreciation, the scientific
and laboratory environment, greater freedom and the stimulating atmosphere
were more important factors than the financial rewards offered.
The "spin-off" from American ·defence and space research was another
question which the meeting would do well to consider. Between 60 and 65%
of United States federal expenditure in these fields was channelled through
"industrial laboratories" .where the pool of scientists and engineers-forming
a mass potential for developing "marketable technology"-was formed. Govern-
ment-supported and industry-supported technologists mingled, exchanged ideas,
stimulated each other and the author was coµvinced that "spin-off" was sub-
stantial. .
In connexion with. present Europ~an fears and frustrations, he suggested
that the change from transfer through licensing of national firms to exploitation
by an international company based and owned in the United States was possibly
21
..,,~'11111
\,z::··.~~\~,(~1:,
I ,'I•
the dominant cause. Certainly the international company was a real factor in
the life ofnation-states. Yet it should be noted that while the economic establish-
ment in the United States was strongly in favour of maintaining the technolog-
ical gap in view ofAmerica's world role, it nevertheless recognized that undue
disparity could create serious political tensions, while an economically prosper-
ous Europe was essential to United States marketing and sales. Meanwhile the
question arose ofwhether"trans-national"European mergers rather than nation-
al concentrations could be helpful in solving or mitigating the technological
gap.
On the positive side, there were indications that worry about the techno-
logical gap had been a stimulus for more action in the EEC towards economic
harmonization in order to facilitate "trans-national" European mergers. After
a period of stagnation, there seemed to be a real progress in the drafting and
accepting of a European company law; the "Six" had accepted the "added
value" tax; and other "harmonization" actions were under way. The "size"
of the market would not solve the technological gap, but it was a necessary
consequence of the more essential actions (education, management, environ-
ment) to be taken.
If admitted to the Common Market, Great Britain could make an immense
technological contribution to Europe and it might be asked whether this was
not indeed essential.
*
* *
The author of the paper suggested that the following points might be taken
as a basis for discussion:
I. Nature and extent of the "technological gap".
Is it a general problem or restricted to certain sectors of industry? What
are the trends? Are factors such as size, capital availibility, large domestic
United States market permanent, or will they, in due course, be balanced
by European integration? Is the latter a pre-condition from Europe's
tackling of the problem?
2. The United States Government and its sponsored research.
22
Is the "fall-out" essential? One advantage in such research is that it is
nearly assured of a large customer, the government itself. Co-operative
European scientific agencies (CERN, EURATOM), in varying degree, ful-
fil the research-sponsorship function, but can a European "buyer-ship"
be created?
3. Is there agreement on the basic causes of the "gap"?
Management attitude, mangement-labor relationships, sociological climate,
educational system.
a. Management attitude. It might be worthwhile to dig deeper concerning
this phenomenon.
b. Labor's attitude. Is it "it's all right, Jack", or is there a broad sense of
involvement?
c. Sociological climate. The appreciation of the development-engineer;
openness to top management for "other class" etc.
d. Educational system. This is a very worthwhile discussion point as it goes
to the heart of the matter from the long range point of view. In fact, it
includes all the causes as an expression of the total national attitude.
4. The "brain drain".
Is it really damaging? Causes and correction.
5. The basic changes in transfer oftechnology: the phenomenon of the multina-
tional "world company".
The confrontation of the "world company" with national objectives. Will
parochial nationalism aggravate the problem? Will oligopoly be contained?
The just role ofjoint ventures as an economic business approach: when are
they useful?
6. Will there be a "spin-off" of the research of the Soviet Union into commer-
cial fields? If so, what methods can be expected through which the Soviet
Union will exploit these marketable developments? Will it lead to further
relaxation through a pragmatic approach?
7. If the technological gap were to go out of manageable balance, what
consequences could be predicted: economic, sociological and political?
*
* *
In the course of the discussion, various speakers made the point that the
so-called technological gap represented a more complex situation than was
popularly believed.
At the outset, a British participant, echoed by subsequent speakers partic-
ularly from the United States, stressed that the gap was not a new phenomenon.
One ofthe Americans remarked that essentially it should not even be considered
as a macro-economic problem.
The same British participant went on to say that many new advances had
23
originated in Europe and, in this connexion, a Netherlands participant cited
plastics and man-made fibres as being primarily a European development.
Similarly, it was noted by a Greek speaker, that out of55 Nobel Prize Winners
between 1957 and 1966, 23 were American, 20 were West Europeans, 7 were
East Europeans and 5 were from Australasia. Reference to the technological
gap as a problem only existing between the United States and Europe, there-
fore, represented something of an oversimplification. In this same connexion a
United States participant remarked that far greater technological gaps existed
between various parts of his country than between the United States and
Europe.
Within the same context, a Norwegian speaker directed attention to the
shipbuilding industry as one sector in which the gap was to Europe's advan-
tage. United States Defence Secretary Robert S. McNamara had said that it
not only cost twice as much to build a ship in the United States but it also took
twice as long. Support for this view came from a French participant who said
that European firms were still managing to make inroads on the United
States markets, even if only to a limited extent.
An American speaker stressed that the issue was one which also concerned
all the developed countries in the light of their responsibilities to the third
world, while a Canadian speaker urged that we should not forget that the
real problem was the gap between Euro-America and the rest of the world.
At a later stage an American participant who had lately visited various
Eastern European countries-see page 66-stressed the enormous effect on
East European countries of progress made in Western Europe and of techno-
logical development in the United States and Western Europe. This develop-
ment is creating fears in high level official circles and has even resulted in
practical measures being taken in order to reduce the gap by allowing more
economic freedom also with respect to prices. This has happened in Czecho-
slovakia, Poland, Hungary but especially inJugoslavia where serious measures
are being taken to protect foreign investments.
There was no unanimity with regard to the question of whether the gap
was mainly quantitative or qualitative or both but there was agreement that
a gap between Europe and America did exist, that it was to the advantage of
the United States and that the tendency was for it to widen.
*
* *
This led a British speaker to suggest that much development came about
simply because it could be done and not because it was actually needed. At a
24
('i'
1/
later stage in the meeting, he emphasized that he was not questioning the
utili.ty of science and technology but was merely urging that we should know
what we were trying to do with it and not just carry it out because it was
possible. The most valuable forms of technological development were those
which answered a recognizable need. Technology should be regarded as a
means of improving the lot of mankind in general; in other words, we should
be in control of technological development and not driven by it.
A French participant shared this view and a United States speaker agreed
that technology was not an end in itself. A Canadian participant noted that
there seemed to be a notion that technology held the key to the kingdom.
Firmer evidence was needed, he suggested, before we accepted the view that
technology was somehow the essential component of political power and it
was arguable whether mere deprivation of the latest technological "gimmick"
automatically shut one out.
At the same time an international official defined technology as merely
doing things more efficiently. Once a country opted out of technology, he
said, it opted out of history. The essential problem in connexion with the
technological gap did not concern the possibility of acquiring a fourth tele-
vision set but the possibility of doing things most efficiently so that more time
and opportunity remained for the things in which human beings were most
interested.
An American speaker pointed to the advantages which had accrued from
space exploration in respect of medicine, stellar measurement, etc., and a
fellow-countryman summed up by saying that the primary function of science
and technology was simply to enlarge the scope and scale of the intellectual,
social and economic possibilities confronting mankind.
*
* *
A wide range of factors were singled out by the meeting as lying at the
root of the technological gap. The "brain drain" from Europe to America,
research, the "spin-off"; the non-proliferation treaty, the effect of the differ-
ence ofsize between the two continents, and between the markets, educational
aspects, the policies of firms and big concerns in the United States and Europe
and other elements were mentioned in this respect and will be dealt with in the
course of this summary.
*
* *
25
It was generally felt that the proper way to stop the "brain drain" would be
to make conditions at home more attractive. It was also pointed out that it was
not only financial considerations which caused scientists to emigrate.
Additional incentives to encourage scientists in Europe were put forward
by a United States participant who pointed out that so far European countries
had not gone along with the United States practice of providing outstanding
scientists with an opportunity to acquire an equity investment in corporations
so that they were not only hired technicians but benificiaries ofprofits accruing
from their own ingenuity. His own experience, he said, indicated that European
financial groups were reluctant to give up even a small portion of the initial
financial equity to the scientists concerned.
A French speaker shared the opinion of the author of the introductory paper
that the importance of the "brain drain" should not be overestimated and that
the research problem was far more important.
*
* *
The research problem and the failure of European governments to provide
sufficient funds to this end as well as shortcomings in management were men-
tioned by various participants and more particularly by a French speaker,
although a German participant said that too much blame should not be placed
on management attitudes towards research and development in Europe.
Europe, in the view of a Netherlands participant, would have to spend
more money on research and the development of technology but, as everyone
knew, the battle ofthe budget in European countries was essentially a battle ofpri-
orities and it was almost impossible to find extra money in government budgets
without hurting some of those priorities. Hence, the problem was not only the
mentality ofmanagement or firms, but also the mentality of people as a whole.
It was very doubtful ifthe list of priorities could be changed to lower housing
and transportation on the list in favour of technological development, research,
etc. Nevertheless, this was what would have to be done if we were to bridge
the gap.
This same speaker mentioned as another reason for the gap that European
governments had never been very active in research and development, possibly
because it was jointly decided some 15 or 20 years ago that the main develop-
ment of defence would be centred in the United States.
*
* *
26
An Italian participant forecast an enormous increase of the technological
gap in the years to come and believed European industry should take the lead
to enable Europe to compete.
Another Italian speaker thought that the main cause ofthe technological gap
might be not so much an inability to decide how much to spend but a lack of
knowledge of the right spheres in which to spend.
*
* *
The meeting paid considerable attention to the question of "spin-off" as a
result of government spending on research and development.
Although a United Kingdom speaker pointed out that "spin-off" was a
haphazard product initially depending on programmes of research originated
by governments and was therefore not necessarily a good thing, it was generally
agreed that this process had contributed to the American lead. A German pre-
sent recalled that, in 1963, 12.7 billion dollars were spent in the United States
on research and development and that 58%of this sum had come from Federal
funds.') The equivalent figure for Germany, he said, was 750 million dollars,
of which nearly 95% was provided by the industrial sector itself. He foresaw
that the gap would go on expanding especially in the field of electronics in
which case the "spin-off" would be to the detriment of Europe.
However, a United States speaker doubted whether "spin-off" was of major
importance and one of his compatriots said that hardly any product that the
Department of Defence had supported had hit the commercial market as
such products had to be completely redesigned for commercial purposes. The
important element of the "spin-off" was that it created a large body of people
who knew a great deal, and their most important characteristic was mobility
between universities, industries and governments and mobility between in-
dustrial firms. This view was also expressed by a fellow American who noted
that Federal expenditure on research and development-amounting to r7
billion dollars in 1966-not only enlarged the pool of active scientists and
technologists but also developed skills which could be transferred to various
sectors of the economy and at the same time generated demands.
A third American said that this was a powerful point but that it would be
1) The figures mentioned in this paragraph do not correspond with those given by the
rapporteur on page 12.
27
1111
I~•
I
I
wrong to conclude that Europeans had to repeat the United States experience
in order to get such benefits. It would be regrettable and not in the European
interest if European nations felt that the only path to the advantages of large-
scale spending on difficult technological and scientific problems was the path
of weapons development.
*
* *
This issue tied in with the discussion of the non-proliferation treaty. A
Netherlands speaker stressed that Europe's reluctance to sign such a treaty
was due precisely to fears that it would prevent signatories from benefiting from
the "spin-off" effects of military research. He suggested that this had led to
United States assurances that the "spin-off" from such research was practically
negligible in view of the differences between the military and the civil needs.
However, he had to admit that the discussions of the meeting so far had not
been particularly calculated to eliminate the objections regarding the effect of
the "spin-off" on European industry.
He was answered by one of the previous American speakers who recognized
the interaction of military and civilian elements in this field but he saw no
contradiction between these two factors.
An Italian speaker likewise referred to the belief that the non-proliferation
treaty would increase the technological gap and said that, in his view, this
objection was not valid. Ultimately, in the view of a Netherlands speaker, the
question was whether there could be collaboration between the United States
and Europe so that while non-proliferation was accepted as a necessity, Europe
nonetheless shared in technological development. Meantime, according to a
French participant, consideration might be given to what he termed the
"negative spin-off" effect of United States Government expenditure on space
and defence; if such expenditure were to be concentrated on civil instead of on
military objectives, its effects would be relatively far more detrimental to
Europe than the present situation.
*
* *
Sheer size, in the opinion of many of those present, provided an explanation
for the technological gap. As a French speaker put it, differences in the size of
28
the J1'larket led to differences in the profit margin and thus reduced the possibil-
ity of financing research in Europe. An international official likewise described
the size of the market as a matter of top priority. His view was supported by a
Canadian who underscored the fact that the United States market was over six
times as large as that of any European country and was therefore better able to
support the companies best equipped to exploit technology.
Similarly, a United Kingdom participant stressed that the difference between
the United States and the European countries was ultimately one of scale. The
United States, he said, had scale advantages at two different levels: the govern-
ment as a purchasing agent was able to influence technological development
much more rapidly than any European government and the size of the com-
mercial market encouraged the development of very high grade and very
large-scale industrial undertakings.
*
* *
'With reference to this same question of size, the meeting was concerned
not only with the size ofthe market but also with that ofthe companies engaged
in the market. An American speaker stated that 49 of the 65 world corporations
were American. As another American participant pointed out, the bigger
European companies were quite relaxed about the technological gap. He
went on to say that international concerns had much virtue insofar as they
provided the world economy with the advantages of efficient utilization of
resources-raw materials, labour, plant, capital, etc.-but that the question
of the legitimacy of power and the problem of responsibility had to be borne
in mind. To whom were these large companies responsible? Decisions which
might be of high value to the corporations themselves could cut across national
interests and, while they might tend to erode nationalism, such companies
could also tend to exacerbate nationalism.
This point was· also made by a Belgian speaker who said that the very
restricted number ofbig concerns in Europe was clue to the lack ofstandardiza-
tion of fiscal regqlations in Europe, the immaturity of the capital market, etc.
Their existence was, he agreed, of considerable importance since they had
vast resources of manpower and finance which enabled them to do extensive
work on research and development. On the other hand, he also agreed with
an earlier American speaker that some international companies might incline
to overlook national interests while others might have an unduly national
29
,,,,,:"1...\i,~'·~'4,;
:·11
i I
I'
•
I 1
I
I
I
11
;111
bias. Finally, he wondered to what extent international companies could make
up a network ofscientific relationships to offset the political disparities.
In this connexion a United Kingdom participant remarked that the most
_pernicious form of nationalism at present existing was the economic form so
that world companies should be encouraged although it was essential to find
a system whereby they could develop without provoking a nationalist reaction.
*
* *
Discussion of the dimensions involved led to a number of points being made
in connexion with European unity. The British participant who had opened the
discussion considered that since the most important incentive for management
and industry was the market and its profitability and size, together with the
opportunity for better utilization of capital, this was the most potent argument
for a more united Europe. An Italian speaker also affirmed that the economic
and political union of Europe would be the most decisive step towards solving
the problem ofthe technological gap while an American present added his voice
in support of the view that European integration offered obvious advantages.
Similar attitudes were voiced by an Italian speaker who warned that there
was a great danger involved in delaying the achievement of such unity and by
a Greek participant who added, however, that in talking of integration, it was
essential to be clear as to what sort of integration we wanted and the possible
implications with respect to the technological gap. The necessary progress
should aim at the creation of a number of common policies and this inevitably
implied a supra-national mechanism.
Another Italian speaker said that the union of the different European
countries at the technological level could bridge a large part of the gap and
that while European unity, including the United Kingdom, could not make
Europe comparable to the United States on a l : l ratio, it would nonetheless
make the relationship far more favourable. He felt we might be overreaching
ourselves in talking about the transformation of the Common Market into a
political unit without realizing that the natural evolution of the Customs
integration taking place in the Common Market area would necessarily cover
the technological sphere. Finally, he pointed out that a technological commu-
nity would result in creating a partner with whom the United States would be
inclined to deal in quite a different way from that in which it dealt with a
divided Europe.
In this connexion, a United Kingdom participant said that the concept of a
European technological community had been more of an idea than something
30
worked out in detail. He questioned whether European technological unity
would do all that much to reduce the technological gap.
A note of caution was sounded by a United States speaker concerning the
relationship between political and economic structure. Even where there was
a centralized political structure, he said, there might well be decentralized
economic enterprises. Given the great differences between national industries
in Europe, Pan-European enterprises could only be achieved through a
central European government which would have to take far more intervention-
ist and dirigiste measures ·than would either be liked in America or prove
practicable in the early stages of even a European federation.
His comments were taken up by another American participant who said
that while a common political structure for Europe would not necessarily
procure the industrial concentration needed to close the technological gap,
the removal of impediments through such a common political structure would
open the way in a manner impossible under the present circumstances. United
States experience of a big market and the demands leading to concentration
which result from such a market indicated that concentration would come
about. European unity might not ensure the necessary conditions but such
conditions could not be achieved without such unity.
*
* *
The meeting treated the question of education as being scarcely less impor-
tant than that of European unity. At the outset of the discussions, a United
Kingdom speaker said that there was no evidence for saying that the United
States was necessarily more prolific in scientific and technical advances but,
on the other hand, the output of scientists and technologists varied greatly as
did the use made of them. Europe produced several times more scientists than
technologists, America roughly equal quantities of both. The same speaker
felt that it was necessary to change the "prestige aspect" of universities as
against colleges of advanced technology.
Significant figures were furnished on the educational situation by a United
States participant who said that in the United States, approximately 70% of
the l 5- I 9 age group was still in school as against 3l % in France, l 8% in
.Germany, etc. Similarly, 12% of the 20-24 age group was still in school in the
United States whereas the corresponding percentage in Europe nowhere
exceeded 5%. As a result, there was a much larger pool of the so-called B+,
B and even C people in the United States able to contribute and consume
technology, and the educational system further contributed to the sophistication
31
of a market able to utilize or buy technology. An American participant
remarked that whether or not the gap was widening, governments, educational
systems and the business community should have policies designed to make the
best possible use of the world supply of brains. Nor, he added, was it only
B+ and C brains which were involved but also A brains. It was a great
disservice to the world community at large to divert the few A brains to tasks
which B+ men could do. The problem could not be solved by governments
alone but they could do much by removing barriers and providing stimuli
for the development of programmes to advance the use of science and tech-
nology in public affairs more intensively.
These comments impelled a United Kingdom speaker to draw attention to
Admiral Rickover's book on education which showed that although the
proportion of any age group at any period in their education differed in
Europe and the United States, yet at doctorate level the proportion was roughly
the same.
Replyip.g, the American who had submitted the original figures said that
he agreed the quality of Ph.D. theses in England and America was roughly
equivalent and that other factors were involved besides mere quantity. Never-
theless, in addition to leaders a great many people were needed to do a wide
variety of jobs and it would therefore be a mistake to underestimate the
importance of B+ people.
In the view of a French speaker, comparison of United States and European
universities indicated that the technological gap would increase in the years
ahead. At present there was I graduate in Europe (Common Market) for 4 in
the United States; in 1975, this discrepancy would have doubled. In order
to absorb the knowledge generated in America, it would be essential to expand
universities in Europe.
Revertingtothequestion ofquantity versus quality, anotherFrenchparticipant
mentioned three main differences between European and American education
as far as the technological gap was concerned. First, teaching in the United
States was more closely linked to the concept of efficiency; second, Europe
had not sufficiently developed the concept of continuing education; and third,
there was a tendency in Europe to feel that only a few people were concerned
with technological activities and that the others were hardly interested.
Yet another important element in the American educational system was
mentioned by a United States representative who said that America had a
small number of first-rate engineering schools but that the products of third-
rate and fourth-rate schools were ofvital importance to American technological
advance and, in addition, had upward mobility.
This argument received support from a Canadian participant who added
32
that a good deal of snobbery needed to be eliminated from education. There
seemed, he said, to be a sort of natural law that the less developed the country,
the more it strove towards "precious" academic standards.
Answering an American speaker who had referred to the fruitful inter.action
of town, gown and government in the United States, a Canadian contended
that such interaction had also brought about very harmful side-effects. He
concurred with the view of another American participant who had warned
that the American relationship between government, universities and business
might lead to scieµtists being permanently diverted from the realm of theory
to tasks connected with applied science or applied study, and said that he was
profoundly disturbed at the readiness of people in high places to "bully and
hector" the universities. Great universities should remain "sanctuaries of
concern". This view was supported by yet another American participant who
stressed that the role of the university was to carry out research in the basic
sciences and that it was up to industry to take on the practical application of
such science. A fellow American agreed that universities should be preserved
as centres for the creation of new ideas, for the objective criticism of society,
etc., but contended that this role did not preclude a healthy interaction with
the society in which such universities existed.
An American speaker summed up by saying that no system could satisfac-
torily apply technology to the standard of living where much less than 30%
of an age group attended secondary school or much less than 10% received
education at collegiate level. Ifless than one-quarter of the bottom third of the
socio-economic classification went through high school, then the system was
probably not utilizing available talent to the maximum.
In respect of Europe specifically, a United Kingdom participant said he was
confident that in order to develop European technology there would have to be
a massive development of secondary education and further education. He took
the view that the whole ofa given age group should receive secondary education
and something like 25% should receive higher education in one form or
another.
Finally, a United States participant stressed the importance of business
colleges in producing men for the technological infrastructure. He was sup-
ported in this view by a French speaker who pointed out that in some European
countries, especially in France, there was an undue regard for technical
graduates so that excessive impo1·tance was attached to entrepreneurs of this
category as compared to business men.
*
* *
33
·,.\.'·'""'llO~.,,
In discussing possible ways in which the gap might be bridged, the meeting
showed no disposition to favour active hampering of United States investment
in Europe although a British speaker thought that the situation might require
some discrimination against the United States in cettain forms and certain
fields, adding that this would imply a European investment policy.
Another British participant, however, laid particular stress on the fact that
American investment in Europe encouraged the outflow of technological
development from the United States so that the problem was not to interfere
with that outflow but to find ways of maintaining national control through
company law. The reform of international company law, he said, would do
much more to encourage technological and scientific applications, in which
view he was warmly supported by a French speaker.
A Canadian speaker likewise emphasized that a hampering of investment
flow was no solution to the problem of domination since it was impossible to
have the technology without the investment. On the other hand, clear and
unmistakable ground rules should be laid down for the conduct of foreign-
owned subsidiaries and such subsidiaries should be required to conduct their
affairs in the best interests of the host country. An international official also
contended that United States investments would have to be continued but
controlled so as to be consistent with the aims of the European community.
There should, therefore, not be undue concentration in any given sector or
country and the companies concerned would have to display self-discipline.
A British speaker in turn suggested that it might be necessary to investigate the
behaviour of international companies and felt that this might help to bridge
the gap.
Answering an Italian participant who had suggested that it was perhaps
desirable for NATO to do something about reducing the technological gap
-in which connexion he mentioned the "Fanfani Plan"-a Canadian speaker
pointed out that the problem was not exclusive to NATO or to the Alliance.
He considered that the OECD might be the ideal organization to examine
the problem since such countries as Japan, Sweden and Switzerland which
were not in NATO might then give the benefit of their experience. Neverthe-
less, he continued, the NATO Council might find it worthwhile to define the
area of work which might properly be done within that organization in the
matter of defence technology.
The same speaker went on to say that, in his view, European countries
could co-operate more fully to reduce the gap and he wondered whether what
was really required was not the establishment of public or private \Vest
European firms. In this same connexion, a British speaker noted that in Europe
the trend was towards national mergers rather than European mergers and
34
said that the maximal solution would be active intervention by a European
authority which would imply a positive European policy to promote European
mergers. He doubted if the minimal solution-common company law and
patent laws, harmonization of fiscal laws and standards-would do much to
narrow the gap although he recognized the desirability of bringing about such
harmonizations. The need to standardize European laws was a point also
raised by an international speaker and by an American who not only felt a
pressing need for uniform company law and standardization of fiscal charges
within the Common Market area but also an equally pressing need for a
common capital market.
With reference to some of the suggestions put forward for bridging the
technological gap, a Canadian speaker warned that certain of the cures pro-
posed might be worse than the disease itself. There was a real danger that
efforts to close the gap could involve dirigiste or even totalitarian solutions
which could ultimately be more detrimental to society than the gap it$elf.
Finally, a United States speaker stressed the American willingness to support
all initiatives to close or to decrease the technological gap and he gave the
assurance that any suggestion to this end would be taken into serious consider-
ation.in his country.
*
* *
The American participant who had undertaken to sum up the discussions
began by expressing appreciation of the excellent working paper provided.
In the course of the discussions, he said, participants had developed a state-
ment of the problem, an identification of its causes and an effort to discover
some solutions.
Concerning the problem, he said it seemed to be agreed that the application
of science and technology to the development of new and economically
advantageous products was greater in the United States than in Europe and,
if anything, the gap seemed to be widening. The causes of this problem were
several: first, the size of the United States domestic market had encouraged
the development of industries which would grow to optimum size with large-
scale production; second, the United States educational system trained a
larger percentage of the population at every level than was the case in Europe;
third, while the best scientists in the United States might not be either more
creative or more inventive, there were more of them; fourth, and even more
important, the United States trained a much greater number of technologists
35
-the- B+ men-who converted ideas into marketable products; fifth, the
United States Government, especially through its space and defence program-
mes, and industry in the United States spent a higher percentage ofincome on
research and development than did their counterparts in Europe and this
quantitative superiority in producing research and scientists had inevitably
had a very important impact; sixth, the management of United States multi-
national corporations were for the most part more research-conscious and
marketed new products more aggressively than most European corporations,
despite notable exceptions, while the United States corporations also had
greater financial resources at their disposal; seventh, creative scientists were
given greater freedom and more opportunity in the United States-freedom
in their research, opportunity for equity participation in industry, in addition
to the higher wage scales paid in the United States.
Concerning possible solutions, there were two aspects to the problem:
measures which needed to be taken, and the political and psychological
implications of those measures.
a. It was generally agreed that a truly unified European economic community
including Britain would be the most important single step which could be
taken to eliminate the technological gap.
b. Short of that, it was agreed that steps should be taken to establish uniform
laws affecting corporations among the European countries, to encourage
investments across national boundaries, to improve the capital markets in
Europe and to encourage co-operation in research across national bounda-
ries.
c. It was agreed that European corporations should be encouraged to place
more emphasis on research, on flexibility, on market planning, on manage-
ment techniques, etc.
d. It was agreed that education should be stepped up at all levels in Europe,
with special emphasis on the training of technicians.
e. It was agreed that the United States investment in Europe should also be
encouraged, especially investment which brought research and technology
to Europe.
f. In order to allay fears of domination or control by United States firms, it
was felt that laws should be passed which were neither punitive nor discour-
aging to investment but which cleared the ground rules serving to protect
national interests. Reciprocal investments by European multinational
companies in the United States would also seem to be another step which
might be taken to allay some European fears concerning American invest-
ment in Europe.
36
g. United States multinational companies should examine their own policies
and personnel to make sure that when investing in Europe they were
respecting national pride and national interests.
h. Finally, the United States Government should make sure that its policy
and laws were- understanding of and responsive to the problems posed by
the technological gap.
In conclusion; the speaker said that the technological gap was a complex
problem and a real one. He quoted a high United States official as saying that
it was as much in the interests ofthe United States as in the interests of Europe
to find a way of narrowing the gap but, as other participants had pointed out,
the problems between Europe and the United States were in many ways less
serious than the problems existing between the industrial nations as a whole
and the developing nations. Moreover, discussion of the gap tended to divert
attention from the very basic social and moral questions of the goals oftechno-
logy. It was necessary to decide to what extent technology should be directed
towards human objectives other thanjust raising the gross national product.
37
II. a. DO THE BASIC CONCEPTS OF ATLANTIC CO-OPE-
RATION REMAIN VALID FOR THE EVOLVING WORLD
SITUATION?
b. IF NOT, WHATCONCEPTSCOULDTAKETHEIR PLACE?
The groundwork for discussion of these items of the Agenda was laid by two
papers prepared by a United States participant and by a German specialist,
the papers having been distributed before the meeting.
The author of the first paper began by pointing to the fact that to some
extent an "Atlantic mythology" had developed over the last twenty years which
exaggerated the degree of community actually reached among the members
of the Atlantic Alliance. Two crucial questions had therefore been sidestepped:
whatfor i.e., what are the purposes of the enterprise, and who controls-i.e., who
commands and who benefits.
The dominant concepts of Atlantic co-operation belonged to a phase of the
international situation that no longer applied. The basic assumptions were as
follows:
a. The Allies were faced witha threat from Communism that was overwhelming,
universal and centrally controlled. Being overwhelming, this threat displaced
and submerged the separate or conflicting interests which the Allies had in
areas of secondary importance; being universal, the threat called for a
considerable amount of harmonization of policies not only in Europe but
also in other parts of the world; being centrally controlled-by the Soviet
Union-the threat of Communism in general did not have to be analysed
separately from the threat of Soviet imperialism.
b. Because of the above vision of the world, a bipolar system was taken for
granted. One pole was Moscow. The other was Washington. It was hoped
that the nations of Western Europe would gradually unite so as to become
together a partner of the United States but there was no expectation of
major conflicts of interests between the partners, or of challenge to the
basic concepts described here.
Even during what might be called "the bipolar duel" phase, the· assump-
tions of Atlantic orthodoxy were never entirely vindicated. Separate interests
often intruded: France's misgivings about German rearmament, the reluc-
38
tance of France and other colonial powers to subordinate overseas interests to
the imperatives of the cold war, the Suez crisis, the rivalry in Europe between
the Six and the Seven-i.e., Britain's reluctance to join the Continental Com-
munities-proved that the simplified arrangement of priorities provided by
Atlantic orthodoxy did not always prevail.
Moreover, the structure of the Alliance was never as tightly integrated as
the mystique of Atlantic co-operation suggested. There were four different
layers of purposes and control relationships. There was a layer of separateness,
in which the Allies pursued unco-ordinated or minimally co-ordinated policies
over a broad range of economic, diplomatic and even strategic subjects. There
was the layer of American hegemony, strictly limited to a portion of the realm
of defence (nuclear weapons, integrated commands of the conventional forces
in Europe, strategicdoctrine). There was the subsystem ofthe West European Six,
concerned with economic relations and thus inevitably involved in an effort
to reshape those relations not only among themselves but also with the United
States. Finally there was the emergent or potential stratum of the possible
political community of Western Europe, the object of a fierce tug of war
between, primarily, France and the United States. The scope of integration
in the Alliance was limited to the second and third layers, and was always
narrow.
As long as the threat from the East was felt to be compelling, and the nations
ofEurope were still recovering, the second layer was the controlling one. Ameri-
can leadership was accepted-either voluntarily or, in the case of decoloniza-
tion troubles, under duress; there was no challenge of the prevailing strategic
doctrine-that of massive retaliation-nor of America's predominance in the
Alliance.
The rapporteur went on to say that the evolution of the international situa-
tion since the early 195o's had deeply affected both the ties among the Fifteen
and the relations among the Six. Among the Fifteen, the Alliance had been the
victim of the dominant trend of the last ten years: the muting of the bipolar
conflict due to the nuclear stalemate and to .the new world-wide legitimacy of
the nation-state. This had resulted in (a) greater moderation of the Soviet-
American conflict, (b) a "polycentric" rise of smaller nations acting on the
world scene, (c) the challenge of the chief rivals by their respective allies,
France and China, determined to restore a multipolar system. For three
reasons, the stratum of separateness had become much more disruptive, and
in the second stratum, where American hegemony had been challenged, both
the purposes and the control had become objects of controversy and crises.
First, as the problem of West European security became less central, pro-
blems external to the geographical area ofNATO became more important. As
39
a result, the ultimate political questions came out in the open again. With Ameri-
ca's increasing involvement in other parts of the world, there was a host of
reasons why the layer ofseparateness assumed increasing weight. Consequently,
the problem ofcontrol in the second stratum could not fail to arise since Ameri-
can control there provided the United States with the means of continuing to
equate the Alliance and the West even outside the geographically and function-
ally limited realm covered by the stratum of American hegemony.
Second, the organization ofsecurity became a focus ofdiscord. The declining
credibility of massive retaliation as the basis of deterrence enlarged the sphere
ofdisagreement over purposes by putting in doubt the relevance ofthe strategic
doctrine. American control was accepted as long as there was agreement on
the doctrine; but once the doctrine was in jeopardy, there could not fail to be
"polycentric" attempts at gaining some control, so as to make sure that no one
member could sacrifice the security of the whole Alliance by being either too
rash or too cautious.
Third, behind the wall of deterrence, the six nations of Western Europe
gave a very strong impetus to their own organization. The very success of the
third stratum, the Common Market, raised questions of purpose and control
in European-United States relations that had been submerged. The problem
of the Common Market's external tariff, the agricultural negotiations among
the Six, the problem ofpolicies toward the non-Communist world, all involved
a possible clash between the United States and the very powerful economic
grouping of European states.
The very same basic trends of the international system which created the
trouble ruled out the solution. One, the world-wide harmonization of purposes
among the Fifteen was made difficult by the muting of bipolarity. The new
conditions of the cold war decentralized the Soviet-American contest all over
the world, moved it away from large-scale military confrontations and en-
couraged some prudent rapprochement between the chief contenders. Two,
the reorganization of control in the Alliance was made difficult by the boost
which the muting of bipolarity gave to the nation-state, and by the emergence of
new nuclear powers. Not only were the Six, for all their success in creating a
Community, nowhere near setting up institutions capable of "speaking with
one voice"; not only was a division ofresponsibility between the United States
and Europe hardly conceivable as long as Britain remained outside Europe,
but on the crucial issue of control in the second stratum it was not possible to
envisage a simple "collective" solution. In military affairs, a formula of true
"sharing" could hardly be invented.
On the issue of purposes, President Kennedy indicated clearly that insofar
as the United States was concerned, the Atlantic dimension was only one among
40
t;:.
I''
,.
many. Not only was the sphere of separateness thus made weightier, but in the
second stratum, the Administration drastically revised America's strategic
doctrine so as to draw the consequences of "peril parity" between the super-
powers. Inevitably, the old inter-allied agreement on strategic purposes was
the casualty ofthe new effort. Any strategy ofgraduated deterrence was bound
to worry Europeans whose first concern was the deterrence of major war rather
than the choice.of a sound strategy in case of a failure of deterrence.
On the issue of control, there was a determined effort to reassert American
command within the Alliance. Its most spectacular arena was in the second
stratum. The new strategic doctrine offlexible response was, in fact, imposed,
since the United States alone had the means to apply it. The Nassau agree-
ments, which tied the British nuclear force-present and future-to NATO
and set in motion the machinery toward a MLF under American control,
went in the same direction.
The American desire for control existed in other areas as well: while the
call for an Atlantic partnership and the Trade Expansion Act indicated
awareness of the need for co-operation in economic affairs, the United States
used its presence in Europe as a way ofaffecting the third and fourth strata. As
a result, inevitably, the structure of the Alliance became more complex, and
more of a stake: the zone of separateness was preserved. While the ideal of a
future partnership was launched, it was made clear that it would have to wait
until a desirable European partner had emerged, that for the time being the
partner-in-the-making would have a limited role in defence, and while his
future role in defence was left obscure, a battle for control of the policies of
the European partner was already being waged.
Another circumstance that increased the disarray was the emergence of
General de Gaulle: between the new Administration in the United States and
the French leader, the whole complex of Atlantic relationships became a stake
in a fight of nationalisms. America's, being that of a leading power, inevitably
cloaked itself iri the language of common interests and "enlightened" vision,
while France's, being that of a challenger, appeared more parochial and
jingoistic. Insofar as purposes were concerned, de Gaulle tried to limit the
range of comrnon action by insisting on the right of France to follow her o\vn
policies in every conceivable respect; he exploited America's own insistence
on a separate course in various areas, as a reason for acting in the same way.
Moreover, he openly opposed America's new strategy and upheld the old
doctrine of nuclear retaliation.
De Gaulle shook American control in the second stratum by three series of
moves: by pushing France's nuclear programme, by keeping it under purely
French control (i.e., by rejecting the Nassau proposals and the MLF) and,
41
. ··111
I
111:
i
I
finally, in the spring of 1966, by pulling France out of NATO's conventional
structure. He also fought the battle for control in the third and fourth configu-
rations.
The rapporteur went on to say that there were today, among the members
of the Atlantic Alliance, still a number ofrecognized common interests, trans-
lated into parallel objectives:
a. A joint interest in West European security against the Soviet Union, to be
preserved by a strategy of deterrence in which the nuclear arsenal of the
United States was recognized by all to play a determining role.
b. A joint interest in what could be called the tying of West Germany to her
Western allies, the management of West Germany in such a way that she
would not become an arena of instability.
c. A joint interest in eliminating what de Gaulle had called "the German
anomalies, the concern they cause and the suffering they entail", i.e., all
the allies realized that the main threat both to security and to West Germany's
Western ties could come from the partition of Germany and from the status
of West Berlin.
d. A joint interest in a detente with the Soviet Union and its East European
satellites, as long as it entailed no loss of security and no setback for the
two interests concerning Germany.
e. A joint interest in prosperity and in aid to underdeveloped countries.
While there might be relative harmony at the level of generally defined
interests and general objectives, there was discord at two other levels. First,
there was a clash between bipolar and multipolar visions, On the whole, the
United States had remained bipolar. The bipolar vision did not favour the
emergence of a European entity whose foreign and military policy would
differ greatly from that of the United States. The multipolar vision looked for-
ward to the emergence of independent actors other than the two superpowers.
Then there was a contrast between an Atlantic vision and a European one.
The Atlantic vision concentrated on the internal relations ofthe Atlantic world,
on the partnership between the two halves of the Alliance. The European
vision focused on one aspect of the external relations of the Atlantic Alliance:
the relations between the two halves of Europe.
The problem today was first, to determine whether the Allies could agree
on a policy in the "new" area of cold war-China; second, to determine the
terms of practical settlement of the original cold war; third, to cope with the
pressures which successful containment of Soviet Communism and the de-
centralization of the Communist threat had created in the West itself.
42
The notion of Atlantic partnership, offered by President Kennedy, was not
adequate to the present situation.
In the first place, it envisaged the emergence of a special kind of j1artner-
an integrated Western Europe, not a "Europe of national states". But the
integrated Western Europe required was not likely to develop nor would it
necessarily be congruent with the notion of "equal partnership". In either
event, as long as de Gaulle was there, the French would not favour suprana-
tional integration. His successors might be readier for it than he, but with a
vision not so different from his, hence quite different from that of the Atlantic
Partnership as conceived in the United States.
The second, and major weakness of the American conception, lay in the
notion ofpartnership itself. On the subject of control, the will-to-equality ofthe
United States was open to question. This could be shown by analyzing Ameri-
can attitudes on two important issl)es. One, when would t!Ie United States be
willing to establish partnership? Two, what was it that the United States
wanted to share? To say that true sharing had to be postponed until Europe
had become a power comparable to that of the United States meant post-
poning sharing sine die. The key question of control was: who should decide
when the time had come for equal association? On the second issue ofcontro1-
what was to be shared?-the United States had been more explicit about the
sharing of burdens than about the sharing of privileges or decisions.
On the subject of purpose, the suggested reorganization of the Alliance had
too little to say about the purposes of intra-Atlantic arrangements and little
to do with the other two great problems: the "decentralization" of the
cold war and the gradual settlement of the original one. The Allies had been
arguing ad nauseam about the control of nuclear weapons, while avoiding the
one subject that was both fundamental and (in contrast with nuclear control)
manageable jointly: the definition of the purposes for which such weapons,
or the threat to resort to them, might be used.
As for the other two problems, what was suggested was the "Atlantic dimen-
sion" as the keystone for both pillars of the Alliance. Yet this was not ipso facto
capable of playing the role of common denominator in the rest of the world
and, relevant as it undoubtedly was to relations with the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, it provided no guidelines for the partners. It was a conception
based on the notion that Europe's partition was sufficiently durable, and the
costs of ending it sufficiently high to justify giving priority to Atlantic solidar-
ity. The "Atlantic dimension" could be used either to justify a call to the
West Europeans to concentrate their energies on their own integration, or to
defend the right of the guardian of Atlantic interests to deal directly with the
Soviet Union on behalf of the common cause.
43
:11
The real problem was to define common policies and, should there be. no
agreement, to ask whether an agreement to disagree was necessarily worse
than a hypocritical or forced agreement. The kind of diversity that let "part-
ners" try different approaches was more in the interest ofthe Alliance than any
forced or cramped unity.
The present situation within the Alliance engendered no coherent common
actions, despite the widespread popularity of the "opening to the East". Any
scheme for the reunification of Europe led by the United States suffered from
a fundamental contradiction. Either it would not reach its goal, and would
thus exacerbate the tensions already present in the Alliance, or else it would
move toward its goal, but the price to be paid by the United States would
have to be much higher. Ifthe United States in its approach to the East should
try to keep West Germany as its privileged ally, the most likely results would be
the delaying of European and German reunification and trouble in Western
Europe. If the United States chose to approach the USSR and East Europe
without the traditional consideration for Germany's security fears and anti-
Soviet susceptibilities, the most likely results would be a consolidation of
Germany'spartition (whichremains the Soviet Union's definition of a European
detente), and serious troubles between the United States on the one hand,
France and West Germany on the other. From whatever angle one looked at
it, the conclusion was the same: while the United States had an important role
to play along the long road to European reunification, a scheme that envisaged
continuing American preponderance in Western Europe was condemned to
sterility. The very settlement of the original cold war sought by such a policy
requires a reorganization of intra-Atlantic relations.
The policy that seems required today is one of American co-operation with a
uniting Europe or limitedengagement in European unification. The rapporteur said that
what he had in mind was the creation of an international system stabilized, at
the global level, by mutual deterrence between today's or tomorrow's super-
powers; under the nuclear umbrella, a certain amount of decentralization
should allow for the management of most crises at a predominantly regional
level; in this world, the number of major participants in world politics would
be higher than today. Relative moderation as well as a return to flexibility
would be the chief attractions for the United States. The implications, insofar
as the Atlantic Alliance is concerned, would be of little help in relieving the
United States of its "burdens" outside Europe; the dream of a partnership
of world-wide scope would have to be given up as neither feasible nor even
truly desirable; the scope of those purposes which the Allies agreed to keep
common would be restricted to the "old" cold war in Europe: for the rest,
there would be separateness, ranging from convergence (international trade,
44
it was to be hoped) to diverge·nce (it was to be feared, in Asia). But in Europe,
there was a need to revive the Alliance's sense of purpose by making it aim at
a gradual reunification of Europe, that would not be either a barely disguised
Soviet or American victory or'a badly disguised duopoly which would contain
the seeds of iii.stability. The United States must therefore encourage actively
the creation of a European entity that would give to the continent its only
chance of emancipation from "the two hegemonies", to the United States its
best chance of ultimately reducing its burdens without increasing its risks,
and to all parties their best chance of reaching an acceptable solution of the
German problem. What was required was American involvement toward self-
.denial: an unorthodox kind of policy, but, in .the rapporteur's opinion, the
most likely to produce results both practical and desirable.
This suggested the following answers to the three present problems of the
Alliance: resignation to diversity; a gradual working out of a settlement in-
volving reunification away from the "hegemonies" toward the creation of a
European "pole" of power; a gradual reorganization of the Alliance toward
greater "sharing" ofprivileges and responsibilities. Thus, the sphere ofseparate-
ness would no longer include a variety of political, economic and military
policies toward Eastern Europe and the Soviets. But in exchange for trans-
ferring those policies into the second stratum, the Allies would agree to replace
American hegemony with genuine partnership. The partners would be the
United States and a developing West European entity, the enlarged version
of our present third stratum, the long delayed emergence of the fourth. For
the long run, this conception suggested the following answers to the two basic
questions of politics: on purposes, the common goal of the Atlantic Allies
would be the emerge11ce of a "European Europe" secure and coherent on both
sides of today's iron curtain, from the Atlantic Ocean to the eastern border of
Poland; on control, the question of command should ultimately be solved by
an association of major powers in a "multi-hierarchical" world.
*
* *
Assuming the goal to be the reunification of Europe in agreement with the
Soviet Union, two consequences followed. First, the kind of partnership to be
established between the United States and the Western Europeans would
have to be one that incited the Soviets to such an agreement, not one that
incited them merely to try to get the status ·quo sanctified. Second, the long-
term perspective was that of a detente between the superpowers. By making
possible a reduction of America's burden in Europe, by opening up some
avenues of at least tacit collaboration between the superpowers in other parts
45
,II
I
I,
I
'
i,j
If
I
I
of the world, i.e., by driving the international system closer to moderation,
such a detente might reduce the need for universal "burden sharing" on
America's part.
Moreover, the problem ofjoint control would become much less acute, if,
along with a solution to the European problem involving not merely some
reunification of the continent but the development of Europe as an entity,
there would also be a relative loosening of the ties between the partners outside
Europe. The ideal would be a joint enterprise aimed at establishing an entity
with its own domain-its own set ofrights and responsibilities-without having
to beg for, demand or insinuate itselfinto the domain of the United States.
The best way of easing the present disarray was to emphasize the need for
an evolving solution. If the writer's vision were adopted the Soviet Union
would forego its grip on Eastern Europe, but would "gain", in exchange for
an undeniable loss of power, both a decrease of America's role in Europe and
a· set of institutionalized guarantees against any dangers from a reunited
Germany. The West Germans would accept restrictions on their borders and
military capabilities as well as a loosening of their ties to the United States,
but regain the unity of Germany and an important role in uniting Europe.
The French would gradually switch from their heady emphasis on indepen-
dence to the construction of a confederal Europe, consonant with the Gaullist
vision. The British would join such a European entity, giving up the vestiges
of Commonwealth ties and fading or costly special relationships with the
United .States for the reality of European development. The United States
would give up its privileged position in Europe, but gain in exchange both
from the return of the Soviet Union to moderation and from the establishment
of a European entity.
Politically, the rapporteur believed that this corresponded to America's
interest and capabilities, since it aimed at establishing a harmonious Europe.
When the Soviet menace was paramount, America's interest in a harmonious
Europe was inevitably focussed on \'\lestern Europe-within the Atlantic
Alliance and the emergent Community of the Six; today, a harmonious
Europe meant a gradually reuniting Europe. America's interest still required
a continuing association between Europe and the United States, but presence
and association, "partnership" and co-operation, integrated alliance and
guarantee were not synonymous. America's role in Europe would be "broader"
since it would aim at European reunification and organization; but it would
also be more modest. In Europe, American and West European interests were
safely and overwhelmingly mutual. Whereas each of several West European
countries could be tempted by a separate deal with Russia if the present status
quo persisted, a uniting Europe's only interest in a deal with the Soviets would
46
be for the purpose of reunifying and stabilizing Europe. Moreover, it was
rapidly becoming in America's interest not to man the front lines everywhere,
but to build up centres of power in vari<;ms parts of the world.
The best prospects lay in strengthening Germany's European links, in
incorporating her in a complex continental framework in which there would
be both security and ultimate unity in exchange for certain restrictions, and in
which those restrictions would at least serve their purpose. Any policy, followed
by European powers or the United States, that would lead toward the military
unleashing ofGermany would be dangerous. The only way out was the gradual
elaboration of a European defence system, in association with the United
States. In such a system, there would be a chance of preventing \'\lest German
disenchantment with her allies, without giving her so important a voice as to
preclude reunification.
Europe was the only forum in which it would be possible to have both
German unity and ties between Germany and her neighbours that would
make such unity acceptable to them; from which it would be possible for each
superpower to withdraw without a sense of defeat or imprudence; for which
states such as France, England, Germany would accept certain sacrifices of
sovereignty, around which these three states, whose divergent outlooks had so
far plagued both the Alliance and the European movement, could reconcile
their interests. But Washington would have to accept the notion ofa "European
Europe", with a political, military and economic role of its own in association,
but not in exclusive partnership with the United States. Within the Alliance
the role of the United States would be to promote the gradual emancipation
ofits dependents, as well as to collaborate with its defiers, while the institutional
form and face of the European enterprise would matter less than the capacity
to arrive at common policies and to multiply links between the states, whatever
the formal amount ofsovereignty still at their disposal.
Concerning the policies required the rapporteur said that two precepts
should be observed. First, it was dangerous to act in the present as if the
desired future had already arrived. This meant in particular that even though
the outcome ought to be a replacement of the present rival alliances and a
withdrawal ofthe superpowers' forces from Europe, any premature withdrawal
in the West could make the goal unreachable by weakening \'\lestern Europe
and consolidating the Soviets' position. Second, decisions made in the short term
should take into account and contribute to the designs ofthe long term.
a. In the military realm, we should have to devise a security system to facilitated
the transition from the present stage of an "integrated" alliance dominated
by the United States to the final stage of a European entity guaranteed by
the United States (as well as by the USSR). Those imperatives could only be
47
reconciled through a transformation of NATO. Two sets of measures were
needed, with the common aim of turning an "integrated" alliance under
United States leadership, into an alliance between the United States and
a West European organization-an alliance necessary as long as the
division of Europe lasted, but whose very structure would facilitate the end
ofthe division and the advent ofa general European organization.
The first set of measures concerned the present Alliance. The necessary
co-operation between the United States and the Europeans, in pursuit of
their common goals, required the careful preservation of the second stratum
of the Alliance. If the notion of integration were gradually replaced by
that of co-operation, the French could return without appearing to renege
on their condemnation. What was required was a flexible interpretation of
Art. 5. Furthermore, a gradual dissolution ofthe integrated commands would
be a disaster only if the result were a return to full national autonomy.
An agreement was needed on reactions to crises, and on command and
operations in wartime. If such an agreement existed, and if a European
organization developed, there would be no disadvantage in placing national
forces situated on national soil under national command in peacetime.
The second set ofmeasures concerned the establishment ofa West European
defence system, associated with the United States. The rather loose structure
of the WEU could provide the nexus. Indeed, the military realm is the one
in which so-called "sharing" could begin at once-precisely because it was
the area of American hegemony. As the European organization became
more coherent, as its members became more self-confident, as they dis-
covered-through the exercise of responsibility-the need for conventional
forces to make the nuclear deterrent credible in major emergencies and un-
necessary in small ones, as those members reorganized their defence systems
accordingly, a thinning out of the United States troops could proceed.
The author of the paper said that what he was suggesting was simply the
gradual transformation of an alliance whose central purpose was the defence of
West Europe against the Soviet Union, and whose additional purpose became
the controlling of West German rearmament, into an alliance whose central
purpose would be the establishment of a West European entity both secure
and capable of contributing to the reunification of Europe. In such a perspec-
tive, a certain relaxing of peacetime integration could be allowed and, on the
other hand, the encadrement of Germany would change form. The participation
in a European defence organization of a West Germany without national
nuclear weapons, would suffice to establish links that could justify a relaxing
of German subordination. Also, a defence organization of the type described
48
would avoid raising at a premature stage the issue of a "European nuclear
force", while making possible the assignment of the British and French forces
to a European command in wartime. An agreement with the United States on
ends and means would actually reduce the pressure for a European force
although the door would remain open to a future force, once European political
unity had progressed enough.
b. Turning to the common external policy ofthe Alliance, the rapporteur said
it was true that neither the United States separately nor West Europeans
alone could reach the goal. Washington acting alone could bring about a
de facto recognition of the continent's division. The West Europeans alone
don't carry any weight in Moscow. But for the long run objective to be
reached, there had to be a transformation of the ties between the United
States and Western Europe, without which the ties between the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe would persist and the German problem would remain
a formidable source ofinstability. Whatwas needed in the West was a complex
but coherent policy. Since the ultimate objective was the reunification of
Europe, not of Germany alone, and since the various East European allies
of the Soviet Union were neither organized in a grouping of their own, nor
capable of moving collectively toward the West, even if their leaders all
wanted to, any monolithic Western approach would backfire. Co-ordination
was useful, anything tighter would be ineffective. Co-ordination ought to
mean a certain division oflabour between the United States, West Germany
and other West European nations. Whether a Western European entity
emerged in the realms of defence and diplomacy or not, this would un-
doubtedly not eliminate national freedom of action right away: hence the
continuing possibility of separate emphases, say between West Germany,
London and Paris. Yet such an entity would have a most important role:
first, in keeping the separate approaches co-ordinated and convergent;
second, in developing in the Western half of Europe precisely the kind of
model of relations that would attract the East European states, as well as
convince them and the Soviets of the value of the whole entreprise. A
West European entity comparable to a fully-fledged federation would
probably be absorbed by problems of internal organization and it would
be much more difficult to "open it to the East". Something different and
more flexible was needed.
c. Concerning the organization of a West European entity, institutional
engineering was less important than, and determined by prior agreement
on, goals and directions. The entity must comprise France, West Germany
and England but this would become a possibility only if the three countries
49
came to share the same general vision. Should this happen, it would be
futile to expect total harmony, any more than within the Economic Com-
munities. A confederation would have to look in the beginning very much
like the Fouchet Plan of 1962. Experience showed that while even such a
scheme was too muchwithout a priorconsensus, anything more supranational
was too much even when there was a prior consensus.
The author ofthe paper said there was one reason for believing that the goals
and directions outlined would stand a fair chance of providing a kind OJ
common denominator for the Allies. Each one of them was rapidly reaching
the end of the road he had pursued for himself. The best future for each lay in
a common road. Secondly, the problem of Europe's unity was obviously a very
long-term one. Obviously it would take a while until the required consensus in
Western Europe was reached, and the entity to be built on it was launched.
Much internal liberalizing would have to precede the reunification of the
continent. There would have to be considerable ideological erosion in the
Soviet Union, and strong domestic and extra-European incentives for the
Soviets to bear the pain of an "agonizing reappraisal". But such erosion was
in progress, the incentives existed, and the scheme suggested could give the
right push-especially if the United States and its allies put their statecraft at
the service ofsuch a scheme. Thirdly, even ifthe goal should be a mirage after
all, even if the gradual detente, while leading to closer contacts between the
two halves of Europe, failed to bring about the withdrawal of Soviet troops
from Eastern Europe, the return ofthe nations ofEastern Europe to the "Euro-
pean Europe" built in the West, and the reunion of the two Germanies, the
scheme would still be worth trying. Not only would it expose and spotlight
Soviet hegemony, it would also give to the Western half of Europe and to its
relations with the United States the kind of shape that would help Americans
and Western Europeans bear the strains of partial frustration-something that
the present shape of the Alliance did not. Even ifthe European Europe should
remain truncated, the scheme would meet the conditions for a return to a
moderate international system.
*
* *
The author of the foregoing paper suggested that the following points might
be taken as a basis for discussion:
I. Basic changes and trends in the international system, and their impact on
Atlantic co-operation today.
50
2. Is there a contradiction between the search for an American-Soviet detente
and the Atlantic Alliance?
3. Is a world-wide partnership between the United States and its allies
possible and desirable?
4. How can the Alliance be reorganized?
a. The problem ofsecurity: troops, nuclear weapons, and NATO reform.
b. West European unification: is it a prerequisite? What institutions?
c. Necessary changes in national policies.
*
* *
The author of the second paper began by saying that the word "disarray"
was barely adequate to describe the present situation of the Atlantic Alliance.
Decay and disintegration would more accurately sum up the present state of
affairs.
The NATO partners had long been aware of the .need for reappraisal and
revision, but no real effort had ever been launched to unite the Allies for the
purpose. Such major changes as had been effected were the result ofinitiatives
taken independently by individual member states-notably, although not
exclusively, by Gaullist France. Without exception, they served to weaken
rather than strengthen the fabric ofcohesion.
General de Gaulle has carried the principle of independent action further
than anyone else, to the point ofactual disengagement from NATO's organiza-
tion. But American insistence on strategic autonomy was not, in the last analy-
sis, very much different; similarly, Great Britain had repeatedly served notice
of its claim to independent decision.
Everything indicated that the trend towards autonomous decision and
independent initiative would continue and develop during the years ahead.
And the problem would not be appreciably different if a United Europe came
into being: the number of players would change but not the basic rules of the
national interest game.
The spirit of 1949 could not be recaptured for the set of facts to which it
related had vanished. The future NATO would have to relate to a different
set of facts, which the Alliance itself did much to bring about during the past
18 years. It would seem to be a rather safe bet that the new alliance would
have a much looser organization and, at the same time, a far broader purpose
than the old one. Differentiation would continue, more flexible structures
would evolve. Bilateralism would complement multilateralism.
At the root of NATO's malaise lay its very triumph. During the period of
the cold war it prevailed; for 17 years it had achieved its basic objective of
51
preserving the peace and security of the North Atlantic area. It contained
Russian expansionism by creating a military equilibrium.
The nature of the threat had basically changed. It was now agreed in the
West that a general war was unlikely and that there was little real possibility of
a massive attack in Europe. There was still the danger ofan armed clash arising
from miscalculation or accident, or of swift, limited thrusts across the Central
European demarcation line, but neither was probable. While Russian military
capabilities continued to be formidable, Russian intentions had undergone a
qualitative change. Given the maintenance of the nuclear stalemate, the
mounting pressure of China on the Soviet Union, and continuing differentia-
tion within the Warsaw Pact, NATO would seem justified in assuming that
Soviet aggressiveness would henceforth be the exception rather than the rule.
Armed invasion of Western Europe need no longer be the dominating
concern of the Allies and this had a fourfold significance.
-First, the inevitable political consequence was a weakening of allied
cohesion. In the absence of a cementing military challenge NATO members
must be expected to give more rein to their individual interests and concepts.
-Second, as to the military consequences, if Soviet aggression against Western
Europe can now be rated unlikely, NATO's defence posture must in future reflect
this state of affairs. It would be quite wrong to rid transatlantic relations of their
military content altogether, butit could safely be diminished. This was unavoida-
ble, and if the Alliance would not do it on the basis of collective agreements, the
partners would do it individually. A collectivesolution, of course, would be vastly
preferable simply because it would be far more rational. And rationality of
reduction and/or redeployment was a prerequisite if NATO was to function
as an insurance against renewed tension.
-Third, the prospect of a continuing detente between East and West cast
NATO in a transitory role. Ifthe evolution from confrontation to co-operation
maintained its current momentum, the military alliance between Western
Europe and North America would take on a new meaning: guaranteeing a
temporary order against forcible change but not frustrating the movement of
history towards new horizons.
-Fourth, if indeed the security aspect of European-American relations
were to lose its significance, other ties-cultural and economic exchange,
parallel social and governmental development-should be intensified in order
to keep both Europe and America from sliding into sterile "continentalism".
The rapporteur went on to say that, for a variety of reasons, European-
American co-operation must remain a basic feature of the future. This did not
imply that its present modalities would or could remain unchanged but it was
hard to conceive of a Western world the two halves of which were divided
52
against themselves. Economically, Europe and America were more important
to each other now than they were before World War II; in the world ofscience,
there was now a single Atlantic Community-with its imbalances, certainly
but not without mutual benefit; societies had developed along parallel lines
toward a common industrial and urban pattern; their domestic policies were
oriented toward similar welfare-states; their monetary institutions were
inextricably bound up with each other.
Basic security interests, moreover, continued to operate. The cold war had
abated; but East-West crises could recur, and if the instrument which helped
to master past crises were dissolved this might conceivably lure the Kremlin
leaders back on to the irrational paths of adventure. Europe still needed the
protection of America's nuclear umbrella, while the United States would be
placed in a position of troublesome inferiority if the great industrial and
scientific potential of Western Europe ever fell into the hands of a Communist
"tsar".
There was another important consideration. Without the United States,
the Central European status quo could not be maintained; but neither could it
be changed and, after such change, be guaranteed unless this process had the
backing of American power. Most Europeans-even including Poles, Czechs
and other Easterners-would fear any arrangement that left the maintenance
of a European balance of power exclusively to Europe's medium powers; in
their view the United States must provide a counterweight to both the Germans
and the Russians.
All this added up to the simple conclusion that it was not the principles of
Atlantic co-operation but the modalities of their application that needed
overhauling.
Under present conditions the inherent difficulties of NATO reform were
compounded by the fact that answers had to be found to three problems that
had arisen at roughly the same time: the .change in relations with Eastern
Europe indicated major adjustments of the Alliance; France's withdrawal
from the treaty organization imposed the necessity of hasty rescue operations;
the financial problem subjectep. re-examination of NATO's structure and
strategy to basically extraneous factors: many governments were more inter-
ested in a cheap solution than in what a particular solution would or would
not do.
The military effects of General de Gaulle's move had turned out to be less
serious than the political and financial consequences. Removal ofboth military
and political headquarters from France, though expensive and disruptive,
posed no insurmountable. obstacles; indeed, it had provided an incentive to
streamline headquarters and tighten up the command structure of NATO.
53
But it was now an established fact that there were two kinds ofNATO member-
ship, one involving various degrees ofintegration, the other not even committed
to the joint definition of the casus foederis. The Alliance was effectively split in
two. A precedent of unilateralism had been set that might find followers
elsewhere.
The first test would come in the Anglo-German-American talks about
offset payments and force goal re-examination. Accommodation was already
being prepared in Britain in case it proved necessary, for financial reasons, to
reduce the Rhine Army in Germany.
Similar ideas were being discussed in the United States with rising intensity.
While the immediate outcome of the Great Debate might be in doubt, a
drastic cut of the Seventh Army would be inevitable in the late sixties; recent
progress in military technology militated strongly in favour of a Big Lift
Strategy.
Bonn seemed to be resigned to the inevitable. If the h·end towards thinning-
out continued, no one ought to be surprised if the Germans themselves con-
formed to it by restructuring the Bundeswehr-possibly cutting down the
Army from twelve to eight divisions, turning it into a largely professional body
and backing it up with a sizeable militia-type force for static defence. In the
end all the main allies were likely to embrace a strategy of means-of cheap
means, on present reading.
Resignation to the inevitable seemed to dictate the third change in the
offing: NATO turning to peace by committing its members to seek better
political, economic, social, scientific and cultural relations with Soviet Russia
and East Europe. But if the Alliance were to add peace-making to its war-
deterring role, necessary though this might be, it was bound to place new bur-
dens on an already creaking structure. While it was clear that all Allies, West
Germany included, were now engaged in building bridges toward the East,
it was also obvious that this might engender new rivalries rather than help
overcome the old ones. Experience would suggest that NATO should restrict
itself to military matters without branching out into strictly political activities.
As we emerged into a less threatening and more complex world, said the
rapporteur, the relatively monolithic alliance structure of the cold war was
bound to break up. Some kind of NATO would survive; but it would be very
different from the NATO we used to know: neither so tidy nor, perhaps,quite
so efficient, but this was a time for makeshift solutions, a time oftransition.The
following rough rules-of-thumb might be taken as guidelines to the future:
a. NATO must survive as a centre for European defence relations with the
United States in order to deter any recurrence of the Communist threat.
S4
For this reason, a minimum nucleus of organization should be maintained
but this would inevitably be less collective and more multi-national.
b. Provided the overall military equilibrium between East and West remained
intact, the military level of confrontation might be lowered. Instead of
roundly opposing any and every British or American troop withdrawal,
continental Europeans should try to keep it within reasonable limits and
to influence its modalities. They should make sure that sufficient air trans-
port capacity and depots of prepositioned war material were on hand to
allow speedy reinforcement of overseas garrisons in times of renewed
tension; they should urge that reduction of force levels be compensated by
increase of strategic and tactical mobility; they should insist on frequent
exercises to test its plausibility; but they would have to grasp the import
of the new trend which put quality above quantity and required two types
of forces: highly professional armies for sophistication, and national reserves
for numbers.
c. It would be extremely difficult to effect a reasonable measure of tacit or
explicit East-West reciprocity with regard to troop reductions. Since the
Eastern countries knew that NATO would scale down its continental gar-
rison anyhow, there was little incentive to bargain. Probably it would be
wiser for NATO to go ahead on its own, thereby creating a psychological
climate in which corresponding changes on the other side were likely to
follow.
d. There was little hope of institutionally underpinning America's nuclear
guarantee for Europe in such a way as to remove the last doubts which the
latter might harbour about the trustworthiness ofthe former; the Americans
were not going to share their burden of ultimate nuclear responsibility with
anyone. Conversely, the Americans could not expect their European allies
to display any enthusiasm for sharing the burdens of United States interests
in areas outside the framework of the Atlantic Alliance.
e. There would be different classes of NATO members. The Alliance would
have to learn to live with its built-in differences, trying to cover up some of
the holes in its fabric by a network of bilateral agreements. The principle of
universal participation in decisions would have to be abandoned in favour of
joint action by those partners interested in any given project. This was
admittedly a highly cumbersome approach but, in the absence of a compre-
hensive multilateral system or true partnership between the United States
and a Europe capable ofcollective political action, it was the only approach
that held any promise of success.
The author of the paper conceded that these guidelines hardly added up to
SS
a very alluring picture of the future, but stressed that this was not a time for
sweeping reforms. Such reforms, indeed, could not be envisaged until political
Europe had taken shape one day. In the meantime, only temporary adjustments
were possible while many ofthe disputes besetting the Alliance were inherently
insoluble.
NATO had fulfilled its primary purpose; future purposes were not so obvious.
There was no new concept that could take its place, but the old ideas had lost
muchoftheirlustre and some oftheir relevance. Yet ifthere were less "glamour"
and less need for perfection in tomorrow's alliance, this in itself could be taken
as a measure of the success yesterday's NATO had achieved.
*
* *
The following points arising from the second paper were suggested by a
German participant as a possible basis for discussion.
1. Would it be advisable and feasible to extend NATO's purposes in such a way
that the Alliance would play a dominant role with respect to a co-ordinated
policy of detente? Or would experience suggest that NATO should restrict it-
self to military matters without branching out into strictly political activities?
2. Is East-West reciprocity as to troop reductions entirely dependent on
Moscow's readiness to withdraw simultaneously troops from East Germany?
Or should NATO go ahead on its own, assuming that the other side is likely
to follow?
3. The American view that NATO should acknowledge the principle of uni-
versal political engagement jeopardizes the cohesion of the Alliance. The
majority of the member states reject participation in world affairs. On the
other hand: what are NATO's future prospects for Atlantic partnership if
the Europeans demand America's total engagement in Europe without
being prepared to share the United States burdens outside Europe?
4. What of the non-proliferation treaty and similar attempts in the field of
arms control? Did the procedure affect the cohesion of the Alliance?
*
* *
The ensuing discussion revealed a general consensus on the continuing need
for the Atlantic Alliance, although, as will be seen later, there was wide dis-
agreement as to its role and functions. While most also thought that NATO
still had a vital role to play, a French participant insisted upon the distinction
drawn by the French Government between the North Atlantic Treaty and the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
56
A Canadian speaker warned that NATO was as essential today in the face
of the military position of the Soviet Union as it ever had been. Similarly, a
British participant said that the Soviet military threat had not completely
abated and that there should therefore be no question ofdisbanding the NATO
organization, more especially since any attempt by Europe to become a third
force would be politically stultifying and economically unviable.
An American participant said that while it was quite obvious that the Soviet
danger of I 967 was not the same danger as that of I 947, yet it should be remem-
bered that the Cuban missile crisis had taken place less than five years ago.
This point was made by another American present who said that only five
years ago there had been a most serious threat involving the redeployment
of military forces and a most serious contemplation of the use of such forces.
·He asked whether events over the last five years had created a situation in which
we could be completely confident that we no longer needed the defensive
capabilities available.
The first American, already quoted, drew attention to a study on "The At-
lantic Alliance; Unfinished Business'', submitted by the U.S. Senate Sub-
Committee on National Security and International Operations. This report
made the point that "nothing is more guarded than the Kremlin's decision-
making process, and this makes it difficult for anyone on the outside to predict
whether the Soviet leadership is in a cautious or risk-taking mood". There was
therefore little reason for complacency, said the speaker, who added that we
must keep up our strength as a basis for working with the Russians and ensuring
their respect.
This aspect of the problem was taken up by another American who said it
was surely obvious that NATO was necessary in order to get the Soviets to
talk sense about Europe, now and probably over a period of many years.
Even when some kind of European settlement could be arranged with the
Communists, he said, there would be a need for some organized Western
military strength to keep the deal honest. This view was echoed by a British
participant who described himself as an unrepentant believer in Atlantic unity
and who contended that a greater detente between the United States and the
Soviet Union was likely to derive from greater cohesion ofthe Atlantic Alliance.
Along the same lines, another British participant said that NATO had made
a major contribution to the slow decline in the military threat to Western
Europe; yet, since Europe could not produce a second strike nuclear capability
in the near future together with the means of collectively controlling it, the
. Atlantic Alliance remained a pre-condition for successful negotiations with
the East and as a guarantee for any solution achieved.
These views. found support from a Belgian participant who emphasized
57
.,
that the Russians had not made any contribution to the solution ofthe European
problem, that the only thing which the Russians ever respected was force and
that any detente was therefore dependent on the cohesion of the Western
Alliance. A similar opinion was voiced by a United States participant who said
that the Soviets had a tendency to lean against weakness.
Summing up this aspect of the matter, an international official particularly
familiar with NATO questions, said that the basic reason for retaining NATO
was simply the old requirement of a balance of strength without which there
could be no clear settlement. This view was wholeheartedly supported by one
of the American participants who said that he wondered whether countries
like Greece and Turkey-and even the larger countries of Central Europe-
would be happy without the Alliance. A Greek participant replied that he was
confident that his country could not dowithout the Alliance while a Swiss member
of the conference said that even non-members of NATO would be extremely
unhappy if the Alliance were to disappear.
The Soviet menace had abated but could flare up again if the Atlantic
Alliance were weakened or were to break down, in the view ofa Danish partici-
pant. He went on to say that in such a situation, Western Germany would have
to take all necessary precautionary measures whereupon West German defence
would probably become the most powerful military force in Europe. A termi-
nation ofthe Atlantic Pact would mean a return to national states and national
defence systems on both sides of the iron curtain. A discontinuation of the
present defensive integration, whether through the NATO or the Warsaw
Pact, might endanger the future of Europe more than the preservation of such
pacts. Certain countries seemed to have got the impression that relaxation in
Europe enabled them to take up individual attitudes but small countries were
in fact unable to do so and their survival depended upon the Atlantic Alliance.
The Alliance could not be abandoned, he concluded, until we were sure of
controlled disarmament throughout Europe. In this connexion, a Turkish
speaker warned, however, that the Warsaw Pact and the NATO Pact were not
equivalent. If the Warsaw Pact were to disappear tomorrow, the aggressive po-
tential of the Soviet bloc would not be reduced thereby. The Warsaw Pact was a
superstructure added to existing Soviet domination established by bilateral
treaties and its disappearance would notreducetheneedforthe NATO structures.
Two American speakers, a German, a Norwegian and an Italian were among
those who stressed the importance of maintaining a balance of forces in Europe
through the continued existence of NATO, the Norwegian pointing out that it
should be remembered that men and intentions sometimes changed over-
night. There should be no reduction of \'\'estern strength in Europe, he said,
without a similar reduction on the other side.
58
In the view of a British speaker, one force which was driving the Western
nations to cling closer together, both militarily and economically, was the
fact that the world was increasingly entering into a dangerous state of inter-
racial tension based on the haves and have-nots, the former being primarily
the Western nations which formed the Alliance. Whether politicians in the
West liked it or not, he said, we would have to stand together in order to
overcome that danger.
*
* *
Notwithstanding this virtual unanimity concerning the need to preserve
Western cohesion, it was generally agreed that the Atlantic Alliance was con-
fronted with a difficult situation. A Portuguese participant said that the Alliance
was in a very serious and even critical state. There was no point in disguising
this or in trying to identify those Allies which had created such a situation.
No individual country had deliberately brought it about: attitudes and actions
were the result and not the cause of the Alliance crisis. The real cause lay in
the fact that the NATO Pact no longer met the vital requirements of most of
the Allies. The political and military realities on which NATO was originally
based had changed: the Soviet threat to Western Europe had been diverted
to other quarters of the world and Atlantic solidarity had been abandoned in
those new areas of tension. The Communist threat had become global but
NATO's political and military solidarity had remained limited. Similarly,
a British speaker said that the shift of the external threat from Europe to
Asia (but also changes in the relative balance of economic strength between
the United States and Europe) called for a change in the structure of NATO.
NATO, in the view of a German participant, would tend towards disinte-
gration unless various problems were solved, e.g., the lack of a common NATO
strategy for the central area of Europe, nuclear control, lack of co-ordination of
foreign policy among NATO partners, etc. Great progress had been made
towards establishing the pre-conditions for a common strategy but the question
of how to solve this strategy problem in a changing world still remained un-
solved.
An Italian participant suggested that one of the problems confronting the
Alliance lay in the fact that NATO lacked the capacity for political decision-
making while a fellow countryman said that the overall situation was no longer
the same as when NATO came into existence. He cited the process ofdecoloniza-
tion and the attitude of some European countries which refused to assume
world responsibility, and the introduction of new missiles, rockets and atomic
59
weapons. The threat itself, he said, had changed: it used to be global and
primarily military and was now peripheral and manifest in a variety of forms.
It frequently had a political, economic and ideological character which was
less obvious than its former military nature but no less dangerous. On the
other hand, a United States participant felt that tensions were not so much due
to changes as to our delayed reactions to those changes. This observation tied
in with the remarks made by a French speaker who said there was a basic
conflict between those who thought that NATO was healthy and that all was
well, people who had not changed their minds since 1949, who still used the
cold war vocabulary and who did not understand the tremendous changes
which had occurred throughout Europe and the world and, on the other hand,
those far-seeing people who thought there was no heresy in saying that major
changes had occurred and that the Alliance should be adapted to present-day
realities.
According to an American participant, one of those changes lay in the fact
that the Atlantic Community was now confronted with the enormous challenge
of the Third World which had become a dangerous theatre of power rivalries.
There had also been great changes in the Communist world: China had con-
solidated its power and this had resulted in a division within the Communist
bloc.Japan had also been transformed since 1949 and had become a great and
successful power with a significant participation in world affairs. He concluded
by saying that there were now very few regional problems: the world was
inexorably getting smaller and it had to be realized that neither the United
States nor Europe could remain isolated from developments.
A fellow American saw the problem in terms of conflicting patterns. There
were, he said, the Atlantic idea, which was essentially based on United States
leadership of a coalition; the idea of a European federal state on a footing of
equal partnership with the United States; the Gaullist design, which was essen-
tially opposed to the Atlantic and the "classical" European idea and which
was based not so much on a supranational Europe as on a Europe of States
although one which included a positive new element summed up in the
phrase "from the Atlantic to the Urals". One way of defining the disarray of
the Alliance, he said, was to note the conflict between those desires and political
reality itself.
In most of the less developed Alliance countries, said a Greek participant,
there was a general belief that the type and degree of co-operation between
members of the Alliance was not consistent with certain basic principles of
solidarity and he considered that the inadequate performance in the non-military
fields represented a real threat.
An American said that the disparity in size and resources between the
60
United States and any West European country necessarily led to some diver-
gence of interest and created apprehension in Europe-to some extent justified
apprehension-that the United States tended to have a larger voice in decision-
making. Any effort to envisage an Atlantic partnership between the United
States and individual European states acting more or less on their own was
therefore a concept which had many inherent limitations. In this context a
United Kingdom speaker expressed some doubt as to whether the United
States had sufficiently realized the changes which had occurred on the Eastern
side of the Ocean and if America had always acted accordingly. This view was
strongly contested by a United States participant.
These various comments led an American to question whether the Alliance
could avoid extinction in the course of the enormous avalanche of words and
analyses devoted to it. We did nothing to promote either United States or
European interest, he said, by a continual vivisection ofthe Alliance. Answering
this observation, the author ofone of the working papers said that the difficul-
ties nowadays facing the Alliance were not due to academic analyses but to a
failure to solve certain important problems. One such problem, according
to a French participant, was that the Atlantic Alliance had been partly emp-
tied of meaning precisely because it had proved a success.
Discussion of the Alliance's difficulties impelled several speakers to warn
against over-dramatization. The international official, already mentioned,
concurred in the view that the Atlantic Alliance was not in a state of disinte-
gration although NATO problems remained serious and even very serious.
We could be reasonably satisfied, he contended, with the situation within the
Atlantic Alliance despite the undeniable divergencies. An American present
said he himself saw no sign of disintegration, and this certainly applied to the
morale of the troops. The army was a better army than it ever had been. He
believed that Europeans-even the French-wanted the United States to
remain in Europe and considered that the problem was to persuade Americans
that Europeans wanted them to stay and that the troops had to stay. Another
United States speaker warned that, once United States troops left Europe, their
return would, in view of American public opinion, be hardly conceivable. The
Europeans should realize this when they expected any relaxation from the
Russians as a counterpart of unilateral withdrawal of United States troops.
The author of one of the working papers summed up by saying that the
policies followed by the main NATO members gave no particular reason for
despair. The disarray was not dramatic, yet it unquestionably did exist because
policies had been followed which were not entirely compatible with ideals of
community and partnership-e.g., French policy over recent years-and this
had exacerbated various strains.
61
One of the problems which had to be solved if NATO were to survive,
according to a German participant, concerned differences over the non-proli-
feration negotiations. Germans, he said, had the impression that the United
States and Great Britain were inclined to give a higher priority to coexistence
than to the cohesion ofNATO. An American insisted, however, that any conflict
which might arise between agreement with the Soviet and agreement with
America's allies would always be resolved in favour of the latter. He did not
favour policies, he said, which would lead to concessions on inspection and
control and which would weaken EURATOM.
The plain fact was, said a British participant, that nobody was satisfied
about the non-proliferation treaty. This was very clearly demonstrated by
the attitude of the German Federal Republic as compared with its attitude
towards the partial test ban agreement offour years ago. Reaction to the latter
had been almost nil whereas today the protest against the treaty had been of
a major kind (which development, incidentally, demonstrated the new position
of resurgent Germany). On this point, an American present said that there
was a difference between the non-proliferation treaty and the test ban treaty
as far as German reaction was concerned: one treaty was symmetrical, the other
asymmetrical. In the case ofthe non-proliferation treaty, the real commitments
were all on the side of the non-nuclear powers. There was therefore no funda-
mental change in the German attitude.
Discussing his country's attitude towards the treaty, a German speaker said
that the Federal Republic was, in his opinion, ready to subscribe to the non-
proliferation treaty but was not willing to be discriminated against and felt
that other states in a position similar to that of Western Germany should also
subscribe. There were serious misgivings in Germany, not so much because of
the economic danger of being deprived of "spin-off" as because some people
feared that the treaty might rule out for ever any possibility of a European
military combination. It was widely believed that the vague language of
paragraph 3 ofthe treaty could open the way to a great measure ofinterference
in civil research and civil application of the results of such research, while it
was also widely feared that the treaty had an in-built disagreement between
Washington and Moscow as to what the wording of that paragraph actually
meant. Another criticism in Germany, he said, derived from the view that the
negotiators of the text had not sufficiently borne in mind the fact that there
was such a thing as EURATOM, that its controls were functioning and that it
had achieved good things. These misgivings and strains on mutual confidence
could have been avoided if the negotiating parties had kept more closely in
touch with the non-negotiating parties.
A fellow countryman added that Germany had submitted its reactors to
62
l
international control through EURATOM so that Germany accepted controls
and considered them necessary but his country did not want such controls
to be discriminatory. The treaty should apply to all nations without exception
and control should be limited to the real purpose of the treaty-Le., use for
military purposes. As far as the European option for a nuclear force was con-
cerned, it was not the creation of such a force for their country the Germans
had in mind but the question should not interfere with possible developments
of a United Europe force.
The non-proliferation treaty did not discriminate against Germany or any
other country, according to an American participant who went on to say that
the United States had not reached an agreement on the non-proliferation
treaty with the Soviet and then submitted it to others in the confident expecta-
tion that it would be accepted. America had merely explored the position
with the Soviet until both parties thought there was a real possibility of
agreement and had then broken off negotiations in order to consult with its
allies.
In connexion with these negotiations, another American participant said
that America had offered on various occasions to make nuclear material
available for peaceful purposes, to dismantle nuclear weapons, etc., but that
none ofthese proposals had aroused the slightest degree ofSoviet interest.
Arguing that the search for detente was not contradictory with the Alliance
but that certain means for pursuing one or the other might inject an appearance
of contradiction, another American present said that the non-proliferation
treaty might well do more harm than good insofar as it contributed to a deterio-
ration in United States-Europe relations. The treaty, he said, only served
the political interests of the Russians and should therefore be pursued in a
broader framework. ·
In any case, said a French spokesman for the Gaullist viewpoint, France
would retain its own nuclear policy. It was a paradoxical situation, he said,
when an effort was made to strengthen the Alliance by relying on European
Allies while simultaneously negotiating with the main opponent without
reference to those Allies. Moreover, he saw serious difficulties in the task of
applying the non-proliferation treaty: proliferation would inevitably continue
since we had no impact on China; it was impossible to imagine any agreement
maintaining the existence of a small nuclear club and depriving Europe of any
potential in terms of defence and technological "spin-off"; finally, the non-
proliferation treaty would put an end to EURATOM although that organiza-
tion could well go on being utilized in terms of the peaceful use of nuclear
energy in Europe.
This French intervention Jed to a reaction from a United Kingdom speaker
63
,.(,
who remarked that in a decade plutonium would be available in massive
quantities and the value of conventional tactical weapons would have become
problematical. The partial test ban could not survive unless it were comple-
mented by a non-proliferation treaty and other similar agreements. His con-
clusion was that Europeans would have to back the United States in the non-
proliferation question and that the West Europeans would eventually have to
come to terms with the East Europeans. Conversely a United States speaker
said that the non-proliferation treaty could not survive by itself and was not
self-sustaining: the non-proliferation question was only one of the elements to
be taken into consideration in an effort to dampen a nuclear arms race.
*
* *
Mention of the increasing trend towards greater freedom of action among
European members of NATO led a German participant to point out that this
trend was paralleled by decreasing cohesion in Eastern Europe. On the whole,
he felt that this development was not to be deplored. The tendency was
towards a "Europe ofFatherlands" in which relations between East Europeans
and Moscow would become relatively looser while their relation with Western
Europe would relatively increase. There would, he thought, be a parallel
development in Western Europe with France and Federal Germany pursuing
a new course of improved relations with East European countries. It was of
over-riding importance that the general balance of military factors should be
maintained so as to make the process ofrelaxation and normalization through-
out Europe possible. This equilibrium was currently endangered by the
excessively quick tempo of France's loosening of ties with NATO and was
further endangered by both the United States and the United Kingdom
announcement of their intention to pull out a considerable proportion of their
troops from Europe unilaterally. The United States, he said, should make it
absolutely clear that its forces in Europe were not related to the balance of
payments but were dependent on the balance o(forces exclusively. In answer
to this, an American participant affirmed that America had in fact a positive
policy in favour of mutual reduction offorces.
In the matter of East-West relations, another German participant said that
as the clanger of aggression receded, it became more and more important to
harmonize the future policy ofcletente with the East. Harmonization should be
extended to the whole range of policies, especially in respect of arms control
and disarmament and the goal of harmonization should be the reunification of
64
East and West Europe. Nothing, he warned, could be more dangerous than
to weaken the West's integrated structures until fundamental changes in the
Soviet attitude became visible. This approach did not impede reconciliation
with the East but rather contributed to it.
In the view of a Canadian participant, NATO's primary concern should be
precisely a search for an East-West settlement in Europe. Every support should
be given to the desire ofEuropean countries for peaceful settlement even though
any transformation towards a loosening of transatlantic interests for the sake
of such a settlement would confront Canada with difficult problems. Whatever
disengagement ultimately took place, however, must, he said, be on the basis
of (a) a collective decision in NATO itself, (b) mutual disengagement, and (c)
an absence ofunilateral acts by greater or smaller powers within the Alliance.
This viewpoint was shared by a Turkish speaker who said that bilateral
efforts to achieve a detente were wholly legitimate but that the content and
methods ofsuch a detente should first be discussed within NATO.
A British speaker said that the presence of United States nuclear weapons in
West Europe together with hundreds of thousands of United States troops had
made it wholly irrational for the Soviet Union to think ofchanging the situation
by force. In these circumstances, people were beginning to wonder whether
European unity should not comprehend Eastern European states and he added
that no East-West bridge could be achieved solely on the basis of collective
action but also called for individual action. A similar view was expressed by
another British participant who contended that no situation should be created
in which Eastern Europe was automatically excluded. NATO had greatly
impeded East-West trade and it was now essential to create a situation in
which all Europe had an economic self-interest.
A number of speakers raised the question of how far action in the West had
influenced or could affect developments in Eastern Europe. According to a
British spt>aker the loosening of the Soviet grip in the East had almost wholly
resulted from factors within the Soviet bloc. The Soviet grip would continue to
loosen but not as a result of anything that the West could do. The real question
was how far we could exploit what was happening in Eastern Europe to mutual
advantage.
In this context another United Kingdom speaker said it would be an illusion
to suppose that Russia would allow European satellites to be enticed into
political unity with European powers.
Still another British speaker said that the growth of prosperity in the
Common Market and in the West as a whole had had a significant impact on
Eastern states and the granting of credits to those states had encouraged this
trend. It was, therefore, a fundamental fallacy to imagine that the EEC should
65
,,,..,
\Wiii
",'\'.:}~~
·\'(/
not be enlarged since it would thereby be damaged; ifthe EEC were enlarged,
it could only have a greater magnetic effect on Eastern states.
A British speaker said that some of the features of the Common Market
organization which militated against an· opening to the East would be removed
when and if Britain and some of the EFTA countries joined it, but a fellow
countryman said that, whatever the changes in the internal relations or internal
conditions of Warsaw Pact states, he could see no concept of European unity
which in the foreseeable future would stretch beyond the iron curtain. He
asked how the Common Market could possibly embrace satellite countries
which had no market in the sense that they did not, for example, have a
market price-quite apart from Soviet objections.
The overall discussion ofEast-West relations led various speakers to speculate
as to the extent to which those relations had in fact actually improved. Ac-
cording to an American participant, speaking as one who had spent much
time negotiating with the Communists, no so-called unilateral move had ever
been reciprocated to the slightest degree by the Soviet Union. Nevertheless,
another American claimed that significant progress was being made with the
Soviets during and notwithstanding such difficulties as Vietnam.
The detente, insofar as it existed, was not yet a marriage between East and
West, said an international participant, who described the situation as merely
a "flirtation" with the West doing most of the wooing.
The American speaker-quoted on page 24-who had recently completed a
tour of five East European countries reported extensively on his experiences.
He concluded that outwardly there seemed to have been some improvement
in the situation beyond the iron curtain. Something had happened in Eastern
Europe as a result ofthe fact that some people had been allowed to travel while
the flow of West Europeans and Americans to Eastern Europe had also exer-
cised an influence. There was a general belief in the East that the detente was
a reality and was making progress but that it had both positive and negative
implications. The positive implication was that it would help establish peace;
the negative implication was that the Soviet Union and the United States
might lose all interest in smaller countries. Eastern Europe, he said, was more
ready than previously to accept normalization ofrelations with West Germany,
particularly since the inception ofKiesinger's regime, and all Eastern countries
were anxious to enlarge or initiate programmes with the United States for the
training of business managers, public administrators, etc. This offered many
opportunities to the West. Many East Europeans believed that in a decade the
Germans might be more interested in relations with the Russians than with
the United States.
Another American attributed the changes which had occurred in the Eastern
66
bloc not to initiatives taken by individual countries but to the strength and
unity of the Atlantic Alliance and, in this connexion, a fellow countryman said
that he would like to remind Europeans that the United States interest in
rapprochement, detente and disarmament was not a plot against Europeans
but an expression of what America deeply believed to be a vital common
interest.
There could be no good solutions to the hard problems that lay at the centre
of power in Europe, said another American speaker, unless Europe moved
towards some kind ofpolitical unity. However many bridges were built between
East and West, there was little possibility ofsettling the division of Europe and
specifically the division of Germany except within the framework of a united
Western Europe. A French participant, however, insisted that it was not
within a divided and hostile Europe but only in a Europe enjoying a detente
that we could start towards European and German unification.
A new element in this part of the discussions was introduced by two United
Kingdom participants with regard to direct negotiations between the United
States and Russia on the ABM's. If the United States were going ahead
purely for its own coverage and the Soviets on the same basis, so that Europe
was left in the middle, then the consequences for the Alliance would be immea-
surable. Another United Kingdom speaker said the prospect of an agreement
reached over the heads ofthe Europeans was not a happy solution.
An American speaker emphasized that in this respect the two nuclear
powers should exercise temperance in their dealings with each other if they
wanted to avoid a disastrous arms race. He had particularly in mind the dis-
cussions on the ABM system where little factual knowledge was available as
to the destructive power ofthe Russian system. In such circumstances enormous
sums would be spent to avoid all pmsible risks and this argument ran both
ways.
*
* *
Discussion of East-West relations was interconnected with a discussion ofthe
European situation and more particularly the role of the United Kingdom and
Germany.
Warning that Russia would oppose a reunified Germany except under
galling conditions and that even Western Europe would have some appre-
hension unless such reunification took place within the framework of a larger
unified political system, an American speaker said that unless this problem was
67
solved there could be no permanent stability and that the United Kingdom
had an essential role to play in a united Europe.
He went on to say that the United States should put less emphasis on the
notion of equal partnership and should look forward to the emergence of a
Europe enjoying a great measure of independence on the assumption that
while we might not always be in agreement on both sides of the Atlantic,
neither America nor Europe had a monopoly of wisdom. Europe should get
on with the essential business of organizing itself in a modern, 20th century
manner so as to play an effective role in the world. The institutionalization of
co-ordination of foreign policy would be an important incentive for Europe to
draw nearer to political unity and, here again, if the United Kingdom were to
join the EEC, such an evolution might be greatly accelerated. In this connexion,
a Netherlands participant said that it would perhaps be unfortunate in present
circumstances if the Six were to agree on foreign policy since such a unified
viewpoint would probably be the wrong one.
A French participant said that Europe as imagined 10 or 20 years ago, a
supranational Europe, was impossible in the immediate future. It implied
no rejection of European construction to say that this could not take place on
the basis of those principles which dominated its original founders. We had to
be very pragmatic and to proceed stage by stage. It was impossible to have
immediate integration but we could have growing co-ordination between
governments of the Six first and this could gradually be extended to other
governments. Such co-ordination could be followed by closer co-operation,
conceivably leading to confederation. A Europe of this kind, he said, should
be harmonious, sovereign and open: geographically Europe included not only
the Eastern countries but also some others which did not belong to the Common
Market but which were nevertheless European, e.g., Great Britain.
There had, he said, been an evolution in British governmental circles and
in British public opinion and the need for Great Britain to belong to Europe
was now more clearly appreciated. Britain, however, had to make a choice
and he cited a British speaker who had said that Britain could not belong to
Europe economically while preserving special links with the United States in
other spheres and special links with certain European countries or dominions.
Britain had a global choice before it and its spontaneous and voluntary parti-
cipation in Europe called for serious thought.
His comments were taken up by a Belgian participant who contended that
the idea of starting the construction of European entity by defining a joint
European policy in fact represented a dead-end-strikingly exemplified.by the
French speaker's statement that the United Kingdom would be welcomed in
the EEC providing it adopted a standpoint vis-a-vis the United States similar
68
to that ofFrance. This was not possible: all the other members ofthe EEC had
views differing from those of France. Europe must start from what existed in
the Common Market-i.e., a system based on the majority view. If it were
necessary to choose between an extension of the Common Market and the
maintenance ofthe partition of Europe the first alternative should prevail.
The French participant's remarks were also taken up by a second Belgian
speaker who pointed out that the Six did not represent Europe in its entirety
but merely formed an embryo. That Europe would expand as other democratic
countries joined in. He· asked why we should query the intentions of states
which clearly specified that they were ready to accept the Rome Treaty in
form and substance. If smaller countries did not brush aside their obsolete
past, he said, they would become parochial and would never be regarded
either by America or the USSR as equal partners.
Another French speaker observed that the previous day's discussions had
clearly revealed that technological problems could only be solved within a
wider framework and suggested that other problems could find no solution in
excessively narrow national frameworks or even a narrow European framework.
Solutions would have to be sought outside the European framework and should
aim at a European construction based on United States support. The structure
should be open so as to welcome Britain and the very process involved in this
should be general enough to apply later to other countries so as to enable
Europe to include even some of the satellite countries.
The need to be clear as to what European unity in fact meant was stressed
by a British speaker who said that many people believed that ifwe started with
political federation all the rest would follow. This was contrary to all historical
experience and amounted to a confusion of the desirable with the attainable.
His views were supported by an international official who expressed doubt as
to whether economic union inevitably led to political union. On the contrary,
he inclined to believe that the failure of political progress might disrupt
economic consolidation.
Stating that Britain hoped to see the Common Market extended, a partici-
pant from that country said that the United Kingdom felt that this should not
mean a dilution ofthe Common Market nor that the accession ofBritain should
mean a change in the Market's present character.
A German participant stressed Germany's desire to belong to NATO and
to Europe. An Italian speaker agreed that a distinction should be drawn
between the "NATO" factor and the concept of"Europe". The two not only
involved different time elements but were different as to substance. A solution
valid for one of the entities was not necessarily valid for the other. In this
connexion, the speaker recalled the discouraging experience of institutions
69
proposed on this dual basis-e.g., the European Defence Community, the
MLF, etc.
Turning to the future prospects, a number ofspeakers discussed the question
ofNATO's geographical area ofresponsibility. A Portuguese participant urged
that the basic philosophy behind NATO should be revised and NATO goals
reappraised, and that the Organization should not be seen as an instrument to
deal with European-American relations as though Europe and the United
States were isolated from the rest of the world and had no common concern
outside the NATO area. The geographical area of NATO should be enlarged
so as to include all areas threatened and political consultations should take
place within the NATO Council so as to try and achieve co-ordinated policies
on fundamental questions vital to the Allies. The enlargement of NATO's
geographical area, he stressed, did not mean that all Allies should automatic-
ally go to war in outlying areas because of a particular conflict involving any
o.ne of them but should mean that NATO would consider as its legitimate
concern events and developments in outlying areas.
The international official already mentioned agreed that Portugal had
problems which deserved deep attention and understanding and the view of
the Portuguese speaker was also echoed by a British speaker who said that it
was quite unrealistic in the present circumstances to look at the problems ofone
area in isolation. A fellow countryman, however, thought that there was little
prospect of achieving an integrated policy among NATO members outside
the NATO area. The problem would be to reconcile integration in Europe
with independence of action outside the NATO territory.
Various participants made the point that for the future the purely military
defensive aspect ofthe Alliance should not be overstressed. As an Italian speaker
put it, the goal today should be to achieve a certain type of peace involving
vast tasks to provide mankind with new wealth and to redistribute this wealth
while raising democratic and political levels in all countries. Members, he
said, should give greater priority to the general aims of the Alliance. The
military sector should be only one of the instruments of action and an in-
creasingly technical one.
This viewpoint was taken up by a United States speaker who said that a
purely or even primarily military mission for NATO would no longer find the
necessary political support because a new generation was emerging which had
no remembrance of the issues which originally shaped the purposes of the Al-
liance. This new generation was concerned not simply with saving what exist-
ed but with building a new order and it was essential, therefore, that NATO
acquire a constructive political orientation.
70
Similarly, a Netherlands speaker said he did not believe that the younger
generation in Western Europe would retain faith in NATO so long as NATO
remained a purely military organization, while a United States participant
with a military background urged that governments should not concentrate
exclusively on military forces but should think in terms of creating a better
atmosphere and providing a better substitute for force. This contention was
supported by a Finnish speaker who contended that arms alone could not
solve the European situation and by a German who said it would be wrong and
even dangerous if NATO were restricted to military matters.
Within the same context, a Greek participant suggested that the type of
developments now underway gave increased emphasis to non-military forms
of solidarity among NATO members. Atlantic co-operation now represented
a community of nations sharing common principles. Those principles were
exposed to the test of the adequacy of the system as a whole in coping with
problems confronting the less developed countries and especially the so-called
peripheral European countries in the Alliance. Inadequate performance in
the non-military fields, he said, was a real threat and advanced countries
should recognize this. The important thing was to emphasize the feeling that
effective solidarity among members of the Atlantic Community did exist and
that the principles on which it stood were adequate to meet the problems of
its developing members.
A British participant likewise proposed that the Atlantic Alliance, while
retaining its military defensive role, should advance the joint economic and
political interests of the free world in a way which would mobilize the enthu-
siasm of the younger generation, while an American present urged that the
·west make a massive effort to assist the developing countries. Finally, a
Belgian speaker said that Europe's interest in the Atlantic Community was
oveniding and necessitated the maintenance and broadening ofthe Alliance not
merely as a military and defensive association but as one which had political
and economic interests as well.
An American speaker, however, expressed the view that the Alliance should
remain a purely military one and should not be transmogrified into an all-
embracing Atlantic Community designed to generate solutions to economic,
financial and other problems.
Another United States participant pointed out that NATO was not neces-
sarily the only forum for discussions between the Allies. He stressed the part
OECD could play in this connexion.
Various speakers emphasized the importance of better political consultations
within the Alliance but the Portuguese speaker already mentioned expressed
his doubts. Speaking from a vast personal experience insofar as NATO
71
meetings were concerned, this speaker submitted that real political consultation
hardly existed. There were no debates and no desire to reach a common policy
because members wanted to remain free to pursue their national policies, often
not even refraining from openly attacking other members.
The case for re-negotiation of NATO, said a Canadian speaker, lay in the
fact that the Alliance was simply too important to its members and to the
world to allow it to be unnecessarily handicapped by a treaty, certain of the
articles ofwhich had become obsolete or anachronistic or irrelevant. Article ro,
he suggested, concerning the admission of new members, could be re-worded
so as to extend a warmer and more generous invitation to states not at present
members ofthe Pact. He had in mind more especially the "newly independent"
countries of Eastern Europe. Secondly, he went on to say, Article 6 defining
the Treaty area was surely outmoded while Article 2 should be revised so as to
pledge members not only to improve their own common economic and political
relations but also to improve the lot of underdeveloped countries.
There was a very good reason for not following this suggestion, according
to a British participant. Nothing should be done unless one was sure that
something better would emerge and he could think of no worse move than
to encourage the entry of East European nations at this time. Everyone paid
tribute to NATO in defending Europe against Soviet armed aggression but
some had gone on to argue that precisely because it had been so successful it
was no longer necessary. For his own part, he did not feel confident of the
logic of this premise and he agreed with an earlier American speaker that
excessive analysis and self-criticism were to be deplored.
The question of individual initiatives was raised by some participants,
amongst them a British speaker who said that independent action was more
likely to be dangerous than concerted action, although a fellow countryman
said it should not be felt that individual initiatives per se endangered the unity
of the Alliance. We could afford a degree of national independence in action
precisely because we had a common culture and common interests. It was
essential to relax a bit and not insist on an excessive rigidity in the Alliance since
this would either lead to unity snapping under the strain or to the most disastrous
outcome of all, namely, a sort of schizophrenia not only in the Alliance itself
but also within national governments. This remark impelled a third British
participant to ask whether NATO Air Defence Ground Environment might
not perhaps offer an indication of how in fact NATO could be reorganized on
basic essentials so that the French position was not incompatible with that of
the Six and the position of the Six not incompatible with an effective Atlantic
Alliance.
Two United States speakers displayed concern in pointing to the difficulty
72
which American public opinion would have in accepting a basic change
in the premises on which American attitudes towards the European problem
might develop. The goals set for Europe by the author of the first working
paper, one of them said, were to be approached by a gradual evolution, the
final control ofwhich would be European rather than American. He considered
this a major change in the approach towards European questions and urged
that it was important that American public opinion should be prepared to
accept this point ofview and for this to happen he considered that an enunciation
of this approach in readily understood terms was urgent.
Another American issued a plea for continued recollection of the impor-
tance of our old and continuing dreams of a better world after World War II.
We seemed to be faced with an erosion of those dreams and a rationalization
of that erosion with not much of a replacement for what seemed to be slipping
from us.
In an earlier intervention a United States participant had mentioned new
designs which could be pursued: acceptance offurther disintegration, duopoly
and a more general concept which would accept European autonomy, make
for a loosening Europe where the United States would maintain its part, with
elements of supranationality and integration.
It was apparent from the discussion, said an American speaker, that almost
everyone agreed the Alliance should be re-examined in the light of a world
situation which had radically changed since 1949. The study of the future of
the Alliance started by Belgian and Canadian initiatives in recent years should
become an occasion to impress on the younger generation the need for allied
solidarity, itshould devise a strategyfor negotiating the detente, it should consider
aid to less developed countries and the responsibilities of the Alliance outside
Europe. The malaise of the Alliance should be cured by strengthening the
Alliance not by dismantling it. Its political influence should be improved at
the same time as its deterrent strength was maintained. Any such reform should
take account of the fact that the countries of Europe had now recovered from
the shocks ofwar and decolonization and might wish to take a more active and
continuous share in the process of decision-making.
*
* *
The international participant who had undertaken to sum up the discussions
described the debate as a fascinating one.
He went on to refer to the wide range of conflicting opinions which had
73
been put forward but nonetheless stressed that there were three areas ofdefinite
agreement. In the first place, all speakers had concurred in feeling that the
Alliance and NATO had been outstandingly successful and that current
difficulties stemmed precisely from that success. Secondly, it was agreed that
the Alliance was still necessary. This did not imply that there had not been
serious disagreement on what kind of alliance and also on what it still meant
since there were those who thought that the Alliance was a passing phase
which must eventually come to an end while others considered that it repre-
sented the beginning of a new and lasting structure; nevertheless, no one had
recommended that the state of the world be left to the United States and the
Soviet Union to determine nor that a purely European balance of power
should be built up. The third area of agreement was all the more remarkable
in thatit was based on an orthodox Marxist proposition, namely that military
alliances did not create a basic structure in themselves whereas economic
alliances, unions or communities did do so.
Turning to the areas ofdisagreement, he said that the first of these concerned
the question of the context in which the Atlantic Alliance today was actually
operating. There had been no agreement as to the reality of the detente and
there were those who were profoundly sceptical and wondered whether any-
thing had really changed. Assuming, however, that a detente did exist, there
were many different opinions as to how it should be defined. What was its
objective? To maintain peace? Or to lead to the reunification of Europe?
What was the relationship between the detente, the status quo and peaceful
change? No agreement had been forthcoming on these points.
The second area of disagreement concerned the objectives of the Alliance.
Was it necessary to reformulate these? There were those who thought that
defence by itself sufficed as an objective while others very clearly stated that
something more than a mere military alliance was needed. Did management
of the detente constitute an adequate objective for the Alliance? Ifso, we were
thrown back on the differences ofopinion concerning the nature of the detente.
If the objective was to create a new order, what kind of a new order was in-
volved?
Again, there was a wide measure of disagreement concerning the means
available although there was some agreement within the disagreement as far as
it was recognized that there were enormous political pressures to reduce
military resources and budgets. Extensive disagreements, however, had been
revealed as to the emphasis which should be placed on the composition of both
political and military means, on national action on the one hand and Alliance
action on the other.
Extensive disagreement had also been apparent concerning such concrete
74
issues as disengagement. Should there be any form of disengagement at all and,
if so, how far should it go? Should it be limited to conventional weapons or
should it include nuclear arms? Should it be carried out only in agreement or in
parallel with the Soviet Union or should it be considered a unilateral first step
designed to obtain a corresponding Soviet reaction? A second concrete point
of disagreement related to the question of whether the Alliance should be for
Europe or for the world? Some speakers felt that Europe was not yet ready
to act on a world basis while others replied that it was impossible to believe
that America could remain interested in Europe if Europe itself was not inter-
ested in America's problems elsewhere.
There had been substantial agreement in respect of Germany insofar as
no one had questioned that German reunification was an absolute necessity
nor that it could only come about at the end of a long process. Conversely,
the1e had been significantly less agreement on the question of how this
should be achieved. Should it consist of a loosening of structures and
mainly national action or should it, on the contrary, consist of a tightening
of structures?
Pronounced disagreement had been apparent in respect ofthe non-prolifera-
tion treaty. There were those who considered it a second Yalta and those who
considered it essential. One important element of agreement on the treaty was
that the way in which it had been handled was not the way in which to keep
an alliance going.
Varying concepts of the Atlantic Alliance had been voiced. There were
those who considered that the Alliance was and should remain military. It
had worked very well, the situation had not fondamentally changed and there
was no reason to "tinker" with the Alliance. Another group held that it was
not only a military alliance but that this was not the time to make any sweeping
reforms. We should join together to manage the detente and thus move towards
peace. Finally, there was the third group which insisted on the necessity of
keeping the Alliance alive thus presupposing the emergence of some form of
European entity. The differences arose in connexion with this latter group.
The first thing which divided them was the question ofwhat kind of European
structure was desirable. The second point concerned the kind of relations with
the United States which were required. Within the group, there were those
who were deeply preoccupied by the questions of structural change not only
in the Alliance but in international relations as such and this sub-group
considered that the European Community was an idea in expansion and that
building on that idea the Alliance itselfshould change its structure in the direc-
tion of partnership. Others, however, believed that a change in the structure
of the Alliance was required but had less confidence in a lasting change
75
111!
ffi
'
!0111
in the structure of international relations, regarding Europe not so much as
an idea in expansion but as a new and larger nation-state.
*
* *
Earlier in the discussion a United States participant who had to leave the
meeting early had expressed the gratitude of the American group to His Royal
Highness and all the other persons who had contributed to the great success of
this meeting.
Before declaring the meeting closed, the Prince conveyed the warmest
thanks of all those who were present to the British hosts and the Master and
Fellows of St. John's College for the admirable arrangements which had been
made, to the writers of the excellent introductory papers, the linguistic service
and the members of the Secretariat.
76
