•
z
WW
:cu
OZ
~w
(!)
me:
co
a:
"I
w
co
w
(,f)
(/)
u.
m
co
0
..-
a:
z
LL
.
(!)
-1Z
c
w
i-
:J
ow
w
'"'")
-l
w
!...()
o:i
~
1--
u
I
Cf)
~
BIIDERBERG MEETINGS
TELFS-BUCHEN
CONFERENCE
3-5 June 1988
NOT FOR QUOTATION
.-
VIL FUTURE STRATEGY OF THE ALLIANCE
Working Paper .....
Introductory Remarks, I.
Introductory Remarks, II.
Introductory Remarks, III. .
Discussion. . . . . . . .
VIII. THE GULF AND AFGHANISTAN
Working Paper. . . . .
Introductory Remarks, I.
Introductory Remarks, II.
Introductory Remarks, III.
Discussion.
CLOSING ....
2
73
76
78
79
81
87
90
93
94
96
101
FOREWORD
This booklet is an account of the proceedings of the 1988 Bilderberg
Meeting at the Interalpen-Hotel Tyro~ Telfs-Buchen, Austria. Working
papers and introductory remarks are reported essentially as they were
presented, with minor editing. Remarks and interventions made in the
discussion sessions, as well as panelists' closing remarks, are organized
according to subject matter, and are not necessarily reported in the order
in which they were made, nor in their entirety.
Grant F. Winthrop
Rapporteur
3
INTRODUCTION
The thirty-sixth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Interalpen-Hotel
Tyrol, in Telfs-Buchen, Austria on June 3, 4, and 5, 1988. There were 116
participants from 17 European countries, the United States, and Canada.
They represented government, diplomacy, politics, business, law, labor,
education, journalism, the military, and institutes specializing in national and
international studies. All participants spoke in a personal capacity, not as
representatives of the governments or organizations to which they belonged.
As is usual at Bilderberg Meetings, in order to permit frank and open
discussion, no reporting of the conference proceedings took place.
Lord Roll of Ipsden, the Chairman of the Bilderberg Meetings, opened
the conference with a welcome to the participants and an exhortation that
they remain in attendance for all three days. He stressed the importance of
keeping the discussions tightly focused, and encouraged all participants to
join in.
5
f
7
VII. FUTURE STRATEGY OF THE ALLIANCE
Moderator: Henry A. Kissinger
Working Paper: Fran~is Heisbourg
Introductory Remarks: Hans van den Broek
Brent Scowcroft
VIII. THE GULF AND AFGHANISTAN
8
Moderator: Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.
Working Paper: Gary G. Sick
Introductory Remarks: James Craig
Olivier Roy
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
Lord Roll of Ipsden*
President, S.G. Warburg Group pk
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA
Victor Halberstadt*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE U.SA.
Theodore L. Eliot, Jr.*
Senior Research Fellow, Hoover Institution on War,
Revolution and Peace, Stanford University
HONORARY TREASURER
Conrad J. Oort*
Member of the Board, Algemene Bank Nederland N.V.;
Professor of Money and Banking, University of Limburg
ITA GIOVANNI AGNELLI** President, Fiat S.p.A.
DEN TAGE ANDERSEN* Managing Director and Chief Executive, Den
Danske Bank
USA DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS Chairman, Atcher-Daniels-Midland Company, Inc.
GRB ANDREAS ANDRIANOPOULOS Mayor of Piraeus; Former Minister of Culture
AUS HANNES ANDROSCH Former Chairman of the Managing Board of
Directors, Creditanstalt-Bankverein; Former
Minister of Finance; Former Vice Chancellor
USA GEORGE W. BALL** Former Under-Secretary of State
POR FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO* Director, Jamal Bxpresso; Former Prime
Minister
SPA ENRIQUE BARON Vice President, European Parliament; President,
European Movement; Former Minister of
Transport
USA JACK F. BENNEIT* Director and Senior Vice President, Exxon
Corporation; Former Under-Secretary of the
Treasury for Monetary Affairs
NETI-I ERNST H. VANDERBEUGEL** Emeritus Professor of International Relations,
Leyden University; Director of Companies
TUR SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT* Director of Companies
ICE BJORN BJARNASON Assistant Editor-in-Chief, "Morgunbladid"
CAN CONRAD M. BLACK* Chairman, Atgus Corporation Ltd.
USA SHIRLEY TEMPLE BLACK Foreign Affairs Officer, Department of State;
Former Ambassador to the Republic of Ghana
SWI FRANZ BLANKART State Secretary for External Economic Affairs,
Federal Department of Public Economy
TUR ALI BOZBR Minister of State
9
USA NICHOIAS F. BRADY*
NETH HANS VANDENBROEK
FRA FRAN($0IS BUJON DE L'ESI'ANG
SWE
GRE
SPA
SPA
CAN
POR
UK
USA
BEL
FRA
USA
USA
FRA
INf
USA
STAFFAN BURENSTAM LINDER
COSTA CARRAS*
JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO*
JUAN LUIS CEBRIAN
MARSHALL A. COHEN
VITOR M. R CONSTANCIO
JAMES CRAIG
KENNETH W. DAM*
ETIENNE DAVIGNON*
, ,
GERARD ESKENAZI
DANIEL J. EVANS
THOMAS S. FOLEY
JEAN A. FRAN($0IS-PONCEf
JOHN R GALVIN
KATIIARINE GRAHAM
CAN ANTIIONY G. S. GRIFF1N**
USA HENRY A. GRUNWALD
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON*
ICE GEIR HALLGRIMSSON*
AUS HELMUT H. HASCHEK
INf FRAN($0IS HEISBOURG
FRG ALFRED HERRHAUSEN*
AUS FRIEDRICH HOESS
USA KAREN ELLIOTI HOUSE
USA WILLIAM G. HYIAND
AUS HANS IGLER
FIN JAAKKO ILONIEMI
10
Co-Chairman, Dillon, Read & Co., Inc.; Former
U.S. Senator (Repubjican, New Jersey)
Minister for Foreign Affairs
Minister Plenipotentiary; Former Adviser for
Diplomatic Affairs, Defence and Cooperation in
the Cabinet of Mr. Jacques Chirac
President, Stockholm School of Economics;
Former Minister of Trade, Former Member of
Parliament
Director of Companies
Chairman and General Manager, lberfomento
Director and Editor-in-Chief, "El Pais'
President, Olympia & York Enterprises Limited
Leader of the Socialist Party; Former Governor,
Banco de Portugal; Former Secretary of State
for Budget and Planning
Director General, The Middle East Association
Vice President, Law and External Relations, IBM
Corporation; Former Deputy Secretary of State
Director, Soci€t6 G6nt!rale de Belgique; Former
Member of the Commission of the European
Communities
President, Pargesa Holding SA.
U.S. Senator (Republican, Washington State)
U.S. Representative (Democrat, Washington
State)
Senator; Former Minister for Foreign Affairs
Supreme Allied Commander Europe, SHAPE
Chairman, The Washington Post Company
Director of Companies
Ambassador to Austria; Former Editor-in-Chief,
Time Inc.
Chairman of the Board, SAAB-SCANIA AB
Governor, Central Bank of Iceland; Former
Prime Minister; Former Minister for Foreign
Affairs
Chairman of the Board, Osterreichische
Kontrollbank A.G.
Director, The International Institute for
Strategic Studies
Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A.G.
Ambassador to the United States of America
Foreign Editor, 'The Wall Street Journal'
Editor, 'Foreign Affairs'
Partner, Schoeller & Co. Bankaktiengesellschaft
Member of the Management Board, Union Bank
of Finland; Former Ambassador to the United
States of America
AUS PETER JANKOWITSCH*
USA NANCY IANDON KASSEBAUM
USA
.UK
USA
USA
AUS
UK
FRG
INT
USA
FRA
ITA
INT
USA
BEL
SWI
DAYID T. KEARNS
JOHN KEEGAN
lANE KIRKIAND
HENRY A. KISSINGER*
THOMAS KLESTIL
ANDREW KNIGHT*
HELMUT KOHL
MAX KOHNSTAMM**
PEDRO PABLO KuczyNsKI
MARC LADREIT DE IACHARRIERE
GIORGIO IA MALFA
ALEXANDRE LAMFALUSSY
DREW LEWIS
ANDRE LEYSEN
FRANZ J. LUTOLF*
CAN DONALD S. MACDONALD*
NETH FLORIS A. MALJERS
INT STEPHEN N. MARRIS
USA CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, JR*
FRA THIERRY DEMONTBRIAL*
ITA MARIO MONTI*
USA RUPERT MURDOCH
NETH HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
OF THE NETHERLANDS
NETH HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE
CIAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
~ -~-~·- ~-~~ -~--~·-~~~ ·-·---·------ '"' ,,..:•..-:.~·i-!1"~l.i&!lLl.:.i.:G§#!.ifW~.~;;~'.::';~· -· ,, ., .._,·,"~.....~: ·1.t~, ,~..._d.~J~;~-::~r:...,......"-
Chairman of the Foreign Policy Committee of
the National Assembly; Former Minister for
Foreign Affairs
U.S. Senator (Republican, Kansas)
Chairman, Xerox Corporation
Military Historian; Defence Correspondent,
"The Daily Telegraph"
President, American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)
Former Secretary of State; Chairman, Kissinger
Associates, Inc.
Secretary General, Federal Ministry for
Foreign Affairs
Chief Executive, "The Daily Telegraph"
Federal Chancellor
Former President, European University Institute
Co-Chairman, First Boston International
Director and First Executive Vice President,
L'Oreal
National Secretary, PRI (Italian Republican
Party)
General Manager, Bank for International
Settlements
Chairman, Union Pacific Corporation
Chairman of the Board, Gevaert N.V.; Vice
Chairman, UNICE (Union of Industrial and
Employers Confederations of Europe)
General Manager and Member of the Executive
Board, Swiss Bank Corporation
Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy
Chairman of the Board of Management, Unilever
N.V.
Senior Fellow, Institute for International
Economics; Former Economic Adviser to the
Secretary General, OECD
Partner, Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue; Former
U.S. Senator (Republican, Maryland)
Director, French Institute of International
Relations; Professor of Economics, Ecole
Polytechnique
Professor of Economics, Bocconi University,
Milan; Vice Chairman, Banca Commerciale
Italiana
Chairman, News America Publishing
11
AUS ANrON OSOND
GRE THEODOROSPANGALOS
INT JEAN-CLAUDE PAYE
USA DONALD E. PETERSEN
POR FRANCISCO LUCAS PIRES
NOR INGER E. PREBENSEN
UK LORD PRIOR
CAN GRANr L. REUBER
USA ROZANNE L. RIDGWAY
USA JAMES D. ROBINSON III
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER**
FRA OLIVIER ROY
USA CHARLES S. SANFORD, JR
TUR RUSI'U SARACOGLU
AUS GUIDO SCHMIDT-CHIARI
UK DAYID G. SCHOLEY
USA BRENT SCOWCROFT
USA JACK SHEINKMAN
USA GARY G. SICK
CAN GORDON S. SMITH
FRG THEO SOMMER*
ITA UGO STILLE
FIN ILKKA SUOMINEN
FRG HORST TELTSCHIK
SWE ANDERS THUNBORG
DEN NIELS THYGESEN
AUS FRIEDRICH VERZETNITSCH
FRG KARSTEN D. VOIGT
12
Chairman of the Board of Management,
Osterreichische Investitionskredit A.G.
Alternate Minister for Foreign Affairs
Secretary General, OECD
Chairman, Ford Motor Company
Member of the European Parliament; Fonner
Leader of the Christian Democrats
President, A/S Kj¢bmandsbanken
Chairman, GEC pie; Fonner Secretary of State
for Employment; for Northern Ireland
Deputy Chairman, Bank of Montreal
Assistant Secretary of State for European and
Canadian Affairs
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
American Express Company
Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank International
Advisory Committee
University Professor and Researcher, CNRS
(Centre National de Recherches Scientifiques)
Chairman, Bankers Trust Company
Governor, Central Bank of Turkey
Chairman of the Managing Board of Directors,
Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Chairman, S.G. Warburg Group pie
Vice Chairman, Kissinger Associates, Inc.;
Fonner Assistant to President Ford for National
Security Affairs
President, Amalgamated Clothing and Textile
Workers Union, AFL-CIO, CLC
Visiting Scholar, Research Institute on
International Change, Columbia University
Permanent Representative and Ambassador,
Delegation of Canada to the North Atlantic
Council
Editor-in-Chief, "Die Zeit"
Editor-in-Chief, "Corriere della Sera"
Minister of Trade and Industry
Head of the Directorate-General for Foreign
and Intra-German Relations, Development Policy
and External Security, Federal Chancellery
Ambassador to the U.S.S.R; Former Minister of
Defence
Professor of Economics, University of
Copenhagen
President, Austrian Trade Union
Member of Parliament; SPD Spokesman on
Foreign Affairs; Member, SPD Party Leadership
USA PAUL A. VOLCKER
AUS FRANZ VRANITZKY
UK WILLIAM WALDEGRAVE
NOR NIELS WERRING, JR*
USA LYNN R WILLIAMS*
USA JAMES D. WOLFENSOHN*
FRG OTTO WOLFF VON AMERONGEN**
USA WALTER B. WRISTON
SPA JUAN A. YANEZ-BARNUEVO
I
SPA EMILIO DE YBARRA Y CHURRUCA
ITA PAOLO ZANNONI*
AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMANN
RAPPORTEUR
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
IN ATTENDANCE
SPA JULIO C. ABREU
NETII SASKIA TEN ASBROEK
AUS DIEMUT KASTNER
USA CHARLES W. MULLER
• Member of the Steering Committee
Member of the Advisory Group
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AUS Austria
BEL Belgium
CAN Canada
DEN Denmark
FIN Finland
FRA France
FRG Federal Republic of Germany
GRE Greece
ICE Iceland
INT International
·Chairman, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.; Former
Chairman, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System
Federal Chancellor
Minister of State for Housing and Planning,
Department of the Environment
Chairman of the Board, With. Wilhelmsen
LimitedA/S
International President, United Steel Workers of
America
President, James D. Wolfensohn, Inc.
Chairman of the Supervisory Board, Otto Wolff
A.G.
Fonner Chairman, Citibank
Director, Department of International Affairs,
Office of the Prime Minister
Vice Chairman and Managing Director, Banco
de Bilbao
President, Fiat Washington, Inc.
Senior Advisor to the Managing Board of
Directors, Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Director, Wood, Struthers and Winthrop
Management Corporation
Director General, Central de Congresos;
Organizer 1989 Conference
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
Public Relations Department, Creditanstalt-
Bankverein; Organizer 1988 Conference
President, Murden & Company
ITA Italy
NETII Netherlands
NOR Norway
PRO Portugal
SPA Spain
SWE Sweden
SWI Switzerland
TUR Turkey
UK United Kingdom
USA United _States of America
13
Introductory Remarks
The world economy is doing quite well, despite all our worries about it.
In most parts of the· world, we have been seeing growth combined with some
greater stability in prices. The world economy has been growing for about
five and a half years, led mainly by the United States, but recently also by
Japan. Even in Europe the vital signs are somewhat stronger, although
unemployment remains high. The overall growth numbers also indicate the
directions of growth are becoming more appropriate. Export growth in the
U.S. has been around 15 percent in real terms in the last couple of years.
And we are beginning to see some stirrings of investment. We see, to some
extent, the opposite in other countries. Japan's growth is certainly spurred
by domestic expansion at this point; this is true to a lesser degree in
Europe.
Despite the protectionist pressures in the developed world, there are
some encouraging signs of openings of markets among the developing
countries in Asia and Latin America. Taiwan is a remarkable example, where
wages and growth are both increasing 10 to 12 percent a year, and prices
are stable.
There is no inherent reason why this growth cannot continue for
another three to five years. Indeed, there are some reasons to think that
one possible scenario will involve growth for an indefinite period, featured
by very strong increases in output in general in the U.S.
Despite these reasons for optimism, there is a pervasive air of
uncertainty and unease. This is justified. There is clear evidence of a~ fault
line running through the industrialized world economy. That ·fault line is
reflected in historically very large international imbalances, characterized
particularly by the $150 billion deficit in the U.S. external account and the
counterbalancing surpluses in Germany and Japan and some other countries.
As is always the case with huge international imbalances, there are
accompanying internal imbalances. That is certainly true in the U.S., but, for
all its relative decline in recent decades, the U.S. is still the largest, most
influential economic power in the world. What happens in the U.S. has a
large influence on the world economy in general. The fault line is very much
apparent in the U.S., and thus becomes a threat to the world economy if not
dealt with.
There is nothing new about all this; it was true two years ago. This
shows that economic fault lines, like geological ones, do not produce
earthquakes on schedule. The timing of the effects of these imbalances are
not predictable, but they are inevitable unless something is done. We are
not doing much about these problems at the moment, but we have the
capacity to do so.
From the American perspective, the problem is that we are spending
more than we are producing, and we are therefore importing the excess of
15
!
1·
about 3.5 percent of GNP. The difficulty lies in historically high levels of
consumption--both private and public--as a ratio of GNP.
As far as the domestic savings imbalance is concerned, we are saving
too little relative to demand. Savings in the U.S. have been chronically low.
Historically, for many years, the U.S. saved eight to nine percent of GNP.
That figure, low internationally, has been tending to decline in recent years.
We now have about a .seven percent savings capacity, and we have been
running a 3.5 percent government deficit that has to be financed one way or
another. It absorbs half our internal savings, in effect. The other 3.5
percent is clearly not enough to meet investment needs, even though they
have been running historically low--about seven percent. We've been
balancing the accounts by borrowing the other 3.5 percent abroad--50
percent of what we are saving, net, at home. This is not an indefinitely
sustainable situation when the consequence is a buildup in international
debt, which is now about $500 billion.
There is a new ingredient in the situation. Today, we are now spending
more than we can produce. With unemployment running below 5.5 percent--
the lowest in 15 years--we must be running close to the point where labor
markets themselves are going to get tight enough to produce inflationary
pressures if we continue to grow beyond our potential. Many of our
competitive export industries that have been doing well are at, or very close
to, capacity. These include wood products, many parts of the electronics
industry, large parts of the chemical industry, the aluminum industry, even
the steel and textile industries, where capacities have been reduced. There is
a limit on how fast we can increase our exports or our total production.
Looked at over a period of time, our growth potential is made up of the
increase in the labor force plus an increase in productivity, both of which
are increasing barely more than one percent a year. This is unlikely to
change dramatically. One percent a year increase in productivity and one
percent a year increase in the labor force produces a growth potential, with
full employment, of a little more than two percent a year. If we run our
economy for any period of time at more than two percent a year, the
inflationary threat becomes quite clear. To come close to balancing the
accounts, output could be increased at two percent a year for a couple of
years, with all of it devoted to external accounts and none to domestic
consumption. We are in an adjustment period, and it is going to take some
time to deal with it.
What, then, are the alternative ways of dealing with the world
economy? Some say the problem will go away in time, when our excess
capacity. and unemployment are utilized. That is not a sustainable position
because we are too close to capacity. No reasonable budgetary projection
says that future growth within our reasonable potential will generate enough
revenues to balance our internal budgetary account. Indeed, looking at the
spending side, there are at least as many pressures to increase spending
faster than the GNP as there are to reduce it. Attempting to positively spur
growth to deal with these problems would be likely to produce a recession
because doing so would produce inflationary threats in an already nervous
market, would send up interest rates, destabilize financial markets, and
create problems.
One approach to the balance of payments problem is to go protectionist
16
in a big way. That will do nothing to deal with the internal overspending
problem, would clearly be inflationary, would depress investment, and would
cause retaliation. In short, it would send the world into a tailspin.
Another approach would be to depreciate the dollar. There has already
been considerable depreciation of the dollar to the extent that it is now
competitive. The limitation on the U.S. trade position now is not that the
dollar is overvalued. We still have a considerable problem on the consumption
side which is a symptom of overspending. Wage levels in the U.S. per hour
are no higher than in Japan in manufacturing industries. We are potentially
competitive with Japan at current exchange rates. Even if that is proved not
to be true, this would still be the worst time to have a further depreciation
of the dollar, given its high inflationary potential relative to its potential to
expand exports. This would be a high-risk course in terms of precipitating a
recession. ,
Another alternative is to sit back, do nothing, and hope for the best--
the policy we have been following. A variant of it is to tighten monetary
policy to deal with the incipient or actual tendency to grow faster than our
potential. This apparently is going on, but it is a very difficult and delicate
exercise in current conditions. But monetary policy itself cannot deal with
the basic imbalance between savings and the demand for savings, except by
repressing investment, which is undesirable. If too little is done, it won't be
successful; if too much is done, given the vulnerability of markets, the
fragility of some institutions, and the debt situation, there is a danger of
precipitating a bigger reaction than one would want. There may not be an
even path between doing too little and doing too much.
Finally, there is the constructive, responsible course of action--
attacking the overspending and overconsumption at their source: the budget
and fiscal policy. We need to face up to this problem quickly. We may be
able to survive the fault line if there is confidence that the problem will be
dealt with over a three- to five-year period. That confidence depends on an
effective fiscal program being in place, which implies action on both the
spending side and the tax side. Looking at the budget, it is hard to see a
restraint on spending without doing something about entitlements, and it is
hard to see enough action there to close the deficit, which means taxes have
to be looked at. It is probably politically impossible and economically unwise
to touch the income tax; this leaves excise taxes, of which the most logical
is a $.50 a gallon gasoline tax, phased in over three or four years.·
We in the U.S. tend not to debate measures like this in political
campaigns, but _rather tci appoint commissions. We ought to take action, and
whether we do depends on whether the presidential candidates dig themselves
into positions during the campaign which makes it hard for them to act.
The U.S. economic position has eroded, and it is inevitable--and
perhaps not undesirable--that it will continue to erode in relative terms. It
is not inevitable, and it is positively undesirable to speed that process by
irresponsible economic policies. We need to do some minimum things that are
necessary to maintain leadership of the world's economy, such as funding
international institutions, maintaining consulates and embassies abroad,
paying our contribution to GATT, etc. All these pressures are complicated by
our failure to come to grips with the budgetary situation. It is very hard to
maintain positive world leadership on the foundation of a depreciating dollar
17
year after year. If the U.S. is going to provide a foundation for continuing
world leadership, it had better get after these problems.
Discussion
Divergent trends between Germany and the rest of Europe were seen as
a major cause of concern by an International participant who opened the
discussion. A balance of payments disequilibrium was building up that
threatened the adjustment process Europe was now in the midst of. The
most recent OECD forecasts showed Germany with a more than $40 billion
current-account surplus, while the rest of Europe would have a $35 billion
current-account deficit for 1988. This was because domestic demand had been
growing faster outside of Germany. It was not a new problem, but it was
one of great potential magnitude. To correct this disequilibrium, there would
have to be a 20 percent or greater upward realignment of the deutsche-
mark--a "frightening figure".
The movement toward the 1992 single market was an encouragingly
political development. But the inexorable building up of this disequilibrium
in Europe could lead to a breakdown of the EMS and might bring the single-
market movement to a halt. A key moment in the history of the EMS came
in 1983 when the French socialist government was forced to change to less
expansionary policies. This was in the interest of France and of Europe as a
whole because at the time there was a clear danger that inflation was going
to get out of control. We needed now to have a similar u-turn in German
economic policies--a substantial stimulant to domestic demand and substantial
readjustment of the deutschemark. But such a major change in German
policy did not seem very likely.
A German responded to this by saying that the situation in his country
was already improving. A 2.5 percent growth. rate was projected for the first
quarter of 1988. This improvement was due largely to an increase in domestic
demand, resulting from tax reform. The tax burden was being cut by $50
billion marks in a three-stage reform. Other programs were being reformed:
the social security and health systems, the postal authorities, etc. Germany
was going through a transitional phase, trying to take advance steps in
terms of cyclical development, looking toward the single market. Excessive
pessimism about the current situation was not justified.
A Belgian speaker said he was "flabbergasted" by the proposal to
revalue the deutschemark by 20 percent. He was not worried about imbal-
ances in Europe, and foresaw the convergence of European economic policies
through the E.C. toward more free-market policies. A Dane agreed that the
significance of the disequilibrium between Germany and the rest of Europe
was exaggerated. The implication of having more integrated markets in
Europe was that the overall current account position of Europe as a whole
had to be looked at. It was in approximate equilibrium in the sense that the
deficits that corresponded to the German surplus were fairly equally
distributed, and not, in themselves, unsustainable. Indeed, exchange rate
adjustments of the magnitude proposed to eliminate the German imbalance
18
were so large as to be incompatible with the single market.
Was the proposal for a u-turn in Germany the only remedy for the
imbalances, wondered a German. The 20 percent realignment would lead to
new difficulties and exacerbate old ones. For example, the need to reform
European agricultural policies would be greatly complicated by such a move.
The International speaker responded that, regarding the sustainability
of the European disequilibrium, Europe was only at the beginning of the
American adjustment. As the U.S. current account deficit decreased, large
adjustments would have to be made. The European deficits would not be
sustainable if the improvement in the American position fell on the deficit
countries and not the surplus countries. As to the improvement in the
German situation, it was encouraging, but it did rely to a great extent on
export demand from the rest of Europe. European hopes for monetary
integration were inconsistent with the existence of a payment disequilibrium
of the magnitude that now existed in Europe.
Turning to the U.S. budget, an American speaker said that the
situation, especially as seen by outsiders, was "awash in misconceptions". In
the U.S., budget projections were seen as though "chiselled in stone".
Accounting for funds was "atrociously simplistic"; there was neither gap
accounting nor a capital budget. Gramm-Rudman had been somewhat effective
in creating some additional discipline, and had slowed pressures for spending.
But deficits continued, and had to be financed.
A "large and ominous" budget difficulty lay ahead in the form of social
security. The changes recommended by the 1982 commission had produced
increasing current surpluses in the amount of social security tax income. It
had been suggested that social security tax surpluses could finance all of
the current deficits and some of the current debt in a few years. There
could be conflicting pressures to either reduce social security taxes, stay the
current course, or change the assignment of social security funds. Therein
lay the potential for handling current deficits by cutting into the entitlement
programs in a way that might be politically feasible. But the risk of
financing debt using surplus social security taxes was that the social
security fund could become depleted in 30 to 40 years.
Another American wondered what was so bad about the increasing·
social security surplus. The response was that it was not necessarily bad at
all. Some scenarios suggested that the large burden on the system when the
baby boomers retired could even be handled without reducing the surplus.
But, if it was used to finance the deficit, and then the period of high
demand came, there could be some difficult problems for future budget
makers.
Beyond the particular problems confronting the U.S. and Europe
respectively, participants discussed a range of more general economic issues,
including trade and protectionism, exchange rates, unemployment, and world
economic leadership.
Concerns about unemployment
American. The Austrian speaker felt
were voiced by an Austrian and
that there was not enough attention
19
being paid to full employment. In Europe, there was some growth, and, at
the same time, historically high levels of unemployment. How could we go
about achieving higher employment? What kind of role could new develop-
ments in work and labor in our societies play? We needed new strategies to
fmd new sources of work, employment, and growth. The American interjected
that, in the American steel industry, for example, unemployment was worse
than the figures indicated because many steelworkers were on early
retirement, with inadequate income.
Responding to the problem of unemployment in Europe, an American
admitted that Europe faced difficulties. The U.S. was going to have to deal
with its current account deficit by increasing manufacturing output by 15 to
20 percent (about $200 billion). On the opposite side, Europe and the rest of
the world would have to absorb increased exports. To deal with the
unemployment problem, there would have to be expansion, against pressure to
increase output fast enough to reduce unemployment, while the U.S. was
pushing $200 billion of manufactured goods onto world markets. Unemploy-
ment in Europe could not be dealt with by rapidly increasing manufacturing
production. The increase would have to come in domestic growth.
Several speakers wondered what would happen to the level of the
dollar. Would there have to be further adjustment? Did we need some
mechanism to insure its stability? An American's response to the first
question was that, while most econometric equations said the dollar would
have to go down another 20 percent, this would be counterproductive. The
dollar ought to be competitive at its current level. As to the second
question, we ought collectively to do something to get greater stability in
exchange rates. Rates had been unstable for 15 years, although inflation
rates had converged.
A French speaker asked whether the protectionist danger had been
contained. Was there any danger of the next U.S. president moving in that
direction? Or would we see a move away from multilateralism toward
bilateralism, perhaps on a continental basis? An American answered that he
thought protectionism was contained, but that, if there was a recession, it
would resurface very strongly. And there was perhaps a movement away from
multilateralism. More bilateralism, with regional arrangements, was a
dangerous tendency, because of the potential for protectionist blocs to arise.
It was a problem we ought to be dealing with.
As to the possibility of the U.S. entering at least a mild recession, the
American speaker said he saw no classic cyclical causes of recession on the
horizon. The U.S. was not overinventoried, not overinvested, and interest
rates were not going up. There seemed potentially to be a recovery starting.
Asked whether the October 19 crash had been forgotten, the speaker said
that that seemed to be the case. The crisis had passed, and no action had
been taken. He warned that a repeat performance could be worse.
Some fundamental questions about world economic leadership were posed
by an Italian. The U.S. seemed to have abandoned its traditional role of a
nation capable of and willing to guarantee world economic stability. Was this
concept still valid? Could and should the U.S. resume that role? Could any
other nation assume it? Was the mechanism of economic coordination by the
20
Group of Seven a substitute, or a figleaf to hide the lack of leadership?
In light of developments in the Soviet Union and the resulting
possibility that the Russians might cease to be the common enemy that had
united us in the past, wondered an American, might there not be some
fundamental changes in the way we ran our economies? Could we maintain
our defense budgets? Could the U.S. justify foreign aid, support of NATO,
SDI, the space program, if there was no common· enemy?
In another American's view, no other nation was strong enough to
guarantee world economic stability. The U.S. was lightening its own burden
too quickly to provide a feeling of confidence that there would be sufficient
effort in the world to reflect the collective interest in stability. No other
country could be a substitute. As for the Group of Seven, the U.S. had to
strongly chair it, or it would become a figleaf. But it was true that it would
be harder to take strong leadership if there was no common enemy.
21
II. HOW TO HANDLE A WORLD AWASH
WITH PRIVATE AND PUBLIC DEBT?
Working Paper
Some Ideas on How to Solve the Debt Crisis
A critical appraisal of the debt crisis must first examine how it arose,
because its causes offer a key to its solution.
The fact that we have now been confronted for six years with an
unusual accumulation of financial liabilities in many Third World countries,
especially in Latin America, and have observed the emergence of a widening
of the discrepancy between debt size and debt-service capacity, has its
deeper roots in the two oil-price hikes of the '70's. The effects of these
price hikes on the debt problem complex are, however, varied.
After the first oil shock, the world financial system was in danger of
getting into almost insoluble difficulties, because massive amounts of so-
called "petro dollars" - hundreds of billions - began to accumulate in the
OPEC states, but could only be partly spent there, whereas they were
urgently needed elsewhere in the world for the financing of growth.
This raised the problem of recycling: the funds not used by the oil-
producing countries had to be recycled back to the places where they were
needed. This task, which, had it not been solved, would have caused the
collapse of the world financial system and a world-wide depression, was
assumed by the international commercial banks - in most cases voluntarily,
but in some cases ·under strong political pressure.
In this process, the extension of loans to or the arrangement of bond
issues for today's debtor countries did not - as is frequently asserted - take
place without due consideration, but - at least in the vast majority of cases
- on the basis of careful creditworthiness checks. The assumptions on which
these checks were based at the time were as follows: The borrowing
countries would achieve above-average economic expansion - developing and
newly industrializing countries! In the course of this dynamic growth process
they would continuously restructure their economic and social systems, away
from central administration towards more market-oriented structures with a
broad-based stratum of efficient small and medium-sized industrial enter-
prises.
. That these assumptions were not unjustified is shown by the develop-
ment performance in a number of countries: in the decade from 1970-1980,
Latin America reported an average annual growth rate of 6%, with Brazil
(8.5% p.a.) and Mexico (6.5% p.a.) at the top of the list, as well as Chile ( +
7.5% p.a.) in the second half of the '70's; Venezuela achieved +4%, while
Argentina was an exception with +2.5% p.a.; Nigeria recorded +4.5% p.a.,
although with strong fluctuations.
So, by and large, the growth process was well established. This is why
a large portion of the loans - most of those sourced in the Federal Republic
22
- were linked with exports to the LDC's: buyer loans, sometimes in
conjunction with local cost financings, played an important role. In this
respect, the readiness of the international banks to provide credit also
represented financial support for their respective domestic export industries
(good examples are the nuclear-power station agreements between the
Federal Republic and Brazil, the building of the Itaipu hydro-electric power
station, and the construction and extension of car factories, etc.).
In addition to this, the process of economic restructuring had already
begun in the debtor countries. It promised to gain momentum as growth
gathered speed. (Argentina's Minister for Economic Affairs, Martinez de Hoz,
was awarded the title of Finance Minister of the Year in 1978.)
The whole of Latin America was regarded as the "continent of the
future", with great potential and resources.
This process of eFonomic growth and restructuring, which was well
under way, was interrupted when the second oil-price hike came in 1978/79.
In the wake of the world economic recession, which now set in, the
assumptions on which international lending had been based lost their
validity: expansion did not continue, at least not on the scale which debt
service and on-going restructuring would have called for. In Latin America,
real GNP shrank by 1.3% annually from 1981 to 1983. Consequently, debtor
countries steadily lost creditworthiness. The crisis erupted in 1982 with
Mexico. Since then it has kept busy all those involved: IMF, World Bank, the
Paris Club, the regional development banks, central banks, the governments
of debtor countries and, last but not least, the commercial banks.
The first approach to solving the problem comprised three phases. In
the first phase, the debtor countries were to be placed in a position to
sustain interest service payments. The (American) banks were particularly
interested in this, because otherwise they would have been forced to
promptly form provisions on their claims to the debit of their profit and loss
accounts. The borrowers were therefore given "fresh money" which they used
for part of their interest payments.
The second phase, in addition to "fresh money" injections, was (and is)
centered on the so-called "rescheduling": the terms of the loans are extended
in order to reduce the annual financial burden on the debtors. Linked with
this was - and is - the hope that interest rates would fall in the wake of
reduced rates of world economic expansion. In conjunction with the resulting .
fall in their financial burden, the debtor countries were to apply an
economic policy that would allow them to regain their creditworthiness. This
conditionality was introduced into all negotiations on fresh money and
rescheduling.
In the third phase, the debtor countries were then to return to the
international financial markets on the basis of their new creditworthiness
and obtain again "regular" financing.
This third phase has not yet been reached. We are still in phase 2. It
is proving vastly more difficult than first expected. There are many reasons
for this. The main ones are as follows:
1. Each "country case" is different: Brazil's economic problems are
different from those of Argentina, which in turn are different from those in
Mexico, in Chile, etc. The so-called "case-by-case" approach is therefore
23
essential, as it allows one to take account of the individual circumstances.
2. There is a similar individuality on the creditor side, especially with
regard to the creditor banks or groups of banks. There are at least three
groups to be distinguished here:
- the Continental European banks:
They began at a very early stage to form provisions for their
claims on countries with payment difficulties. These value
adjustments represent, as a rule, deductible expense items and
have meanwhile reached considerable magnitudes - up to 50% or
more.
the American and British banks:
They began much later on to provision for their claims. This is
why they have not, in general, reached a level comparable with
that of the continental Europeans. Moreover, their provisions are
tax deductible only to a very small extent (U.S.) or on a case-
by-case basis (U.K.); in the U.S., they represent part of the
primary capital.
- the Japanese banks:
They are only just starting with their provisioning. Their
provisions, too, are not - or only to a very small extent - tax
deductible.
So far the legitimate need to respect solidarity amongst the interna-
tional financial community has made the banks dependent on the "weakest
link in the chain". To overcome this, the variety of tax law and commercial
law regimes should, as far as possible, be harmonized and differentiated
approaches developed, thus allowing banks to decide in accordance with their
specific situation (menu approach).
3. With regard to the call for appropriate economic policies on the part
of the debtor countries, the initial opinion was that, owing to the lack of
proportion between debt size - inflated steadily by fresh money - and debt-
service capacity, austerity policy and belt tightening were the right recipe.
The belief was that this would free resources for the debt service. No
alternative to such a type of conditionality was put forward until 1986, when
the so-called Baker Initiative came to the fore, which has been adopted in a
few instances (notably in the Mexico package of 1986/87, and in 1987 in the
financing programme for Argentina).
This initiative of the American Secretary of the Treasury was based
on the valid insight that the problems faced by the debtor countries could
only find their solution in an environment of economic expansion. Secretary
Baker therefore called for a policy of growth stimulation rather than
austerity and the provision of fresh money to finance this growth.
In principle, this view is right. Just as the industrialized nations cannot
solve their difficulties without economic growth, so too will the developing
24
and newly industrializing countries not be in a position to solve their
problems without expansion. They must return to the growth path which they
were following in the '70's and which is the only basis on which they will
be able to reorientate their economic and social structures towards greater
efficiency without undue social and political tension. Only economic
expansion will prevent the "zero sum game" in the national and international
distribution process.
The Western creditors must support the efforts made in this connection.
With regard to indebtedness, this support can only relate to the three
criteria which define any debt:
- size of the debt,
the level of the interest rate and the spread,
- the maturity.
The theoretical possibilities derived from these criteria are as follows:
- with regard to the size of the debt, either an increase by means
of fresh money
or a
reduction by means of debt forgiveness;
with regard to the level of interest rates and the spreads, either a
reduction of the interest rates
and/or a
reduction of the spreads;
- with respect to maturities, stretching them.
Additional alternatives would be to change the currencies in which the
debts are denominated and to change the type of interest rate (fixed into
floating, or vice versa).
All these possibilities have already surfaced in the models developed
hitherto for solving the problem, most recently a case of debt forgiveness in
favor of a debtor in the latest Mexico proposal. Debt/equity swaps, which
convert claims into equity capital, have played an increasing role in the
recent past.
The fact that despite all the efforts we have still not really come any
closer to solving the debt problem is due primarily to two things:
1. The principal debtor countries do not have a healthy economic
policy which above all would be conducive to induce the repatriation of
flight capital on the basis of regained confidence in the domestic economy.
Whatever approaches to a solution are developed on the financial side, they
won't offer any real help unless the debtor countries "put their own house
in order".
2. The world economy has too many trade barriers impeding the free
exchange of goods and services according to the principle of comparative
cost advantages. This is an obstacle for the debtor countries to earn the
25
foreign exchange they need for their debt service obligations by exporting to
our markets. Even if appropriate financial solutions are found and the debtor
countries do pursue the right policies, this will not be sufficient to overcome
the debt crisis if we do not open up completely our markets to the countries
with payment difficulties. This is why the present GATT round has great
importance, or at any rate an importance which deserves greater attention
than it is presently receiving.
Taking all these points together, the following debt strategy can be
recommended:
All parties involved - debtors, World Bank, Fund, creditor governments
and banks - should develop a framework for a period of say, 5-6 years, in
order to finally avoid the need for hectic debt renegotiations at shortening
intervals. Within such a horizon, the financial needs of debtor countries
should be met by the official institutions and the banks on a "fair burden-
sharing" basis, on condition that appropriate economic adjustment procedures
are implemented.
The role of the banks within such a scheme of "phased conditionality"
would be to provide new flows and - when appropriate - to make conces-
sions on the conditions of the old debt.
Although they increase the size of the debt, new flows are essential
for debtor countries and their future capability to grow out of their debt.
But new bank credits should under no circumstances be used for balance of
payments financing; they should be provided in two different forms only:
1. Parallel and co-financings (mainly with the World Bank)
2. Trade finance, even medium-term.
The first form is to be found in the 86/87 Mexican package, the second
in the 87 Argentine package. For Brazil's 86/89 programme both forms are
envisaged. In concentrating on such models the banks would basically return
to the classical forms which prevailed prior to the recycling of oil money.
In certain cases, the optimal combination of instruments may also have
to include elements which imply more or less direct forms of partial
forgiveness - which simply means help, resulting in debt reduction. In this
context, market-related options are conversion into bonds along the lines of
the recent Mexican model, debt/equity swaps and debt-for-goods schemes (a
bank sells LDC loans to an importer whose claims are then paid in goods),
as well as voluntary models for the repurchase of old debt by the govern-
ment/central bank of the debtor country or the original obligor itself.
The issue of direct partial forgiveness on capital - which means a "cut"
into the existing system of LDC claims - is much more delicate. It would
only - if at all - be conceivable where very poor countries are concerned.
Also, the general question always remains whether it will be possible, in
view of strategic interests, to motivate common action by all creditors
involved in a transaction.
Even if, for most countries, the burden resulting from repayment of
capital is being deferred through MYRA's until well into the nineties or even
26
beyond the year 2000, interest still has to be paid on such liabilities.
Therefore, concessions with respect to interest burdens or to interest
payment modalities are a very relevant issue. This makes it all the more
regrettable that diverse versions of interest capitalization and capping are
still resisted determinedly by the majority of creditor banks, restricting their
own room for maneuver in this way. However, depending on the merits of
the particular case and under strict conditionality, such concessions would
appear to be more negotiable than partial forgiveness on capital.
High priority must therefore be given to the creation of mechanisms
which guarantee stabilization and limitation of developing countries' interest
payments. The IMF Interim Committee's recent approval of a "Compensatory
Contingency Financing Facility" (CCFF), covering erratic interest rate
movements besides commodity price declines, lower export volume and
natural disasters, is a step in the right direction. Alternatively, debtor
countries might be sheltered more effectively from external interest rate
shocks by a special Interest Compensation Fund (ICF):
Such a fund would support eligible developing countries which are
committed to an approved adjustment program and which are hit by
interest rates exceeding a preagreed level. The ICF would be financed
jointly by governments, international financial institutions, and banks
(e.g. on the basis of their respective exposure .to .the debtor). The
management would lie with the IMF. The ICF would bring about a more
reliable basis for the debtor countries' budget planning and might
represent an incentive to all creditor countries to pursue a monetary
policy conducive to keeping worldwide interest rates down, as utiliza-
tion of the fund would then be correspondingly low.
Within this whole scenario, it is evident that even more attention must
be drawn to the time factor as a basic criterion for a meaningful solution:
in fact, since the outbreak of the debt crisis, original maturities have been
stretched by extending consolidation periods (on average from 1-1/2 to 4
years), repayment periods (from 6 to 15 years) as well as grace periods
(from 3 to 5 years).
Therefore, it is a dictate of reason
to design economic adjustment policy programmes for problem
countries under the leadership of the official multinational institu-
tions covering periods of at least five years and
to make a serious attempt to deduce from that the time profile of
the debtor countries' financial needs as well as the respective
allocation to the creditors. The latter should - at least as far as
banks are concerned - be enabled to choose among different forms
of assistance within a scheme of phased conditionality. (By the way,
concessions on interest may be staggered and confined to certain
periods - as an additional motivation for domestic efforts - with the
proviso of a return to terms previously agreed with the banks,
should economic conditions improve to a certain degree.)
27
.l"... ~:-'~,
"'
In addition to a broadened spectrum of instrumental options for banks,
another key element of a renewed debt strategy is the cooperation between
World Bank and IMF: their programmes and monitoring procedures have to be
compatible with each other within a multi-year dynamic setting, designed
also with a view to long~term adjustment in addition to reviews repeated at
rather short intervals; they would have to be actively supported by the
countries concerned if meaningful results were to be expected.
We have to be aware, however, that the adjustment programme as
outlined above is likely to meet with implementation problems. It might
therefore be envisaged that banks, jointly with the World Bank, the Fund
and creditor governments build up model debtors serving as test cases.
Depending on the individual case, this task could be performed by existing
Advisory Committees or new Consultative Groups which would develop and
process a renewed or enhanced debt strategy.
The application of any such strategy will, however, only meet with
success if the debtor countries observe the following prerequisites:
Sound economic
also measurable
Institutions.
policies: i.e., not merely declarations of intent, but
results, stated by certificates of the Bretton Woods
Compliance with obligations (depending on the case: if necessary,
previous arrangements may be reshaped by mutual agreement between
the parties; under no circumstances should arrangements be broken
by unilateral debtor action).
Steady, smooth and undisturbed cooperation with the banks, the
World Bank, the Fund and creditor governments.
These measures and attitudes would be to the benefit of all parties
involved.
Of course, all this also presupposes disciplined monetary, fiscal and
trade policies of the industrial countries. Otherwise, open-minded politicians
in the problem countries would be additionally hindered from gaining
acceptance for their structural adjustment policies at home.
Introductory Remarks
I.
We are no closer to finding any solution to the international debt
crisis. We are confronted with an extremely complex problem which cannot
easily be solved. Calling for leadership as the answer implies that there
might be an easy solution, which there is not. Any solution has to be very
thoroughly worked out on a cooperative basis by politicians, economists, and
bankers.
28
The problem is characterized by completely different conditions in the
various countries, and different circumstances with the creditor banks. There
are completely different situations in Europe, the U.S., and Japan; this is
why it is so difficult to find a consensus. Whenever we have tried to find a
consensus in past years, we have fQund we are dependent on the weakest
link in the chain--the American banks. So, a general solution cannot be
found.
In Washington, administration officials insist there can be no bailing
out of the banks. In Europe--Germany especially--this kind of talk does not
exist because the tax system is different. In the U.S., while the government
is willing to share in the banks' profits, they are not willing to share in
their losses. The difficulty in finding a general approach has led us to the
menu approach that takes into account the different situations of the
co~tries and the creditor banks. As to the latter, the issue of tax
deductibility is paramount.
What could be worked out as a general approach is an offer to any
debtor country that qJialifies. It would have to be defined what this means.
Whatever solution is worked out will not be possible without applying
reasonable economic policies. Such policies will differ from country to
country. So the case-by-case approach will be necessary in the context of
qualification.
Even if we found a suitable menu approach and even it if was based on
reasonable economic policies applied by the various countries, the solution
still would not be possible without the industrialized countries opening their
markets. The debtor countries are dependent on export opportunities, which
can only be provided by our own economies. Hence, the ongoing GATT round
deserves more attention than it is getting.
Aside from the relatively narrow economic aspect, geopolitical judg-
ment is needed to approach the problem of debt. Three main criteria have to
be taken into account in order to see the geopolitical consequences of
failure to solve the problem. First, why do we not make use of the huge
growth potential we have in the debtor countries? Doing so would have an
immediate impact on the U.S. export performance, eE:pecially in the Latin
American countries. Second, we need to deal with unstable democracies in
Latin America. For example, the former Argentine finance minister has said
that, if the Peronists take over, they will renounce all debts. It is in our
interest to help these countries stabilize their democratic structures.
This brings up the point of the time frame. We tend often to be
impatient. We talk about problems, structures, and solutions, but not about
the time frame in which the solutions can be achieved. We have to be more
patient and take into account that all the approaches we take have
structural consequences. This means we have to deal with long-term
perspectives. We must, therefore, start as quickly as possible.
Thirdly, any economy and society can be defined and characterized by
how it deals with the uncertainty of the future. We have to structure our
societies and economies in a way that enables them to adjust as flexibly and
quickly as possible. What we have been doing over the last ten years is
quite the opposite. By state interventions, by debt, we have made our
structures more inflexible than flexible.
Taking into account that there is an unutilized growth potential, that
29
· - - - - - - - - - ·<·c- :a-'."';:;~"-'~""'""'""'T'.,,,--~•--
.. -'1'1""';';-~,.·-·~-
we have to deal with unstable democracies, that we have to be able to
adjust as quickly as possible, we must cooperatively seek a solution by
means of new approaches.
Introductory Remarks
II.
The notion of a world awash in debt does not seem totally accurate.
There are of course some major areas in the world economy that are awash
in debt, but there are others where tremendous progress is being made. For
example, the U.S. farm debt problem has gradually been dissolved in the last
five years. Major developing countries such as India are making progress
with very low growth in their external indebtedness. A number of countries
at the leading edge of economic growth, such as Spain and Korea, are
making tremendous reductions in their debt right now. The Latin American
debt is a perennial problem; it has been around since 1821. We will solve in
·some fashion or another the present cycle in the debt crisis there, but we
are bound to have another crisis by the end of the century.
The debt strategy that was adopted in 1982 was clearly the correct one.
There were three elements to it. The debtor countries, which were all
middle-level income countries at around $2,000 to $4,000 per capita, with
advanced urban industrial sectors, had to reform. The second ingredient was
that there had to be the continuation of some credit from the outside. The
third was world economic growth in order to enable them to expand their
exports.
To some extent, all three elements have happened. But they haven't
happened quite to the extent that was envisaged. On the credit side, the
external credit flows fell off quite rapidly after the initial emergency
financial packages were put together, and they were not made up by credit
from the World Bank. Indeed, the World Bank in the last couple of years has
had a barely perceptible resource transfer to the area, as has the Inter-
American Development Bank. Major countries like Brazil have been net
payers of flows to the World Bank. So the multilateral development banks
have, for many reasons, failed so far in helping the strategy.
·As far as world economic growth is concerned, it has been only
moderate--the lowest growth of the last four decades, around 2.5 percent
per year. There has been a major slowdown, which has in turn led to a
slowdown in commodity usage. Therefore, the exports of the debtor countries
have not gone up in value terms. One criticism that can be made of the
economic aspects of the strategy is that the exports that were supposed to
pay the way out of the crisis were taking place in a very soft commodity
market. As a result, although Latin America has expanded its exports by
about 25 percent in the last six years, the value has stayed flat, and,
including the oil countries, has in fact gone down.
The third problem that has emerged is that some banks took too long
in protecting their balance sheets against possible future losses. This was
not entirely their fault, especially in the U.S., where the tax treatment of
30
loan losses is highly unfavorable. Governments were; on the one hand, urging
the banks to continue lending, but, on the other, were not helping them to
face .the problems these loans pose.
The Latin American Debt Story: 64 Numbers from the IMF
est.
1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987
Real per capita GDP(% change) 3.7 -1.9 -3.2 -5.0 1.31 A 2.2 1.6
Inflation (CPI % change) 54 59 68 106 128 149 87 118
Terms of trade (% change) 7.2 -4.l -5.4 -2.7 3.5 -1.9 -12.2 -2.5
Exports (f.o.b., $ bn.) 94 100 90 92 102 96 80 89
Imports (f.o.b., $ bn.) 97 105 85 64 65 63 64 70
External debt outstanding
($ bn. year-end) 231 288 333 344 362 371 391 421
Debt as % of exports of
goods & services 183 210 273 292 277 299 361 362
Debt service ratio as % of
exports of goods and services 34 42 51 45 42 43 51 55
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook, October 1987, statistical appendix
tables. These data differ in amount, but not trend, from those in the earlier
chapters of the book, largely because of different definitions.
Where are we now? Comparing in the table above, the last three lines
of 1982 with the last three of 1987, bearing in mind. that each country is
different, it can be seen that external debt outstanding, which was roughly
$330 billion at the end of 1982 is now roughly $100 billion larger. Most of
the difference has gone to pay part of the interest burden. Also, debt as a
percentage of exports has increased quite rapidly--from 270 percent to about
360 percent. As a result, the debt service ratio has stayed quite constant,
but with a tendency to rise. This underlines the vulnerability of this debt to
increases in dollar interest rates. About 75 percent of the debt is at floating
rates, and any increase in interest rates has an immediate adverse conse-
quence on the debt-service ratio. In 1986 and 1987, roughly one percentage
point amounts to three percentage points of export earnings.
Against all this, there has been major progress in starting to restruc-
ture world economies. One of the driving forces behind this has been the
establishment of programs in some countries to convert debt to equity. This
has been especially successful in Chile, and is beginning to happen in
Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina. Monetary economists criticize debt-equity
swaps as inflationary, but this is not really a valid objection.
There has been a significant start in privatizing and reform of tax
systems and exchange systems in a number of countries. Argentina is now
selling part of its airline, is preparing to sell half of its phone company, and
is going to sell the merchant fleet. These are healthy developments. Another
important development is increased awareness in the U.S. especially of the
cost to U.S. exporters of the continued depression in Latin America.
Looking to where we are going, it is true that there is no single
solution. The governments in Latin America have to be key participants in
31
sorting out the problem. They have in the past conducted policies, such as
erratic exchange rates and capricious tax administration, which encouraged
capital flight. Latin Americans today--especially Mexicans, Venezuelans,
Argentineans, Colombians, and Peruvians--have about $250 billion invested
outside. Governments need to provide the conditions to repatriate not the
principal, but even half the interest, which is about $10 billion annually.
This would, more than anything else, solve the problem by bridging the gap
in order to have some growth.
Some basic questions are not being posed. Should there be debt relief?
Should governments help? Should the relief be through direct or indirect
fiscal support? What do the World Bank and the Inter-American Development
Bank have to do with all this? The question of general relief is a thorny
one, and systems of generalized relief will encourage more default. Some of
the schemes that have been proposed have said we need to proceed case-by-
case. The problem in Latin America is that the first case will set the tone
for all the others, and, when something is done for Argentina, then Brazil
will want the same thing, and so on.
Any scheme that provides relief has to have as a centerpiece that, if
there is a way in which banks can, for a time, pass on to the debtors the
reserves that they have created--that is, discount the debt for a period--
then the banks must be given an upside. If they are to discount the
outstanding amounts of their loans, they ought to be able to get the
difference back. If banks give relief to Mexico, for example, which has oil
exports at $12 a barrel now, why should the banks not benefit when Mexico,
at some point in the future, is exporting its oil at $50 a barrel? There has
to be some scheme of that type. And for that scheme to be credible, an
international agency like the IMF or the World Bank has to control it, so
that there is discipline. Otherwise, the major banks will suffer, and the
money-center banks will be imperiled.
The World Bank is an essential element in any strategy. But the World
Bank was created in a period when public investment was the top priority.
This has now changed; Latin America has a pretty good infrastructure. What
Latin America needs now is working capital, maintenance, and private
investment. The World Bank is not organized to provide that. It needs some
major internal changes, not just a reorganization. What the role of the
institution really is needs to be examined.
Discussion
Opening the discussion, an American expressed his whole-hearted
agreement with the prescriptions set forth in the working paper. In seeking
a solution to the debt problem, it was particularly important to tie the
various elements of a solution together--trade, debt, GATI, the opening of
markets, etc. This would help avoid a case-by-case approach from becoming
a generalized approach in terms of every country wanting the same
treatment. If debt and trade were brought together, a solution that was
attractive to one country might not be so attractive to another.
32
I
I
lf
i
The creation of an international debt facility was a particularly
important step--more so than the details of financing debt relief. Such a
facility should be a joint venture between the World Bank and the IMF.
It was imperative to focus on the various suggestions and options for
solving the debt problem and how they related to different countries. The
Baker Plan had fallen short in terms of bringing in net new monies. New
monies had been available only under duress and as part of reschedulings.
International institutions had not been participating to the extent they
should; they had to become involved to a greater extent by providing co-
financings and guarantees. The agenda of the upcoming Toronto summit
meeting should include the whole question of debt and its relation to
security and stability around the world.
A German speaker asserted that the debt issue would indeed be on the
Toronto agenda. He worried that the importance of the issue was being
underestimated in many industrialized countries. The sense of frustration and
spirit of resignation in Africa and Latin America was increasing, and the
result would be much more expensive for the West in economic terms than
coming forward with solutions now. We had, in effect, to make "advance
payments on a better future". Our aim should be to create greater stability
and promote growth in the developing countries, and we needed to do so in
the same spirit of cooperation that characterized the Marshall Plan.
An American agreed, stressing that governments had to get involved in
the solution. We had reached the point where banks could no longer put
forward technical solutions. There was a limit to what could be asked of
profit-making institutions. Governments, not the banks, were responsible for
conducting foreign policy. There, too, was a limit to the concessions that
governments in the developing countries could make to private institutions,
and to international institutions that operated on primarily technical criteria.
What was needed was a recognition by governments that the problem of
growth was not merely a question of helping developing countries, but of
maintaining the stability of the international order. Governments had to
demonstrate their interest in promoting growth in the developing countries.
Arrangements had to be negotiated on a basis that rewarded performance.
Reforms were more likely to happen in response to a generous proposal. Our
challenge was to find a balance between providing enough incentives but not
taking on all the responsibility. Government participation in solving the debt
problem would be forced upon us anyway; a strong case could be made for
doing immediately what we would ultimately be forced to do.
A German speaker emphasized that the debtor countries, too, had
responsibilities in achieving a solution. Many of them had been pursuing
unwise, unacceptable policies. Capital flight was a particular problem. A
Dutchman agreed, saying that the amounts involved were "massive".
Returning these flows would reduce the debt problem to manageable terms
and would also affect the willingness of banks, governments, and interna-
tional institutions to act. How could such prescriptions as debt reduction and
new loans be advanced while the doors in these countries remained open to
capital flight? Conversely, the lender countries should take action to prevent
the inflow of these funds.
33
Many of the debtor countries had only the behavior of their govern-
ments to blame for their economic difficulties, agreed an American. Latin
America, in particular, had an enormous amount of capital outside, and
considerable corruption at high levels of government. It was not a poor area
and had the capacity to grow. Any plan to aid these debtor countries had to
include incentives for the return of outside money, which was a huge
proportion of total savings.
A German participant sought to put the problem of capital flight in
perspective. It really was a result of the underlying economic problems of
these countries. They had no well-functioning capital markets or banking
systems, both of which were essential to avoid capital flight. There was also
a lack of confidence in these countries' economic development.
Several participants acknowledged the political difficulties of achieving
a solution to the debt problem. The notion of the developed countries
rewarding the debtor countries for good behavior was bound to be politically
awkward. Rather, the approach should be based on the idea of partnership.
An American doubted that Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico would be able
to resist indefinitely the "demagogic impulse" to confront the banks. Some
had cited Brazil as an example that this could be avoided, but the only thing
Brazil showed was that a weak president would not confront the U.S.
Another American felt that there was too much gloom in the discussion
about Latin America. It was true that many African countries would not be
able to service their debt. But, under reasonable assumptions about growth,
open markets, commodity prices, etc., Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Mexico,
Chile, and possibly Argentina ought to be able to service their debt. A
German responded that this was only because we provided fresh money.
In response to one participant's call for "more courage and determina-
tion from the banks", a number of speakers addressed the role of the banks
in the debt problem. Said a Spaniard, it was political pressure on the banks
in the late seventies and early eighties to recycle petrodollars that led them
to undertake huge risks with developing countries. But the banks were left
with the responsibility of having made the loans and the necessity of finding
a solution. That solution could only come through a sizeable reduction of
debt to a level where it could be serviced on a normal basis, where markets
would begin to regain confidence, and where funds would once again start to
flow to the developing countries. This solution, in turn, depended on the
ability of the American Banks, especially, to increase the size of their
provisions for these loans to a point where a major debt forgiveness was
possible and did not threaten the stability of the banking system. Nor could
the banks reasonably expect to recover in the future any part of the debt
that was forgiven.
In a Swiss speaker's view, the banks were in a dilemma. Their primary
responsibility was to their shareholders, their depositors, and the public in
general. It was their job to make sound loans. If they had loans which were
not sound, they had to reduce those loans. Meanwhile, the debtor countries
needed more money. But the banks, under the present circumstances, were
not in a position to do more. Banks could reasonably be asked to extend the
maturities of the principal of old debts over long periods of time. As for
34
interest, why should debtor countries not be treated like corporations--defer
interest in the lean years, but make them pay up in the good years?
An American observed that debt forgiveness or debt moratoria had a
"superficial appeal", but would have the result that debtor countries in the
future would not have access to capital markets and loans. A German was
not concerned about this, saying that, as soon as a country regained its
creditworthiness, the banks themselves would welcome it back to the credit
markets. This had happened with China, even though the Chinese government
after World War II had declared all debt wiped out.
The emphasis on trade as being part of any solution to the debt crisis
was welcomed by a Canadian speaker. In his view, it was particularly
important that progress be made at the current Uruguay Round of GAIT
negotiations. Developing cotintries were at the table for the first time, and
saw this round as an opportunity for economic advancement. It was also
necessary to deal with capital flows at the same time as trade negotiations.
Unless effective measures to improve capital flows were found, the Uruguay
Round was liable to end in stalemate.
An Austrian wondered if assuring increased market access to developing
countries was enough. Should further measures be undertaken, such as giving
developing countries a stronger position through new preferential arrange-
ments like non-reciprocal trade arrangements?
A speaker from the Netherlands felt that the trade issue was compli-
cated by the low level of prices of agricultural commodities as the result of
the agricultural policies of the E.C., the U.S., and Japan. Developing
countries had no chance to use agricultural commodity exports to repay their
debts. This called for a "braver approach" by the West to agricultural
policies.
An American worried about focusing on trade as the only or primary
means of dealing with the debt question. This could result in pressure to
lower standards--wages and working conditions--within the developed
countries as they sought to compete in world markets.
A Turkish speaker cautioned that "too much intellectual effort" was
being paid to the problems of the debtor countries, too much. focus on the
non-performers at the possible expense of the performers. In this context,
Turkey was a performer. Since 1980, it had opened up its economy,
liberalized trade, and made structural adjustments; it thus had access to
international capital markets. But Turkey still had problems. Of its $7.3
billion in debt service in 1988, $2 billion would be paid to OECD govern-
ments or their agencies. It was important that any scheme of generalized
debt relief not penalize such performing countries as Turkey. For example, a
prohibition on new bank credits for balance of payments financing would be
harmful to Turkey. The international banking community should be aware of
the differing needs of different countries.
35
It was an American participant's view that, before the West could
effectively tackle the debt problem in developing countries, it had first to
put its own economic house in order. The October 19 stock market crash
showed the vulnerability of our system and the volatility of change. The
economic situation was still unstable, with the U.S. having made no
fundamental progress toward dealing with its twin deficits. The debate on
the developing countries should be put in the context of an opportunity for
the developed world. Any comprehensive plan had to be put forward on the
basis that, unless we helped the LDC's develop their markets, we would not
be able to solve the problems of the developed countries.
36
li
I
l
l
I
I
III. THE GERMAN QUESTION REVISITED
Introductory Remarks
Three events last year again made Germany and the German question
headline news. On June 12, 1987, President Reagan, in his address at Berlin's
Brandenburg Gate, called: "Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall!''. On
September 7, 1987, I met General Secretary Honecker for the first time in
the Federal Chancellery. And the 31st of December marked the end of a
record year in terms of human contacts in divided Germany: Over five
million Germans from the -Oerman Democratic Republic - which is one in
four of the total population - visited the Federal Republic, many of them
several times. In the opposite direction the number was five and a half
million. Furthermore, just under 15,000 ethnic Germans out of two million
from the Soviet Union resettled in the Federal Republic, 25 times more than
in the previous year. Regardless of how future historians may judge these
events and figures, they already show that the division of the country, the
wall and the barbed-wire, are not history's last word on the German
question. That question will remain open as long as the Brandenburg Gate
remains closed.
The division of Germany, the result of a decision by the wartime allies
in 1944/45 and already then the division of Europe as well, is not the
irrevocable fate of our continent. Nor, in historical terms, do West and East
disagree on this point. To overcome Yalta and Potsdam has been one of the
basic aims of French policy since the days of deGaulle, and Ronald Reagan
and George Shultz have spoken in a similar vein.
In his book Perestroika Mr. Gorbachev recalls his meeting with
President von Weizsacker in Moscow last year. In response to the Federal
President's remark that in speaking of a "common European house" one
should not dig ditches in the living room, Gorbachev said that for the
present we should start from the existing facts and not indulge in specula-
tion. And he added: "Let history decide what happens in a hundred years'
time".
Judging by his own words Mr. Gorbachev, too, thus considers the
German question still open. As for the timeframe for its solution, I am a
little more optimistic! Communist leaders have got their historical calcula-
tions wrong before. Think, for instance, of Khruschchev's boast that
Communism would overtake Capitalism by 1970.
But let us get back to the German question today. For us, the Federal
Republic of Germany, and for myself, my oath of office is still valid. We are
bound by the preamble to our Basic Law, which reads: "The entire German
people are called upon to achieve in free self-determination the unity and
freedom of Germany".
And in this connection my very words to General Secretary Honecker
on the first day of his visit to the Federal Republic were: "The awareness of
the unity of the nation is as keen as ever and the will to preserve it is
unbroken. Our meeting is neither the end nor the beginning. It is a step on
37
the path of an already long development. It is marked by efforts to develop
orderly cooperation." On that evening the Germans - roughly 22 million - in
East and West were one nation - and not only in front of their television
sets!
But Mr. Honecker's visit also showed that the German question is not
the same today as it was when the Federal Republic of Germany and the
GDR were founded in 1949, that there is a difference between the situation
during the confrontational phase of East-West relations - marked by the
Berlin blockade, the uprising of June 17, the Berlin ultimatum and the
erection of the wall - and the present situation. At that time it was still
hoped that the German question could be solved in the short or medium term
through the restoration of national unity. The Soviet Union, when it saw the
Federal Republic increasingly becoming integrated into the community of free
nations, held out tempting but deceptive prospects of German unity.
We refused to be led astray. Germans in the West, but above all those
in the East, have learned from painful experience to adjust to an extended
period of division.
All the more must we focus our policy on the human rights and
humanitarian aspects of the German question. All the more urgent is our
task of preserving the historical, cultural and linguistic unity of the nation,
and especially of keeping the people aware of that unity, and of making the
consequences of division less painful, less unbearable.
The responsible political forces in our country have no quarrel over
this objective. Nor is there any dispute over the fact that in seeking to
improve the situation of the people in Germany we are dependent upon
cooperation and dialogue with those who bear responsibility in and for the
GDR. This is the quintessence of our dialogue and cooperation with the
GDR leadership. This policy will not lead us to forget we have to deal with
a Communist regime, with all the consequences of that. This policy is
enhanced by the general improvement in East-West relations over the past
three years.
As before, our central task is to maintain and increase the possibilities
for contacts in both directions among the people in divided Germany. Every
additional human contact helps to preserve the nation's unity. Today we
must think in terms of generations. This is not easy for Germans. As a
result of the division, hardly any new family ties were established across the
dividing line. The old ones are moving from the first into the second and
third generations. Our aim, therefore, must be to establish personal contacts
over and above those among relatives. Only if the Germans in the Federal
Republic of Germany and in the GDR continue to take an interest in one
another, only if they personally experience and set an example of closer
contacts with the Germans in the other part of the nation, out of a sense
of responsibility for one another, will the people remain conscious of their
national unity.
That is why it is so important that in 1987, for the first time, over 5
million Germans from the GDR visited the Federal Republic, including about
1.3 million below retirement age. At the same time the number of visits by
West Germans to the GDR increased to 5.5 million. This increase in intra-
German travel is unprecedented since the erection of the Berlin wall in
1%1. After all, the wall was an attempt not only to cement the Eastern aim
38
of establishing two, or even three, states in Germany, but to stop all
contacts with one blow and thus undermine the people's consciousness of
being one nation. We have based our policy on the cohesion of the Germans.
All the speculation about the Germans drifting apart has proved to be
wrong. The figures I have just quoted speak for themselves. Relatives who
pieviously had only been able to write to one another can now meet.
In both East and West the people are · worried about transboundary
threats to the environment--to mention Chernobyl, for instance. They
demand remedies which we can only provide in transboundary cooperation.
The churches have not allowed the links between the faithful in both parts
of Germany to be severed, and they are increasing their efforts to make the
borders more permeable. Young people in the Federal Republic, who are now
used to traveling abroad, discover in the GDR an unknown yet familiar
country. All these experiences prove more than theoretical studies that the
status quo is not the end of the road in Germany.
It does not lie within our power, either politically or historically, to
say the German question no longer exists. That would meet with sharp
protests from Germans in East and West. They want to be and remain
Germans. There can be no question of a divided nationality. Nor would our
friends and neighbors in East and West understand us if we thought of
renouncing the unity of all Germans. On my visit to Moscow in July, 1983, I
told General Secretary Andropov that we could no more accept the division
of Germany and the wall in Berlin than he could accept a wall running right
through the center of Moscow. He did not contradict this argument. Nor
would the French and Poles, precisely in view of their own historical
experience, understand the Germans permanently accepting the unnatural
division of their nation. Were we to announce such an intention they would
find it simply unbelievable. It is not the renunciation of the unity of the
Germans but the ending of their separation that is the key to the future of
our nation.
Of course, we do not overlook that the causes and circumstances of the
division of Germany and Berlin are not exclusively a German concern. They
are part of the division of Europe, part of the confrontation between East
and West. The GDR is today the outpost and keystone of the Soviet Alliance
which determines the Soviet Union's power postures and range of influence
in Europe and, to a large extent, its position in relation to the United
States of America as well. There are no signs whatsoever of the Soviet
Union being prepared to abandon those positions. All the speculation about
the two German States · going their own separate way ignores this basic fact.
The same applies to the fantasy of a Central Europe between East and West.
As long as the two political systems and their interests continue to clash, as
long as the Soviet Union defines its interests in central Europe, in Germany
and in Berlin, the way it still does today, the Germans will not be able to
find a common path to freedom and unity.
Our Basic Law, which commits us to the pursuit of this goal, is at the
same time our commitment to freedom and human rights and to the
democratic values shared by the Western community. It reflects our
determination to integrate with the community of free nations and to defend
our freedom together with them. This is the deeper meaning of our
contribution to NATO. This is the reason why 500,000 Germans serve under
39
NATO, and why, for demographic reasons, we had to extend the term of our
conscription from 15 to 18 months.
In making this commitment after the catastrophe of the Second World
War, we showed that we had learned the lesson of our history. This
fundamental policy is not negotiable. Neither can German unity be bought at
the expense of freedom. Adenauer's priority is the same as ours today:
freedom before unity. Nor are we prepared to jeopardize our membership in
the free Western community by trying to follow a nationalistic German
course.
We are therefore opposed to mock debates on whether and to what
extent our policy objectives with regard to Germany can be reconciled with
our goal of European Union. In fact there is no discrepancy between our
national and our European commitment. The more consistent our support for
European integration and our pursuit of European Union, the more reliable
will we be as a partner in the all-European task of ending the unnatural
division of Europe and hence of Germany. And we know that this is an
important reason for the ever closer Franco-German cooperation which
provides both the basis and the thrust for the achievement of that goal.
The sole objective of a realistic policy for Germany can only be to
resolve the German question within the framework of a peaceful order for
Europe. To attain that objective we must prepare the ground in cooperation
with our Western friends and allies, but also with our neighbors in eastern
and south-eastern Europe. In this connection our partners must always be
aware that we Germans are more directly affected by the division of Europe
than others. The Germans in the GDR, but also our neighbors in other
eastern and south-east European countries, cannot enjoy freedom and
elementary human rights. They are denied the right of self-determination.
Making those rights and freedoms a reality throughout Europe is the
common task of all Europeans. The process of security-building and
cooperation in Europe is eloquent testimony to their responsibility for
overcoming the division of Europe and constructing a lasting, peaceful order
in which all individuals and nations can live in security and determine their
own future. And this is one of the reasons that we should not speak of the
European Community as if it were the whole of Europe. Europe is more than
the European Community. It is the totality of all countries, even those
unable or unwilling to join in. We must never forget this.
We accept this responsibility in the knowledge that any solution of the
German question affects the interests of others. A solution cannot be
achieved against the wishes of the superpowers and against the wishes of
our neighbors in East and West. What is rather required is a common, active
policy towards the East of the kind we have been pursuing with our friends
and allies since the Harmel Report of 1967.
In following this course we cannot abandon the democratic values that
link us with our friends, nor can we erase the fundamental differences that
remain between us and the East. Our aim must be to seek within the overall
relationship between East and West more human contacts and a wider
exchange of ideas and culture, as well as more practical cooperation in all
fields. We must in other words perform the art of the possible, and explore
these possibilities at a time when the Soviet Union proclaims a "new
thinking" in international relations and where it seems doors are opening.
40
If we compare the Soviet Union's arms build-up in the seventies, and
especially the threat posed by the SS-20 missiles to Western Europe, with its
present willingness to eliminate this class of weapons under the INF Treaty,
and the Soviet Union's invasion of Afghanistan at the end of 1979 with its
withdrawal as from the spring of 1988, then we can say things have changed
for the better in Moscow.
.The new Soviet policy may possibly lead to a further reduction of the
military confrontation. The litmus test with regard to conventional forces
still lies ahead. But we must always remember that the spiritual, political and
ideological confrontation between East and West will remain; indeed it may
acquire new forms. Anyone who thinks this is a pessimistic approach should
again consult the book entitled Perestroika. We should not take two positions
as some do in Europe--one group acting as if nothing had changed; the other
as if everything had changed.
But we in the West need not fear this confrontation. To us glasnost
and democratization are no danger. On the contrary, developments in Eastern
Europe are beginning to take the course we· ·have always wanted. We hope
that they will pick up momentum. This hope is nurtured by the fact that the
Soviet Union is examining its own past more than ever before, that the
Soviets and the Poles are together filling in the blank spaces in their
history, and that the GDR is rediscovering the common German history.
These are all signs of hope: hope that not only the economic and
administrative deficiencies in the Eastern system will be remedied, that not
only wrong decisions regarding arms technology and lapses in big-power
designs will be corrected, but that the door will be opened to allow Eastern
Europe to reflect on its own interest and responsibilities within the
European and the global framework. This could also lead to the correction of
a terrible historical aberration which led to the division of our nation and
the whole of Europe.
This may be a long-term perspective, but according to the old Chinese
proverb even the longest march begins with the first small step. Our task
here and now must be to seek, through cooperation, exchange and contacts,
to loosen up the rigid structures in Eastern Europe, to extol our free and
democratic way of life, and to keep the Germans conscious of their unity. It
is precisely this policy which the people in divided Germany and divided
Europe expect us to pursue. There will be a peaceful answer to the German
question. We in the Free World have a better hand of cards, and I hope we
will make use of this opportunity.
Discussion
Germany, in an American speaker's view, occupied a unique position in
the East-West struggle. This called for special concern and cooperation on
the part of Germany's allies--especially the U.S.--in the political, economic,
and security spheres.
41
The search for a single security strategy for Europe paralleled its
search for a single market. Such efforts, including the Franco-German
Initiative, were within the original definition of the European pillar of NATO
and should not be rejected out of hand by the U.S.
The issue of modernization of tactical nuclear weapons generated
intense feelings in Germany. Nuclear weapons based in Germany and targeted
on Germany presented great political difficulties for its leaders. The West
should not press Germany too hard on this issue, or expect it to move too
fast.
In any collective enterprise, there would always be an ongoing debate
about the division of labor and profit. Americans should not look to an
illusive solution to difficult problems by pressing the burden-sharing debate.
Political realities in Germany had to be respected also in the economic
area. The fear of inflation was printed deeply in the national memory. In
terms of stimulating economic growth, the German government could not be
pushed to move faster than it could move politically.
Another American participant agreed that the U.S. should not "overload
the German system with too many technical demands". This was especially
true in the demands for burden-sharing when there existed no clear
agreement on what the purpose of the shared burden was.
For several historical reasons, the speaker continued, the problem of
Germany unity was especially difficult. First, if one looked at history, one
would find that Germany had been either too weak or strong for the peace
of Europe. When it was divided, it invited outside countries to balance its
rivalries, and this led to conflict. When it was united and attempted to
achieve security by purely national efforts, establishing an equilibrium was
very difficult.
Since the Napoleonic Wars, Germany had never had ties to the West; it
generally had looked east. It was the great contribution of the Federal
Republic of Germany that it established ties to the West. Americans, who
came to know Germany late in the game, took these ties for granted, not
understanding there had been different tendencies in German history.
Finally, it had to be said that no one was as interested in German
unity as the Germans. If Germany got too far ahead on its national course,
it would raise the apprehensions rooted in its history.
From a Frenchman's point of view, it was correct to say that the
division of Germany was the same as the division of Europe. We should
therefore encourage the changes apparently underway in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe. But there were practical questions about how the West
should do this.
First, in the economic field, what kind of help should the West give
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe? Should it be along the lines of the
Marshall Plan? Should there be conditions? If so, should they be only
economic, or should they extend to human rights and to security? Was there
a risk for the West in being either too complacent or too demanding?
Second, in the security field, we were faced with major questions on
the subject of disarmament. It would be a big mistake to think disarmament
necessarily meant security. Could we achieve security in Europe without
42
nuclear weapons? If there had to be nuclear weapons, what kind should the
be, where should they be deployed, and in whose hands? What was th
future of the U.S. conventional commitment to the defense of Europe? If i
was to be reduced, what did this mean for European defense? How far di•
Europe have to go to assure its own security?
Finally, in the political field, we had to recognize that the unifiec
European market might not be achieved without monetary union and politica
cooperation. What was going on now between East and West was veri
hopeful, but presented a great challenge. Our political cooperation since 194~
had been based upon East-West conflict. Would the developments in relationi
between East and West lead to greater unity within Europe and between
Europe and the U.S., or was the opposite a possibility?
To be able to provide answers to these questions, said an American, we
had to create a vision, of what the future would be about. We in the West
were acting as if perestroika would do our work for us. But we did not
know what would happen as a result of what was going on in the Soviet
Union. We did not know what the Soviet reaction would be to the turmoil
that would occur in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe if perestroika
succeeded. We had to come up with proposals to the Soviets about political
evolution. One Soviet version of the common European house sounded like a
Soviet protectorate over Europe. A version acceptable to the West could be
one in which the two superpowers agreed not to interfere with political
evolution, but to take care of security concerns. We needed a precise
conception of what kind of Europe we wanted to see. Was it possible to
separate European political evolution from security evolution?
A Belgian speaker interjected that, if Europe could not define what its
goals and its organization in the security field should be, real European
integration would be hindered.
The common European house was still very far from being built,
observed an International participant. But the common economic house of the
E.C. member states was slowly being built. As that economic union
developed, the German question, and the question of the division of Europe,
would become a question for all the members of the community. The
"colonial empire" of the Soviet Union could not last forever, and the E.C.
members had a special task to make peaceful the process of its dismantling.
A Canadian wondered if the Soviet objectives in the division of
Germany had changed since Gorbachev came to power. Soviet policy in the
past had been to keep Germany divided and weak. Was there now any new
indication that the Russians were prepared to respond to the aspirations of
the German people?
Citing the already noticeable effects on Western public opinion of the
changes in the Soviet Union, an Italian suggested that the German people
might react favorably to a Soviet offer on German reunification in exchange
for the denuclearization of Europe.
In a Portuguese speaker's view, the necessity for Gorbachev to allow
the Eastern European countries greater freedom might lead to a movement
toward more democracy in East Germany. Might the result be greater
interest in reunification in the GDR? In this vein, a Swiss participant
43
reported that his impression from visits to East Germany was that, in private
circles, the topic of reunification was put on the table more frequently than
in West Germany, especially among the young.
A German speaker acknowledged that there was a renewed interest in
reunification in West Germany. But the government position did not reflect
the thinking of all the Germans. Some wanted to press even harder for
reunification, and put it on the agenda of world affairs. Others gave it very
little thought. Still others were of the opinion that the German question
should be left "to the tides of history". After all, Germany was "eminently
divisible". National goals could change. Perhaps, in 50 years, the situation in
Europe and in Germany might have moved far enough so that reunification
would not matter any more.
A countryman responded that the German people in neither West nor
East had given up their hopes and expectations on the subject of reunifica-
tion. They had not given up on their history. The right of the German
people to self-determination had not been extinguished. The door was open;
history had not yet written its last word on the subject. There was no
danger of a return to Bismark's nation state. Germany had made new
beginnings. Nor was there any chance of a deal with the Soviet Union on
reunification. Germany was not up for sale. The ties between West Germany
and the rest of Europe were strong and growing stronger every day.
Western Europe's first objective, the speaker continued, must be to
achieve the single market in 1992. Then, the matter of political unification
would have to be looked at. It would be a slow process, requiring patience,
but a good start had already been made.
With respect to Eastern Europe, the notion of a Marshall Plan was
good, provided it was acceptable to the recipients. But there would have to
be conditions, and not just economic ones. They should encompass human
rights and religious freedom. The West could not be timid and take a wait-
and-see attitude. As for Gorbachev's common house, it would have to be
defined. It should be a house with many doors and windows, one to and from
which people were free to come and go, without the supervision of a
concierge.
In security matters, the West had to understand that, for all the talk
about peace and friendship with the Soviet Union, the threat was still very
much there. We could not leave everything to Gorbachev. We had to maintain
our defensive capability in order to maintain peace and stability. But we had
also to remain open to dialogue and contacts.
The West's strongest asset was its concept of freedom. In dealing with
the East, the West had been dealt the better hand. In 12 years the century
would end--a century marked by terrible wars. But recent developments
should give us hope that we would have a good chance of establishing peace
for the next generation.
44
IV. THE NEW INFORMATION ERA
Introductory Remarks
One of the recurring themes of history is our apparent inability to
credit information which is at variance with our own prejudgments. Examples
abound. The great historian, Barbara Tuchman, uses the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor to illustrate the point. Despite the fact Japan had opened the
Russo-Japanese War in 1904 by a surprise attack on the Russian fleet,
American authorities years later dismissed the possibility of a similar
maneuver. "We had broken the Japanese code, we had warnings on radar, we
had a constant flow of accurate intelligence, . . . we had all the evidence
and refused to interpret it correctly, just as the Germans in 1944 refused to
believe the evidence of a landing in Normandy." Barbara Tuchman sums up by
saying: "Men will not believe what does not fit in with their plans or suit
their prearrangements." This phenomenon, unfortunately, is not limited to
discrete events.
When major tides of change are washing over the world, the power
structures almost inevitably reject the notion that the world really has
changed and cling to old beliefs. Some changes in the past have come slowly
and thus increased the time we have to adjust to a new reality. In the last
years of the 20th century, the velocity of change in the world is now so
great that there is literally no precedent to guide us. Policymakers are
discovering that many of the events which are altering the world come not
in response to their actions, but are driven by technology which they may
only dimly understand.
Since about 85% of all the scientists who have ever lived on this earth
are alive today, and these men and women have better tools and more
creative opportunities, it is not surprising that the rate of change is now
more rapid than at any time in human history. "The entire Industrial
Revolution," says Carver Mead, the great Caltech Scientist, "enhanced
productivity by a factor of about 100," but "the micro-electronic revolution
has already enhanced productivity in information based technology by a
factor of more than a million--and the end isn't in sight yet." The conse-
quences of this revolution are immense, but have not always been
immediately grasped by policymakers.
The fact that politicians and diplomats are by nature attracted to
historians who record the rise and fall of nation states, but generally display
little interest in the history of science, contributes to the problem of
understanding what is happening today. Indeed, many renown history books
barely mention the impact of science on the course of events. In ancient
Greece, Plato explained that even in his time, engineers were not held in
high regard by philosophers: "You despise him and his art," he wrote, "and
sneeringly call him an engine-maker, and you will not allow your daughter to
marry his son or marry your son to his daughter." Nothing much has
changed, even though scientific events are altering the shape of national
and international events in fundamental ways.
45
On October 4 last year we celebrated, if that is the right word, the
thirtieth anniversary of the launching of Sputnik by the Soviet Union.
World reaction to the event at that time was mixed. Dr. Edward Teller
opined that the United States "had lost a battle more important than Pearl
Harbor".
The President of the United States took a more sanguine view: "... So
far as the satellite itself is concerned, that does not raise my apprehensions,
not one iota. I see nothing at this moment . . . that is significant in that
development so far as security is concerned, except . . . it does definitely
prove the possession by the Russian scientists of a very powerful thrust in
their rocketry ... "
Konrad Adenauer related the event to European geography: "Five
hundred and sixty miles is only the distance from Bonn to Vienna. It does
not prove they can fire anything parallel to the earth over a distance of
many thousand miles."
In the blinding clarity of hindsight, Dr. Teller was probably closer to
the mark in some ways than the politicians. On the other hand, the fallout
from the event did galvanize America to mount a program which would put a
man on the moon.
Despite the initial reactions to this event, what should no longer be in
dispute is that satellite technology changed the world forever. Even today
the full consequences are not known.
The convergence of computers with telecommunications has created an
information revolution that in journalist Mike O'Neil's words is "hurrying
the collapse of old orders, accelerating the velocity of social and political
change, creating informed and politically active publics, and inflicting
conflict by publicizing the differences between people and nations". While
this communications revolution is central to all these tides that are washing
over our world, much more is in the offing.
The impact of information technology has a profound effect on the rate
of advance of all science, since calculations that used to take days can now
be done in minutes. Scientific knowledge is currently doubling about every 13
to 15 years. The old industrial age is fading and being slowly replaced by a
new information society. This transition does not mean that manufacturing
does not matter, or that it will disappear, any more than the advent of the
industrial . age meant that agriculture disappeared. What it does mean is that
like agriculture today, manufacturing will produce more goods for more
people with less labor. It also means that the relative importance of
intellectual capital invested in software and systems will increase in relation
to capital invested in physical plant and equipment. Traditional accounting
systems designed for another age no longer reflect what is really happening
either in business or national economics.
All this taken together is changing our global economy, transforming
national political and business institutions, and altering national foreign
policy objectives and the methods of achieving them.
Changes of this magnitude have always been profoundly disturbing to
the power structure, and with good reason. The mismatch between the fruits
of new technology and the operation of the political process, whether in
government, business, or the family, has often produced unrest, changing
value systems and, indeed, sometimes revolution. Just as the spread of
46
rudimentary medical knowledge took away the power of the tribal witch
doctor, the spread of information about alternate life styles in other
countries threatens the validity of some official do.ctrine and thus the
government's power base. Since knowledge has always conferred power on
those who know how to use it, the proliferation and dissemination of
information to huge numbers of people can be, and more often than not is, a
precursor to a shift in the power structure. .But the side effects of the
information revolution go even deeper than that.
The very nature and definition of national sovereignty is being altered
in substantive ways.
The currently accepted tenets of national sovereignty, like most man-
made concepts, did not emerge full-blown upon a waiting world, but grew
and changed over time. People with a vested interest in any given definition
of sovereignty want to sustain their own power and naturally resist any
change which might undermine their authority. Perhaps one of the fust
organized presentations of a concept of sovereignty appeared toward the end
of the 16th century from the French scholar, Jean Bodin. He argued for the
unlimited and autocratic power of the state unrestrained by law. This idea
was embraced by kings, but challenged by others including Johannes
Althusius who argued the power of the state was limited by the laws of
God, nature, and by the social contract with the state.
It was left to the great Dutch jurist, Hugo Grotius, to give us the
sense of the meaning of sovereignty that exists more or less intact to this
day. In broad terms, Grotius defined sovereignty as "that power whose acts
are not subject to the control of another, so that they may be made void by
the act of any other human will". This definition obviously covers many
different facets of the exercise of power.
One of the fundamental prerogatives assumed by all sovereign govern-
ments has been to pursue their national interest by waging war. This has
been true since early history, but today it is an aspect of sovereignty
which is being severely circumscribed by the effects of information
technology. No one who lived through the American Vietnam experience
could fail to understand the enormous impact that television had in
frustrating the government's objective in Southeast Asia. Knowing in a
general way that war produces violent death is one thing, but watching the
carnage of a battle, or the body bags being unloaded at Dover Air Force
Base, on your living room television set is quite another. While debate will
rage for years about whether Vietnam was lost on the battlefield or on the
home front, few observers would fail to give at least some significant weight
to television's effect on the citizens at home. When the British felt it
necessary to engage in war over the Falkland Islands, they learned their
lesson well and severely limited the press and TV coverage of those
hostilities. Whether or not that military operation could have been success-
fully conducted under the glare of full television coverage is an open
question, although British rules on press coverage are very different from
those in America. We have seen in the United States an organization publish
the names of American agents in place overseas; we have read accounts in
national newspapers detailing American naval and troop movements at a time
of national emergency. These episodes puzzle both domestic and foreign
observers. Solzhenitsyn in his address at Harvard in 1978 put it this way:
47
" . . . We may· see terrorists heroized, or secret matters, pertaining to one's
national defense, publicly revealed, or we may witness shameless intrusion on
the privacy of well known people . . . " This process has repercussions on
the effectiveness of leadership. We are all familiar with the old saying that
no man is a hero to his valet, and today it can be argued that television
has become the valet of world leaders.
In the absence of a major threat to the integrity of one's own borders
or to the independence of the nation, one can at least question whether or
not a democratic government operating in the full glare of television
cameras could, in fact, conduct any long sustained military operation which
produces heavy casualties. If this perception is true, one rather important
aspect of national sovereignty has been substantially altered.
If we look at the other side of the same coin, national domestic
politics, we observe a similar phenomenon.
The quality, speed and nature of information spread by the mass media
has altered the relationship between the people of the United States and
their government. Representative. government in America is changing.
Information technology has made it both possible and politically profitable
for politicians to bypass traditional political structures that supported the
orderly process of government, and head, instead, for the TV cameras to
push some particular issue of the moment. As more and more leaders learn
this lesson, the ancient cement of party discipline and consensus government
begins to crumble. Adversarial confrontations make good TV drama, but may
often lead to bad policy decisions. The national and international agendas are
increasingly being set by the media in the sense that policymakers have to
spend a good share of their time and energy dealing with whatever crisis or
pseudo-crisis has been identified by the media that day. Real issues,
deliberative thought, long-range strategic plans are often casualties of the
required damage-control actions of the moment. In these circumstances, the
old bipartisanship in American foreign affairs has fallen prey to a new
divisiveness. The so-called TV docudramas, part fact, part fiction, have even
attempted to change events in the past. The merging of the media and the
message has created a situation which, in the words of Daniel Boorstin, "A
larger and larger proportion of our experience, of what we read and see and
hear, has come to consist of pseudo-events." This kind of information is
rarely the solid foundation of good policy judgments. But that is the age in
which we live. It is a world where Yasir Arafat works with a media
consultant; Mohammad Abbas, who hijacked the Achille Lauro and murdered
an old man in cold blood, appears on American network television although a
fugitive from justice; the Iranians stage marches, and Soviet spokesmen
appear regularly on American TV. The world is very different from the days
of Citizen Edmond Genet--today instead of being asked to leave the country,
he would be on Ted Koppel's Nightline to protest President George Washing-
ton's outrageous actions.
Without passing value judgments on whether this is good or bad, the
facts are that representative government as envisaged by the Founding
Fathers is no longer operating in the manner originally intended. We may
have to think anew about old relationships, but as of the moment, the use
of information technology has far outstripped the political process. This
problem is not limited to Western governments. If democratic societies face
48
the problems of adapting to what amounts to a whole new definition of
sovereignty, closed societies like the Soviet Union will have a much more
difficult time. Their problem is twofold: first, communist regimes have always
relied to some extent on their ability to control what their citizens see and
hear. This control is now beginning to slip, and from the Soviets' point of
view will get much worse over time. In addition to borders becoming
increasingly porous to TV and radio, studies by the Ganleys reveal that the
Eastern bloc countries have little difficulty gaining access to VCR's and the
number available in Moscow is growing daily. The KGB is concerned that
videotapes will be used for "Magnitizdat"--a coined word for "tape publish-
ing"--for political groups.
Aside from the growing volume of what the Soviet citizen is able to
see and hear that is at variance with the official line, the government's
second major problem conceTns the Soviet's continuing ability to be a leader
in science. Modern scientific research increasingly requires the ability to
access huge data bases at remote locations. If access is limited to a very
small number of scientis.ts, progress will be slowed. Opening up super
computers and data bases to large numbers of men and women obviously
loosens the state's control of data. It is a Robson's choice, but it is very
real and the dilemma will get worse, not better, over time.
The phenomenon of eroding government control over how citizens live
and work, and how one's institutions are managed is not limited to closed
societies, but is becoming more and more evident in the West. National
sovereignty and political saliency has traditionally entailed the government's
power to regulate major sectors of society, ranging from health care to
heavy industries. The increasing difficulty of exercising this power in the
information age, as opposed to the industrial age, was summed up by George
Gilder this way: " . . . A steel mill, the exemplary industry of the material
age . . ." lends itself to control by governments: "Its massive output is easily
measured and regulated at every point by government. By contrast, the
typical means of production of the new epoch is a man at a computer work-
station, with access to data bases around the world, designing microchips
comparable in complexity to the entire steel facility, to be manufactured
from software programs comprising a coded sequence of electronic pulses
that can elude every export control and run a production line anywhere on
the globe." The advent of the silicone compiler, which is an analogue of
desktop publishing for chip design opens up, in Gilder's words, "a great
economic cleavage between the interests of entrepreneurs and the authority
of national governments." Since the technology will continue to progress, the
cleavage will deepen over time.
The growing inability of sovereign governments to regulate things in
the information age has profound foreign policy implications.
Recently, for the first time in history, a private company forced a
super power to change its policy. This occurred because the monopoly
enjoyed by governments on photographs from space was broken by the
launching in February 1986 of the privately owned French satellite SPOT.
When the pictures of the Chernobyl nuclear disaster taken by SPOT began to
show up on the front pages of the world's newspapers, the Soviet Union was
forced to change its story and admit that the event was much more serious
than they had claimed. In this instance, the technology was not new, but the
49
power to use the information shifted from the· public to the private sector.
But what SPOT revealed about Chernobyl, it can also reveal about American
military sites and, thus, poses public dilemmas. There is no American
censorship on SPOT pictures, as there has been on a de facto basis with
American Landsat's photos.
While the resolution of SPOT's picture is only ten meters, no doubt it
will be improved. It is not beyond the realm of possibility that the next
logical development would be for an international news agency to purchase
its own high resolution satellite. From a cost standpoint, purchasing a
satellite would be a good deal less expensive for a television network than
covering the Olympics. If this occurs, the guardians of "national security"
will clash in space with the defenders of the First Amendment.
The policy dilemma posed by SPOT was sharpened by the offer of the
Soviet Union to sell quality imagery, which has a five meter resolution, to
anyone beyond their borders who has the price. National rules, including
those of the Department of Defense and President Carter's secret directive
in 1978 limiting the power of civilian satellites, are eroding to the point of
ineffectuality. Although history cannot be written in the subjunctive mode,
one might at least wonder about the course of events if SPOT had produced
a picture of Pearl Harbor on December 8, 1941, when the world was being
told our fleet was intact. What is certain is that it will become harder and
harder for nations to assert things that are not true if the spy in the sky is
not owned by the government.
Another aspect of sovereignty has traditionally been the ability of
nation states to issue currency and mandate its value. What kings said their
currency was worth was not always congruent with the facts. In the 17th
century, the Amsterdam bankers made themselves unpopular by weighing
coins and announcing their true metallic values as opposed to what some
sovereign said they were worth. Those Amsterdam bankers spoke to a very
small audience and their voices were not heard very far beyond the city
limits. Today technology carries the judgments of the market about the value
of currencies to all parts of this planet in minutes.
We are witness today to a whole new system of international finance
which is up and running. The really unique thing about our new international
financial system, as opposed to prior arrangements, is that it was not built
by politicians, economists, central bankers or finance ministers. No high level
international conference produced a master plan. It was built by technology.
It is doubtful if the men and women who tied the planet together with
telecommunications and computers realized that they were putting in place a
global financial marketplace which would replace the Bretton Woods
agreements and, over time, alter political structures. Although only a few
politicians saw the possibilities of instant global communications, the money
traders of the world immediately drove their trades over the new global
electronic infrastructure, and thus created the new international monetary
system that is governed by the Information Standard.
Today, information about all countries' diplomatic, fiscal and monetary
policies is instantly transmitted to more than two hundred thousand screens
in hundreds of trading rooms in dozens of countries. As the screens light up
with the latest statement of the President or the Chairman of the Fed,
traders make a judgment about the effect of the new policies on the relative
50
values of the country's currency and buy or sell it, accordingly. The entire
globe is now tied together electronically and there is no longer any place on
this planet to hide.
Although innumerable speeches are made giving lip service to the idea
of a global marketplace, many people still fail to understand the reality.
Finance ministers who believe in sound monetary and fiscal policies are
starting to perceive that the new technology is on their side, but politicians
who wish to evade responsibility for the results of their imprudent actions
on fiscal and monetary matters, correctly perceive that the new Information
Standard will punish them. It is, in fact, more Draconian than the gold
exchange standard and a great deal faster.
Like all technological advances, the new Information Standard makes
the power structures of the, world very nervous, and with good reason. The
rapid dissemination of information has always changed societies and, thus,
the way governments have to operate. In my own country we have seen
many examples in our lifetime, but perhaps the most dramatic was the civil
rights movement. The plight of black people in many sections of our nation
went almost unnoticed by many Americans for almost 100 years. Suddenly the
TV cameras brought into our living rooms the image of Bull Connor with his
dogs and whips. Americans decided together in very short order that this
was wrong, and the civil rights movement made a quantum leap forward and
dramatically changed the political landscape in our country. A similar thing
is happening in the financial markets of the world.
Even though politicians in my country have come to accept universal
suffrage and the ballot box as arbiter of who holds office and who does not,
this new global vote on a nation's fiscal and monetary policies is profoundly
disturbing to many.
When women suffrage first came along it was greeted with about the
same enthusiasm as politicians now use to talk about traders and speculators.
Just as the American political marketplace was never the same again after
the passage of the 15th and 19th Amendments to our Constitution, the world
financial markets will never go back within national borders. The lines on
the maps, which have been the cause of wars, are now porous. Money and
ideas move across and over borders in a manner and at a speed never before
seen in the world. Markets are no longer geographical locations, but data on
a screen transmitted from anywhere in the world. Accepting the judgment of
thousands of traders who translate politicians' actions into new values for
currencies and stocks and bonds, is harder to come to terms with because it
developed so fast and is new and unfamiliar. Nevertheless, it is about as
useful to cuss out the thermometer for recording a neat wave, as it is to
rail against the values the global market puts on a nation's currency.
This state of affairs does not sit well with many governments, because
they perceive correctly that the new Information Standard is an attack on
their sovereign powers. Since global financial markets are a kind of free
speech, many complain about what the markets are saying about a country's
policies.
In times past, if a country did not like the way some particular
financial standard was working, be it the gold standard or the Bretton
Woods agreements, the leader of the country could call a press conference
and simply opt out of the system. This has happened many times in history.
51
•
What will get politicians' attention over time, is that today there is simply
no way for a nation to resign from the Information Standard. No matter
what actions are taken by a country to try to escape from the system, those
thousands of screens in the trading rooms of the world will continue to
light up and the market will continue to make judgments.
Since the technology on which the new financial system is based will
not go away, it is reasonable to assume it will be with us for a long time.
The good news is that since the Information Standard is here to stay, there
will be increasing pressure on all governments to put in place sound fiscal
and monetary policies, and that means, also, that over time the chances of
international financial cooperation are enhanced. While each nation will
continue to pursue what it perceives to be its national interest, there will be
increasing pressure to harmonize various economic policies. Progress is
already visible in these areas.
In the field of foreign policy, new technology is rewriting old concepts
of sovereignty and over time will also change national objectives. One
statesman who noticed the impact of science on national sovereignty early
on was Anthony Eden who opined in 1945 that "every succeeding scientific
discovery makes greater nonsense of old-time conceptions of sovereignty".
Although Mr. Eden was among the first leaders to recognize this phenom-
enon, the shift in the power structure that is taking place today is not
unique in history. There have been many instances throughout history of
technology impacting international relations and altering the balance of
power between sectors of society and between countries.
The early science of blue water navigation is a case in point. Although
mariners from many countries had for years crossed oceans and explored
foreign climes, only the Europeans exploited the political potential presented
by this new knowledge. Braudel has pointed out that "the conquest of the
high seas gave Europe a world supremacy that lasted for centuries". The
historical mystery is why the technology of ocean navigation, once demon-
strated, was not grasped by other maritime civilizations to expand their own
political power.
In more recent times, even the most jaded diplomat might have to
concede that the balance of power in the world shifted decisively on July
16, 1945, on the desert of Alamogordo, New Mexico, when the first atomic
explosion took place. For the modern Luddites who explain almost daily that
SDI won't work, it is useful to remember that almost half of the scientists
at Los Alamos through the atomic bomb would not fire.
When it did, relations between nations were instantly altered and,
indeed, the very survival of our planet came into question. The process
works both ways. Scientists suddenly discovered the desirability of having a
world framework of international law and order to protect society from their
own discoveries.
Some will say that while new technologies may affect the balance of
power on a temporary basis, they cannot change the basic geopolitical
interests of a country. This argument rests, in part, on the fact that it is
vital for a country to have assured access to certain critical raw materials.
Countries having these desired natural resources within their borders
are therefore of strategic importance to us. The oil rich nations in the
Middle East are the most obvious examples, but there are other areas whose
52
soils contain important minerals ranging from copper to titanium.
Not that long ago, armies fought and men died for control of the iron
and steel in the Ruhr Basin because ownership of these assets conferred real
economic and political power. Indeed, the basic idea of a nation state was
based on the concept of territoriality. Today, these once fought over assets
may be a liability. To the extent that new technology replaces once essential
commodities with plastics or other synthetic materials, the relative impor-
tance of these areas to the vital interest of nations is bound to change.
When World War II cut the U.S. off from a supply of natural rubber
from the Far East, we turned to synthetic rubber, which had its basic
research completed before the first World War. The technology had not been
exploited because it was too expensive. The war emergency caused us to set
aside economics in order to produce tires, but as we went up the learning
curve, production costs were driven down. When we reached the point where
synthetic rubber became cost effective, the significance of rubber producing
countries to our strategic interests was altered.
Today, as fiber-optic cable replaces the twisted copper pair, the
relative strategic importance of copper producing countries will also shift.
Sand, the most common substance in the world, is the raw material for
computer chips. Clay is the base for superconducting ceramics which will
speed data by a factor of 100 and generally enhance the power of magnets
and thus further shift the value of traditional natural resources. Over a
period of years, this· same scenario in various degrees has, or will apply to
other natural resources, even oil.
As these events unfold, diplomatic priorities are bound to change.
Even the strategic importance of critical areas of the world is altered by
technology. It was not so long ago that conventional wisdom told us the
lights would go out all over the world if the Suez Canal was ever closed.
The conventional wisdom did not take into account the technology that
would allow the building of huge supertankers that could, and did, carry oil
economically around the Cape of Good Hope. This feat was achieved by
relatively simple technology, but it altered the political dynamics of the
physical control of a specific territory. Today the velocity of change is so
great in all aspects of science, technology, economics and politics that the
tectonic plates of national sovereignty and power have begun to shift. As
military hardware has developed, political scientists and statesmen are fond
of remarking--sometimes in a pejorative way--that generals usually prepare
for the last war, without considering that they themselves may now be guilty
of similar errors. If policy makers in business or government fail to
understand that the world really is very different, even though in Barbara
Tuchman's words, what they see "does not fit in with their plan or suit
their prearrangements", they will follow into oblivion a long list of other
leaders who made similar mistakes in the past. On the other hand, those who
understand and master change will be tomorrow's winners.
53
----------·""'.:-:;~~T>\.~~ "'""'c•1uoc..;;oJI\\.,., >:12 ._,<.> ~~~-'~'""~--
Discussion
A Portuguese speaker opened the discussion with the observation that
not all of us realized that the structure of power was changing due to the
information revolution. The tendency was not toward the concentration of
power based upon mass communications; Orwell's prophecy was not being
fulfilled. There was more dissemination of information, and interactivity was
becoming more important, leading to more participation in societies, and
therefore in political life.
There were, however, some imbalances being created by the information
revolution. First, there was an enormous difference between developed and
undeveloped countries in this area. Second, some countries had reached much
higher levels of technology than others in certain fields. Third, in the
production of information, especially in the mass media, there was an
imbalance between the U.S. and Europe. Europeans absorbed many American
television programs and motion pictures, but there was little movement the
other way. This was likely to lead to import quotas imposed by European
countries. Finally, global communications groups were being created,
controlling many different forms of media around the world.
The danger lay more in the fulfillment of Aldous Huxley's prophecies
than George Orwell's. There was a general tendency for the written word to
be replaced by the image. The effects of this on education were already
detectable in the form of people who had become hooked on images and
whose development was effectively blocked by television. Literature was
marginal to such people.
Yet the role of the mass media was essential. Today, politics had
become too serious a matter to be left to the politicians. Also, it had
become easier and cheaper to broadcast than to disseminate in print. The
arrival of interactivity would change the role and content of the mass
media, and the role of journalism in shaping public opinion. Although some
self-imposed rules of conduct by the media were advisable under certain
conditions, the freedom of the media was vital and was good for society as a
whole.
An American felt that, just as technology was "blasting open markets",
so the media was "blasting open" peoples' minds with general information and
entertainment. The ability of East Germans to watch West German television
was an example of this. Throughout Eastern Europe, entrepreneurs were
selling backyard dishes for receiving satellite broadcasts. In China, American
movies were being shown weekly. The American Cable News Network could
be seen all over the world. In short, a great many people were witnessing
Western life and standards.
This trend would only increase as more powerful geostationary
broadcast satellites were launched, more broadcast services were started, and
cheaper dishes linked with better domestic receivers became available. Within
20 years, every second home in the West would be linked to cable or dish.
In the future, there would be greater diversity and variety in the mass
media. In Europe, attempts were being made to improve program standards.
Today, entertainment programs were very expensive to make, and it was only
natural that they would be made for the markets most able to pay for them
54
with advertising dollars. But programs and movies were increasingly being
made for world markets, and it was to be hoped that diversity would win
over protectionism in media. The effects on national identity and culture of
the information revolution were not something governments should fear.
Anyway, the "genie (was) out of the bottle", and technology was moving
faster than politicians could act.
Another American felt that the media, particularly television, had
changed politics. The average viewer today was far better informed than the
newspaper reader of 50 years ago. And the alleged negative effects of
television on politics were greatly exaggerated. A countryman agreed, saying
that people in democracies functioned best with the most information
possible. This made it harder for governments to assert things that were not
true.
In another American's, view, there was, in public affairs, a "dangerous
new kind of censorship" caused by too much information. For example, full
financial disclosure by political candidates was required by law in the U.S.
But citizens did not get full disclosure from journalists, who tended to root
out and publish or broadcast only the most titillating details. The viewer or
reader thus got a distorted picture. Similarly, in television interviews,
hundreds of feet of tape were used for 30 seconds on the air. There was a
conflict between the interviewee and the producer about what went on the
air.
In a Belgian speaker's view, there was a danger that people in the
public arena would act according to the most immediate and optimum media
effect. Freedom of the press was an essential part of our democratic
systems, but the media had to uphold certain ethical standards, including
making clear the difference between reporting facts and commenting on
them. Finally, while there was nothing wrong with the growing concentration
of power in the media, there had to be a greater distinction between
ownership and management on the one hand, and the editorial staff on the
other.
An American worried that governments could still do much to control
the flow of information through the media, and use it as a powerful weapon
to further their own interests and hold back democratic development. A
Briton added that, even in democracies, governments would always try to
censor certain things. Indeed, censorship was often demanded by the people
in democracies, as in the case of pornography.
Addressing the effects of the information revolution on business, an
American was concerned that the business community was already behind in
its application of currently available technologies, and did not understand the
applications of those technologies to come. The implications of these
technologies were disturbing to the management and staff of companies
because the changes required to apply them and compete in global markets
were extremely onerous. Managements tended to do too little too late. The
empowerment of workers at the lowest levels of businesses through training
and giving them available information meant letting go large numbers of
managerial and professional people. In addition, new technologies meant
changes in product cycles and the ability of companies to get products into
55
the marketplace.
In another American's view, information technologies were not that
complicated and the issues involved should not be regarded as esoteric. The
public gains from them were the same in economic terms as from any form
of cost reduction. And the costs of interference with those economic
advances were the same as in other fields.
Information technologies, specifically computer networks, were
instruments of international economic integration. There were already in
place worldwide computer networks in many fields, such as banking and
financial markets. They tied markets together rationally, reducing costs and
making possible transactions that were not possible before. They existed in
management information systems, where they allowed the exchange of
technical information and created cost reductions.
Yet computer networks were regarded by some governments as a
threat, as something to be slowed down. This was not justified. The threat
to privacy had been overcome. Concerns about job loss were better handled
by such things as works councils than by government regulation. There was
concern that computer networks might interfere with traditional telephone
monopolies, which had claimed the right to say who could set up a computer
network and under what circumstances. This kind of protectionism inhibited
economic progress, and unlike other forms of protectionism, slowed the
development of the entire economy. The answer to the problem was
liberalization of the telephone systems, as had happened in the U.S., Japan,
and th.e U.K. Yet there was still resistance in many countries. This issue
had to be viewed in the same way as protectionism in other industries.
Concerns and fears about certain aspects and byproducts of the
information revolution were expressed by a number of participants. An
American observed that, as computers advanced, and increasing amounts of
ever more complex information became available, a new elite would arise,
consisting of those who dealt with this information. No matter what the
computer could accomplish, the human brain could only absorb and deal with
so much information at any one time. Barring developments to link the brain
with computers, the human brain would remain a limiting factor. Thus there
had to be a whole new process of selecting information, a new set of
standards by which it would be selected, and a new elite to do the selecting.
It remained to be seen whether this would be a good thing for democracy.
An overabundance of information was already a problem in the defense
and intelligence areas, observed another American. There were "nowhere near
enough people" to analyze the reams of information beamed down to earth
from the hundreds of military and intelligence-gathering satellites in space.
The huge volume of intelligence made possible by information tech-
nologies complicated the ability of governments to make decisions in the
security area, said a British speaker. The technological revolution increased
the speed at which military deployments could be made and be identified.
Risk assessment software could help in such situations, but, in complex
crises, there was a danger the software could drive the crisis. A new level
of intense cooperation among statesmen was therefore necessary in this new
era.
56
Another concern, expressed by an International speaker, was the
relative success of our countries in coping with the information revolution.
Some countries were bound to fall behind. This was especially true in
education, said an American. New technologies and changes in information
dissemination placed very heavy responsibilities on those in charge of our
educational systems. Those countries that resisted the changes or failed to
keep up would fall behind "fast and far". It was crucial, added another
American, that research be done on the applications of technology to how
people learn. Those countries that could take available technologies and use
them to undertake a complete restructuring of the educational system would
be far ahead.
Another American concluded the discussion on a hopeful note, saying
that technology was "on the side of freedom". Disseminating the maximum
amount of information through the media expanded the role of freedom.
Certainly, these new technologies had their side effects, with which we had
to learn to deal. They had not brought us a perfect world, but rather a
different world. At the end of the day, they had given us greater freedom.
57
V. BRIEFING ON THE MOSCOW SUMMIT
Introductory Remarks
This is clearly a time of great ferment in the Soviet Union, and
change was very much part of the atmosphere the American participants in
the summit encountered in Moscow. All of the Soviet people the Americans
met with--from Gorbachev himself to the refuseniks to the students at
Moscow State University--were preoccupied with the subject of what they
were going to do and how they were going to do it, and what did the
change taking place in the party structure and elsewhere mean for the
Soviet people. As the Soviets considered the reorganization of their own
system, they displayed a new interest in other systems of government outside
their own. In addition to the summit, there was a focus on the upcoming
party conference, and a good deal of talk about restructuring, openness, and
the pace and scope of change.
Underlying the American approach at the summit was the desire to find
a way to assure the Soviets that there was a consistency and continuity in
the American interest in the Soviet-U.S. dialogue. President Reagan sought
to make clear that the U.S. was looking for a durable process for dealing
with Soviet-American differences, as well as identifying areas where there
might be a convergence of interests. His goal was the establishment of a
framework that could be passed on to a successor administration of either
party.
From the American point of view, the outcome of the summit--absent
an arms control agreement--was that a new focus was placed upon three
other areas: human rights, regional issues, and bilateral relations. They
received a level of attention that they do not get when there is an arms
control agreement in the offing.
With respect to the arms control portion of the summit agenda, both
sides concentrated on the three tough remaining issues: air-launched cruise
missiles, mobile missiles, and sea-launched cruise missiles. Some progress was
made on treatment of air-launched, and on a mobile-missile verification
regime, but a great deal remains to be done. The two sides' post-summit
positions are unchanged. The Soviets believe an agreement should include
mobile missiles, the Americans believe it should ban them.
Sea-launched cruise missiles present the most difficult problem. The
Soviets have offered a very intrusive verification regime which, in effect,
would put the U.S. Navy out of business. The task is to find a verification
regime that works without having this effect. The U.S. meanwhile feels that
these missiles should be left out of the numbers to be dealt with in START.
In the area of nuclear testing, much was accomplished, and it is hoped
that both sides will soon ratify two unratified treaties from 1974 and 1976
that deal with nuclear testing. The U.S. and the Soviet Union have both
placed 50 inspectors at each other's nuclear testing sites--which is unprece-
dented--and this number will ultimately increase to 90. This is an example of
58
---
the challenge of verification which lies at the heart of START--to find a
balance between information given for information gained. In START,
verification poses a far greater challenge than it did for the INF agreement.
In any event, large strides have been made in the area of nuclear testing, a
fact that is too often given little attention by the press.
In the dialogue between the U.S. and the Soviet Union on conventional
and chemical weapons, the U.S. found it necessary to resist the Soviet desire
to enter into bilateral agreements in areas which the U.S. believes are
multilateral. Particularly in the conventional area, the U.S. has said it will
not negotiate bilaterally, and has referred the Soviets back to the mandate
negotiations in Vienna. The Soviets have resisted this, with the result that
the summit produced only sterile exchanges in this area.
Gorbachev did put forward a conventional arms proposal in one session
with Reagan that appeared to be a new version of past Soviet proposals
involving data exchanges on conventional weapons, followed by meetings of
experts to evaluate asymmetries. The U.S. has seen these proposals as
attempts to propagandize and to slow down the conventional stability
mandate talks. Gorbachev's proposal called for completion of the mandate
negotiations first (though this could be delayed by mutual agreement of the
two sides), baseline inspections for the collection and verification of the
numbers on each side, assessment of the numbers to see if there are
asymmetries (the Soviet position is that there are none, assessing the
Atlantic to the Urals as a whole), and finally developing techniques to
achieve reductions.
In its second phase, after the achievement of equal levels, Gorbachev's
proposal called for reductions of 500,000 on each side, though precisely what
this number applied to was not specified. Though presented with some
fanfare, this proposal seemed to disappear. It was never brought up again by
the Soviets, and American attempts to ask questions about it were not
successful.
In short, no progress was made at the summit toward closing off the
mandate negotiations, nor the Vienna follow-on conference to the Helsinki
Final Act. The U.S. has insisted on a balanced outcome, and the Soviets
have agreed to language which specifies this, but so far there has been no
substance. It appears that there is a great pause as the Soviets await the
party confe~ence. Taking into account the proposals that are on the table in
Vienna, the new theses being presented by the Central Committee in advance
of the party conference, and the discussions going on with the Warsaw Pact
countries about where legislative changes might lead in Eastern Europe, the
most that could be said at the summit's conclusion was that the two sides
are working somewhere else on these issues, i.e., in Geneva on chemical
weapons and in Vienna on the Helsinki Final Act.
There was discussion at the summit about regional issues which have an
East-West cast to them, such as Southern Africa, Central America, the
Middle East, Cambodia, Afghanistan, etc. It was a helpful exchange, but no
great progress was made. The dialogue will be kept going in the coming
months by expert-level meetings, but it will be some time before anything
concrete comes out of the discussions.
59
'
With respect to Southern Africa, the two sides had some small points
of agreement, but nothing of real substance. The common ground is that a
settlement is necessary that entails the complete withdrawal of foreign
forces from Angola and the achievement of Namibian independence in
accordance with U.N. Security Council Resolution 435. The two sides agreed
to adopt the Cuban proposal of setting September 29, 1988 (the tenth
anniversary of UNSCR 435) as the date by which to attempt to reach a
resolution of differences. This may not be realistic, but it allows the U.S.
and the Soviet Union to demonstrate that they both are trying to solve the
problem. Yet it appears that the Soviets have not yet decided to what
extent they are going to push the Angolans or the Cubans. The Soviets are
not willing to accept U.S. aid to UNITA; their objective is to create a
situation where the political outcome is an end to U.S. assistance, with
Soviet support .of the remaining political structure in Angola. They have not
given concrete support to the political reconciliation process.
In the Middle East, there is still no convergence of interests. It seems
that the Soviet Union has not yet decided how to play out its interest
there, indeed has not yet defined its interests in the peace process.
A reading of the Joint Statement from back to front would call
attention to a listing of bilateral activities--not headline news, but an
attempt to restore a whole web of Soviet-American contacts that was totally
lost between 1979 and 1985. They bring engagement among interested groups
in science, the environment, ecology, the Arctic, people-to-people exchanges,
cultural programs, and an exchange of consulates in Kiev and New York.
They are of great importance in providing a supporting web beneath the big
issues.
Finally, it was not the U.S. intention to make the summit a human
rights summit, but that is what it became, and this probably was not a bad
thing.
The famous names are for the most part gone, but there are equally
desperate cases left, and it is on these that an American team is now
engaged in regular exchanges with the Soviet Union. Another large group of
emigrants has been allowed to go. Indeed, emigration is up for April and
May. And while the level is nowhere near that of the 1970's, the numbers
are healthy. There will be between 12,000 and 14,000 Jewish emigrants this
year. As for prisoners of conscience, it appears there are now only about
100.
The language in the Joint Statement which speaks of spiritual values
and the freedom of the individual was, surprisingly, offered by the Soviet
side. It appears the leadership is trying to build a record of international
acceptance of these things as they go into the party conference.
Yet, for all the talk of glasnost and of new ways of doing things, the
Soviet system remains the most opaque political process around. The same 30
contacts are used, and everyone is fed the same line. It remains very
difficult to see what is really happening. The result is that, in human
rights, great changes are announced, but changes in the system have yet to
60
be seen. Laws on such things as religious practice and the use of state
security as a bar to emigration are said to have been rewritten, but no one
has seen them or knows how they will be made part of the legal system.
The mood throughout the summit was good. The President's Moscow
State University speech was the best description. of what the U.S. message
to the Soviet Union is. Gorbachev was a good host, although he still erupts
in the middle of sessions into vigorous exchanges on certain issues, such as
SDI, or the Soviet Union not being admitted as a full partner in a con-
dominium on regional issues, or American human rights positions.
The public parts of the visit were a success, but their policy impact is
debatable. The summit did show that this kind of broad dialogue can take
place without arms contr9l agreements, and perhaps it added to the
understanding that the arms control negotiations that lie ahead will be very
complex and will take time.
The U.S. is not really looking for a new word to replace detente, and,
if there was one, it would not have that kind of ring to it. It would be a
word connoting process, management, predictability. The Americans left the
summit believing that they had achieved a measure of predictability, a way
of dealing bilaterally with the Soviet Union that should give continuity to
the relationship, particularly as the U.S. goes through the electoral process.
Discussion
A German participant opened the discussion by applauding President
Reagan's conduct of the summit, particularly his emphasis on human rights.
The speaker recalled that it was Chancellor Kohl who, shortly after coming
to power in 1982, had urged the President and the Soviet General Secretary
to meet. His reasoning was that, first, there could be no progress in arms
control as long as relations between the two superpowers were frozen, and
second, Germany, and indeed the rest of Europe, had more room to maneuver
in developing their relations with the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe when
relations between the two superpowers were better. The speaker hoped that
there would be more summits, on a regular basis, with less fanfare.
Other speakers were more cautious, even skeptical, about the real fruits
of the summit process. A Frenchman observed a tendency for the West "to
behave cyclically toward the Soviet Union". After a period of what might be
called anti-Sovietism, the pendulum appeared to have swung, and now there
was perhaps too much enthusiasm for the Soviet Union and its leader.
"Gorby-mania" was spreading everywhere. But had the Soviet Union really
changed? We should not rule out the possibility of a Leninist type of
tactical move. It would be many years before the reality of change could be
assessed. Certainly, the Soviet idea of democracy had nothing to do with the
Western concept. In foreign policy, the style had changed, but not the
substance. Soviet fundamental goals remained the same. The Afghanistan
withdrawal was really a response to a military defeat. And the INF treaty
61
was really favorable to the Soviet Union. The West had to remain cautious.
A British participant worried about the effect of President Reagan's
summit conduct on the Western electorates. He recalled his early impression
of Reagan as a President "who would never make dangerous proclamations of
peace", and would avoid the kind of "lower your guard" message that was
flashed to the people of the West during the 1970's. But Reagan had
changed, especially in the wake of the recent summit. He had provided a
"giant endorsement of Gorbachev's internal control" and had furthered in
Western public opinion Gorbachev's external objectives without asking for a
commensurate price in proof of intentions or actions from Gorbachev, such
as a change in the Soviet position in the Middle East or Nicaragua.
We should be more focused on external manifestations of the Soviet
Union and less on the practice of its internal affairs, added an American.
Another American argued that the West had to "establish a baseline of what
it believed Soviet aggressiveness meant in the past''. We had to develop
criteria by which we could judge what change in the Soviet Union had an
impact on foreign policy.
Other speakers were more hopeful about the reality of change in the
Soviet Union. It was true, said a German, that they would probably never
change fast enough to suit us in the West, but nonetheless change was
afoot, and we should welcome it. An International participant argued that
the mere acknowledgement by the Soviet leadership that things could perhaps
be done differently signified that fundamental change had already taken
place. We in the West had to view this with a combination of "hope and
prudence". We would be making a serious mistake to approach the Soviet
Union with a "Maginot Line complex''.
An American felt that, regardless of whether the Soviet Union had
really changed or not, the formulation and implementation of Western
Alliance policy "could not await the finding". We ought to be able to protect
and advance our interests in a way that could accommodate either outcome
in the Soviet Union. We could not postpone a dialogue while we waited for
answers.
In a German's view, Reagan had done well to emphasize human rights
at the summit. The American president was far better suited than a European
leader to press the Soviet Union on this issue. He was respected by the
Soviets as the only counterpart to their own leader. It was easier for the
Soviets to accept such challenges from the U.S. than from Western Europe.
The emphasis on human rights had already born fruit in the form of
changing laws on such things as religious practice.
From the point of view of a Canadian, Reagan's emphasis on human
rights was the only way to avoid vulnerability to Gorbachev's tendency to
produce "propagandistic and oversimplified" arms reduction proposals, and to
avoid having the summit appear a fiasco or a non-event. It also put pressure
on Gorbachev to satisfy some of the world's hopes for him.
But, warned an American, we should not overestimate our impact on
Soviet internal policy. We were supposed to be "diplomats, not social
reformers". With respect to the Russian Orthodox Church, it had been a tool
of the state for 400 years. It was hardly an organ of liberty. Perhaps
62
Gorbachev had decided to strengthen his hand by including it in the
political process. The speaker wondered how wide an audience the discussions
on human rights had inside the Soviet Union. Were they perhaps designed
mainly for Western consumption?
A countryman responded to this by saying that the American public
demanded progress in the area of human rights. Experience had shown that
the concept of a dialogue with the Soviet Union. that did not include human
rights would not have the necessary public support.
In the area of arms control, a number of speakers urged the West to
develop a comprehensive concept of where it wanted to go from here. A
German felt that the task before the Alliance was to discuss and agree on
an overall concept of secu~ity and arms control in order to reach a sense
within the Alliance on the next priorities of arms control and security
measures.
A French speaker agreed, warning that the immediate danger for the
West was the Vienna negotiations on conventional stability. The Soviets knew
exactly where they wanted to go politically--namely to achieve the denucle-
arization of Western Europe by using the process of conventional negotia-
tions to "catch" the dual capable systems. They might well be successful if
the West did not know what it was doing. Thus, the West had to develop a
conceptual framework for the arms control process. But it must be careful
not to use this Gesammtkonzept as an excuse to do nothing in the short run.
The Soviets must not be allowed to block the modernization process in
Europe. The speaker worried that current policy did not appear to be
translating words into vision.
An American decried the Soviet practice of floating at summits
conventional arms control proposals that the U.S. had not yet seen. Doing
this raised the danger of misunderstandings or mistakes. It should be
standard practice at summits that neither side put forward proposals that the
other side had not yet seen.
In a Greek speaker's view, the Russians scored propaganda points by
putting forward a conventional arms proposal at the summit, and the U.S.
missed an opportunity by not calling the Soviet bluff and agreeing to discuss
it in principal.
A French participant saw a hidden danger in conventional arms control
negotiations. Afghanistan had shown that the Soviet Army's heavy reliance
on manpower and on tanks had failed. Demographic trends in the Soviet
Union would make it increasingly difficult to rely on motivated manpower,
and tanks were fast becoming obsolete. Thus, the Soviets could use a
conventional arms control agreement to modernize their army.
Addressing some of the points raised about conventional arms, an
American said that the U.S. could not respond to every Soviet conventional
arms control proposal because there had been so many. As for the Soviet
Army's experience in Afghanistan, it had learned some valuable lessons, and
had not done all that badly; it would be a mistake to sell it short. Yes, it
was time for the Alliance to form a position on conventional arms. But it
was also true that Gorbachev "did not have the faintest idea" of what he
would do when perestroika and glasnost began to have an impact in Eastern
63
Europe. Until the Soviet Union had a clear idea of its future relationship
with Eastern Europe, it was doubtful that there would be any meaningful
Soviet conventional arms control proposals or participation in the conven-
tional process.
Turning to strategic arms control, an American questioned what he saw
as a "logical contradiction" in the American position of opposing mobile
ICBM's because of the problem of verification, while mobility was the key to
survivability of its land-based strategic arsenal. At the same time, the U.S.
was prepared to let sea-launched weapons "run free" because we could not
verify them.
A Canadian was concerned that .there appeared to be no verifiable way
to include sea-launched cruise missiles in a START agreement. Could such an
agreement, leaving outside of formal controls such accurate and potentially
destructive weapons capable of being deployed off both U.S. coasts, ever be
ratified by the Senate? Would not the exclusion of SLCM's give START
opponents a useful club to use against an agreement?
Addressing the apparent contradiction between the U.S. position on
mobiles and SLCM's, an American pointed out that the U.S. did not yet have
a national choice on a mobile system. The American military leadership had
to stand on a ban when it did not have a system itself. With respect to
SLCM's, it was not clear how to apply to navies some of the. verification
concepts being talked about without destroying the effectiveness of the
navies. But there were some natural, observable limits with respect to
SLBM's upon which some predictability could be constructed.
A number of European speakers were interested in what impact the
U.S.-Soviet dialogue might have on regional issues. Was there an opportunity,
wondered an Austrian, for some kind of joint efforts at crisis management in
such areas as the Middle East and the Gull? In a German participant's view,
negotiations on regional issues were as important to the Soviets as arms
control negotiations, because such negotiations were an acknowledgement
that there were two equal powers in the world. Unfortunately, Europe had
little to contribute to that process at present. The time · had come for
Europeans to "harmonize" their foreign policies and create appropriate
instruments by which to involve themselves in regional issues.
Did we in the West really know what was going on in Gorbachev's
mind, wondered several speakers. We certainly did not know everything, said
an American, but we knew some things. It was ,very apparent at the summit
that Chernobyl, for example, was very much on his mind. He spoke passion-
ately about the experience with Reagan and was clearly emotionally affected
by it. We knew Gorbachev had concluded that the Soviet Union was no
longer economically competitive, and that he was struggling with the
question of how to make it so while preserving the political structure. We
knew he was concerned about the Soviet Union's geopolitical position,
especially with respect to an emerging China.
64
Focusing on the question of whether the Summit process was setting
off waves of euphoria in the West that would erode support for defense
policies and budgets, the American speaker felt that that was a risk that had
to be run. Politicians in the U.S. and in Europe had to be responsive to the
desire of their peoples to see something different in the U.S.-Soviet dialogue
and the East-West dialogue. To have support for defense budgets, leaders had
to .be able to point to progress, to some end to the process in which so
much money was spent on defense. They had to maintain a balance between
hope and prudence. ·
65
VI. THE IMPACT OF GLASNOST
Introductory Remarks
I.
What is in Gorbachev's mind? What is he up fo? We have to recognize
that he is improvising to a great extent, that even he is not sure of what
the content of perestroika is, or what the effect of glasnost will be. He is
caught in a vicious circle--the more resistance he meets to economic
reforms, the more he tends to open up the debate via glasnost; the more
glasnost there is, the more resistance. After three years in power, his
position has become more precarious, and his chances for survival over a
long period have declined. The outlook for perestroika in particular is very
gloomy. There has actually been very little in the way of change in the
basic economic structure. The basic legislation which took effect this year is
a compromise document which defies expert analysis. As a result of all this,
Gorbachev has turned increasingly to foreign policy as an area where he has
greater flexibility and freedom of maneuver, and he is looking for compensa-
tion for what has turned out to be a stalemate internally.
If one rereads Gorbachev's speeches from 1984 and 1985, there is very
little that foreshadows what is happening now. The code words in those days
were discipline, not openness, and acceleration of economic growth, not
perestroika, He came to perestroika because the economic crisis was so bad
that he had to look for new ways, and, in doing so, he enlisted the aid of
some very innovative economists. They sold him on perestroika, and they
understand it. They admit that it is a difficult, long-term concept, the key
to which is price reform--the last thing they want to confront.
As Gorbachev has pressed on, the opposition has begun to take shape,
and has come out into the open. The attack on perestroika that appeared in
the publication Sovetskaya Rossiya in March was an extraordinary document.
In fact, it was about glasnost and democratization, and was a statement of
Russian chauvinism startling in its content. It was sharply pro-Stalin and
anti-Semitic. It did not say Stalin did not commit crimes, but that Stalin
made the .Soviet Union into a great power, just as Peter the Great did. It
falsely quoted Churchill as saying that Stalin took Russia "from the wooden
plow to the atomic bomb".
The document was counter-attacked in Pravda, in the course of which
Gorbachev turned the situation to his advantage by pinning the blame on
Ligachev and reducing some of his duties. Neither Ligachev nor Yeltsin have
been totally purged. Indeed, Yeltsin appeared· during the summit in a
television interview in which he called for Ligachev's resignation. The point
is that the political struggle in the Soviet Union has greatly intensified, and
it bodes ill for Gorbachev. He is on a train he cannot get off. He must
press ahead with perestroika and glasnost, and he does so at his own peril.
He probably has a majority in the Politbureau, so he is not likely to be ·
overthrown, but if he persists in his program over the next two or three
years, he will encounter the kind of political cabal that overthrew Khrush-
chev.
66
In foreign policy, there has been a debate about the nature of Soviet
foreign policy and what happened in the past, in order to provide some
prescriptions for the future. Their general notion is that, while the general
objectives of policies pursued by Stalin and Brezhnev were correct, the way
they were pursued caused the Soviet Union a great deal of damage by
provoking a Western reaction. They forced the West to re-arm, first in the
1950's and then again in the 1980's. What they are doing now is taking away
the image of an enemy, depriving the West of the opportunity to point to
the Soviet threat. In practice, we are beginning to see the fruits of new
thinking. In Europe, there has been a change in Soviet policy. Compared to
Brezhnev and Gromyko, who wanted the U.S. to remain in Western Europe to
guarantee the German settlement reached with Brandt, Gorbachev wants the
U.S. out of Europe, which he, wants denuclearized and neutral.
The withdrawal from Afghanistan is more difficult to explain. He may
have created a situation of a potential stab-in-the back legend that the
politicians would not let the military win the war. It was a shrewd move,
however, that opens up an avenue for Soviet policy in the Persian Gulf and
Iran. Gorbachev appears to be looking for a way to buy the Soviet Union
back into the diplomacy of the Middle East.
Most important is the opening to China. Gorbachev differs from
Brezhnev and Gromyko on China in a significant way. Brezhnev felt China
was a real threat to the Soviet Union; Gorbachev does not have that fear.
He is prepared to deal with the Chinese and make concessions. Gorbachev is
operating to try to reduce the threat on both the eastern and western
fronts at the same time. He has said there is a close linkage between
foreign and domestic policy, and that linkage appears in his quest to buy
some time in his dealings abroad.
For the West, the Gorbachev regime means that, if he is sincere in
wanting a period of relaxation with the West, this offers strategic oppor-
tunities to the West to suggest to him the price he must pay in terms of
regional arms control, settlement of regional conflict, and also in bilateral
relations and human rights. The West is not really ready for that kind of
dialogue, but there has been some progress made in making the agenda
broader than simply arms control.
On arms control, we are deluding ourselves if we think Gorbachev is
interested in conventional arms control. There has been a development in
Soviet military doctrine that has downgraded the nuclear aspect and
upgraded the conventional. This is a significant development whose outcome
is that the Russians recognize they cannot prevail in a nuclear competition.
But in a conventional one, they have significant advantages. If they can
shift the balance in that direction, they will gain decisively. That explains
why they were willing to reach an INF agreement and why they are eager to
reach a START agreement. ·
67
Introductory Remarks
IL
There is some reason to be apprehensive that the whole process we are
witnessing in Russia may be miscarrying. For . the first time in three or four
decades, a basic metamorphosis of East-West relations might be possible: the
transition from an adversary and sometimes hostile connection to a more
relaxed, cooperative, and stable affiliation. It is not in our interest to keep
the enemy image intact. But, in the words of the Greek poet, "what are we
going to do without the barbarians?" We do not need the barbarians, and it
is hoped that, in our case, they will turn out to be gone.
We are talking about glasnost, perestroika, and new thinking. Glasnost
is the introduc~ion of a measure of public discourse hitherto unknown in the
Soviet Union. Perestroika is an attempt to reform the Soviet economic
structure. New thinking is a reformulation of some fundamental concepts,
including foreign policy concepts.
The change with respect to glasnost is most obvious. In Moscow these
days, one can feel a headiness; there is debate, muckraking, exposure,
revelation, even an almost Western type of journalism. It might be said that
this is most easily reversible, but some in Russia say it has already gone too
far, and can't be reversed. It is true that glasnost is strictly liinited to
intellectuals; it does riot affect many people. It is basically an attempt on
Gorbachev's part to create a public opinion, to mobilize the masses against
the inertia of the bureaucracy, and to mobilize support for perestroika. It is
visible, audible, and very popular amongst the intelligentsia. This kind of
glasnost is in our interests. It lets fresh air into a country grown stale in
70 years of Communist rule, and it closes the gap between myth and reality.
Perestroika is an attempt to overcome the glaring economic short-
comings of the Soviet Union, whose growth has been stagnant for almost
two decades. Since the mid-1970's it has been falling behind the capitalist
countries with regard to most key indicators. There is deplorable waste, and
the Soviet capacity for innovation is limited. So perestroika is absolutely
indispensable. It is not necessarily popular because it tells the Soviet people
that they must tighten their belts before they reap any rewards. No one
knows how it is going to work and it is hard to say what its chances of
success are. There is little the West can do to help this process; at least we
should do no harm.
New thinking, especially in foreign policy, is evident in many things
that Gorbachev has done. This new thinking is very much linked to his
person; he embodies the mellowing of Soviet power more than any other
Kremlin leader in history. He is shaking up the drowsy economic machinery
of his country. He has abjured the old dogma that war between capitalism
and communism is inevitable. He no longer considers the post-war era as a
pre-war period. He recognizes the link between Soviet security and the
security of others. He speaks about economic interdependence. He recognizes
the European Community as an entity in its own right, and he talks sensibly
about the global challenges of the future. His human rights record, while
still wanting, is better than that of his predecessors. He preaches moderation
in foreign policy, and he seems ready to translate his words into actions.
68
···-··~-·-·~-,_...,... ____.
There are some uncertainties. Maybe Gorbachev will be gone in three
years, and maybe not. His record at getting rid of his adversaries is quite
formidable. He may turn out to be more durable than anyone today might
think. The second uncertainty arises from the political . and economic
situation in Eastern Europe. Given the endemic state of unrest there, Eastern
Europe poses the most dangerous threat to both Gorbachev's program and to
the improvement of East-West relations. There is still a danger of spon-
taneous' uprisings against Soviet oppression and domination of the kind that
have occurred in the last 40 years. There is nothing to suggest that the
Soviet determination to preserve their rule over Eastern Europe has
weakened in the least. Neither the retreat from Afghanistan nor the recent
Belgrade declaration can be construed yet as a clear repudiation of the
Brezhnev Doctrine. Moscow would probably not hesitate to move in and
crush any rebellion within its orbit. That might end the process of "detente,
round two".
Discussion
In a Finnish participant's view, the key question about glasnost was to
what degree it represented a new way to govern the Soviet Union in place
of the old pattern. Certainly, it had become somewhat easier to see how
decisions were made, and that led to a greater degree of accountability.
Heretofore, Soviet bureaucrats had enjoyed total freedom from control from
below--they had been appointed bosses, rather than leaders with account-
ability.
Since the material fruits of perestroika were still only a hope,
continued the speaker, glasnost was to some extent a concession given for
the hardship economic reform would exact. But glasnost was creating some
new problems by reopening old, long-buried issues, such as the nationalism in
the Baltic states, upon which a tight lid had been kept for a long time.
The real effect of glasnost depended on how deep it went into Soviet
society. So far it was primarily an elite phenomenon, limited to the upper
classes. But it would be different if it went to a lower level, and affected
the education process in the Soviet Union. So far, glasnost represented
mainly cracks in the old monolithic structure, but not very deep ones. It was
still possible that the safety valve of glasnost could be closed off.
A Greek agreed that it was possible that things could "turn sour" in
the Soviet Union. But glasnost was not just on the surface. The cracks in
Soviet society were already very deep. Thus it behooved the West to look
beyond the short term in its dealings with the Soviet Union. The intelli-
gentsia in Russia believed that Marxism had been discredited, and this was
vitally important for the long term. No matter what one thought of the
Russian Orthodox Church, it had been locked in a battle with Marxism, and
many of the intelligentsia were on its side. There was a growing view,
openly expressed, that Marxism was an amoral system. With respect to the
environment, people were openly talking about the disasters of the Marxist
model of development, as embodied in the Chernobyl incident. Gorbachev was
responding to this public opinion. It was very important for the West to
69
have a dialogue with the Soviet intellectuals, who, having discredited the
Marxist model, were searching for alternatives.
While there was a general consensus among participants that the West
should take steps to help Gorbachev achieve economic reform in the Soviet
Union, several speakers expressed doubts about how successful he could be.
A Swedish speaker observed that the gap between Russia and the West was
increasing. Perestroika was necessary to modernize the country and make it
competitive with the rest of the world. The Soviet Union was only a
superpower in the sense of having nuclear weapons and military strength. Its
military burden was huge, amounting by some estimates to 25 to 30 percent
of GNP. There could be no change in the Soviet society and economy
without a reduction in this spending; hence Gorbachev's interest in arms
control. But perestroika would be a long time in producing results. Mean-
while, would the old guard be willing to give up its power?
An American argued that the development of a market economy in the
Soviet Union would be much more difficult than in China. For one thing, the
Soviets had never in their history had a market economy. If price reform
was the key, it would certainly be "a flop" in the industrial sector in both
countries. But China was largely agricultural, and so price reform was
working; this was not true of largely industrial Russia. In the area of
foreign exchange, both countries were commodity exporters, but China had
the potential to be an exporter of manufactured goods. The Soviet Union did
not. Finally, the capital requirements of reform in the Soviet Union would be
enormous, with long grace periods, and this presented Western commercial
banks with potential difficulties far worse than they were experiencing in
South America at present.
In another American's view, what was going on in Russia today
underlay nothing less than the "abysmal failure of Communism". Gorbachev
believed that Communism could be reformed by such things as incentives and
other elements of a free market economy. but it was likely that these
efforts would fall far short of .what really needed to· be done. Free market
incentives sprang from an entirely different conception of human nature and
what motivated human ·beings and society. What the Soviet Union really
needed was not reform, but revolution.
An International participant observed that there were other failures in
the Soviet system--in education, public health, environmental protection,
urban planning, and economic infrastructure. To correct these, the introduc-
tion of decision-making independence for enterprises, or a reasonable
pricing system, would not help, because a market economy could not really
take care of these areas. The reason for the failure was the political
system--the lack of accountability, appointments from within the party,
slowness in decision-making, and a lack of checks and balances. To correct
these problems, political reforms were necessary, but it was unlikely that the
political system could be changed.
In the realm of new thinking in the field of defense, an International
speaker acknowledged that there had been some changes--the withdrawal
70
from Afghanistan and a reduction in the operational activity of the Soviet
Navy, especially in the Norwegian Sea. there could also be other changes,
such as Soviet retrenchment in the Third World. But these changes were
limited, and did not necessarily bode well for Europe, as the Soviet Union
could focus its military resources toward Europe, especially if there was a
normalization of Sino-Soviet relations.
There had been no change with respect to Soviet conventional forces in
Europe--lots of talk, but nothing had happened. There could be some modest
Soviet unilateral force reductions for essentially political reasons, such as an
overture to a new U.S. administration, but nothing of any consequence. The
risks of major force withdrawals for the Soviet posture in Eastern Europe
militated against deep asymmetric reductions. Indeed, the Russians had great
difficulty in defining their interests in terms of reductions of military
budgets and forces. It was likely to take a long time before they could do
so, and there was not much the West could do about it.
Some speakers held out the hope for changes in foreign policy that the
West could take advantage of. Were we losing a common enemy? An
American felt the West had to change "its own entrenched thinking". He saw
a "kind of complacency'' on the West's part in watching the developments in
the Soviet Union. We had to start thinking about reformulating our foreign
policy if we no longer had the convenient frame of reference of the cold
war. We might also have to re-examine our tendency to think that interna-
tional organizations like the U.N. had ceased to be useful because of the
predictability of the Soviet exercise of its veto power. Parallel action
through international organizations might become possible.
Another American warned against attributing major foreign policy
changes to Gorbachev. Present Soviet foreign policy was not a Gorbachev
initiative, but developed when Gromyko and Chernenko were in power. This
was not to say that Gorbachev had not made important decisions, such as
the withdrawal from Afghanistan.
It was generally agreed that Gorbachev faced great challenges and
difficulties that could drive him from power. Among the threats to him were
a failure of economic reform, uprisings in Eastern Europe or within the
Soviet Union itself, and internal opposition from the bureaucracy, the KGB,
or the military. A German speaker felt his greatest threat came from the
inertia and resistance to change of the Soviet people themselves.
Several participants wondered, if Gorbachev were to fail, what sort of
leader would replace him, and whether glasnost and perestroika disappear or
stay. A German speaker felt it was hard to imagine a better alternative to
Gorbachev from the Western point of view. He would probably be succeeded
by "a young, iron-eating marshal! or a young Gromyko". An American
observed that what usually happened was that a liberal was succeeded by a
conservative who then adopted the programs of the liberal.
A German speaker observed that, throughout history, power struggles
had taken place between countries, irrespective of their state of economic
development. It would be unwise for the West to assume that the people and
71
politicians in a reformed Soviet Union would be less inclined to exert
military pressure if they had more to lose economically. The Soviet Union
should be allowed to become a civilized, economically efficient country,
trading, manufacturing, and consuming as the West did. But we should not
forget that a civilized country was not, per se, a peaceful one. Just because
the Soviet Union might become more developed and more civilized did not
necessarily mean it would then be more peaceful.
A fellow German agreed that, no matter what happened, the Soviet
Union would remain a superpower and would continue to be a rival to the
West. It would be a mistake to believe the Soviet Union was in an irrevers-
ible decline; rather it was in cyclical decline, much as the U.S. went
through after Vietnam and Watergate. An American observed that the
current cycle would probably end with the revival of Soviet power, but, in
the meantime, there would be a great deal of turmoil.
72
VI. THE FUTURE STRATEGY OF THE ALLIANCE
Working Paper
The Future Defense of Europe
I. Challenges
1. Despite a good deal of brave talk and a number of interesting
initiatives (the Western Eun;>pean Union's "Defense platform" or the French-
German Defense Council), after the surrealistic Soviet/American summit in
Reykjavik and the INF treaty, the "European pillar" of the Atlantic Alliance
remains essentially an abstract concept. Yet in view of the challenges
confronting Europe's defense, the traditional status quo is probably not
sustainable:
(a) the Soviet Union, having replaced intimidation by seduction, is
well placed to pursue its traditional security objectives (notably the
denuclearization of Europe, leading to Euro-American decoupling). Although
the USSR may, at last, be ready to cut back its massive military expenditure
through conventional force reductions in order to bolster perestroika,
Moscow will, naturally enough, attempt to secure denuclearization in the
process.
(b) The United States has entered a cycle of retrenchment in military
spending with cumulative reductions of more than 10% in budget authority by
FY 1988, with further cuts to come. The next U.S. administration will
probably not be in a position to spare forces earmarked for the defense of
Europe from the effects of budget austerity. Such measures will be accom-
panied by an exacerbation of the burden sharing debate, with a potentially
grave outcome in political and strategic terms if it is mismanaged.
2. Western Europe remains a set of nation-states characterized by
limited economic unity - division being particularly prevalent in defense
economics, with the bulk of armaments expenditure remaining confined to
nationally based ventures under the aegis of national procurement bureaucra-
cies - and substantial political and strategic fragmentation, despite recent
attempts towards rapprochement (particularly between France and the FRG).
II. The "European Pillar"
1. Extreme scenarios may become plausible: e.g.
73
Soviet proposals directed at our public opinions, leading to a
"third zero" in West Germany, and ultimately to the denucleariZa-
tion of all or part of Europe, and an ensuing U.S. and U.K force
withdrawal from the continent ("no nukes, no troops"); and/or:
- a fractious burden-sharing debate, eiCacerbated by protectionist
measures, leading to unilateral U.S. force withdrawals and ensuring
fissiparous reactions in Europe ("finlandization" being one type of
response, nuclear sanctuarisation - in the case of France for
example - being another); and/or:
- deliberate measures by some or all of the Europeans to build up a
military potential outside of existing Alliance structures, such as
former Chancellor Schmidt's proposal to merge the French and
West German armies under French command. Although such a step
may in time become an acceptable outcome, it would under present
conditions accelerate U.S. - European decoupling.
None of these scenarios is particularly appealing.
2. For geographical reasons - the lack of Western Europe's strategic
depth - and given the painful lessons of this century's history, Europe's
defense and that of the United States should continue to rely on a
substantial physical U.S. force presence within the framework of a political-
strategic alliance between the U.S. and Western Europe. Therefore the
rationale for the "European pillar" can be summarized as the following:
An instrument for improving and unifying European defense efforts
(not least in the field of arms procurement), thereby contributing
to a better balance in terms of burden-sharing and compensating,
at least in part, the attenuation of the U.S. physical commitment.
A means to provide a unified European response to Soviet
attempts to split the European allies, with the FRG being at the
center of this challenge.
A logical corollary to parallel ventures in the broader economic
field (the 1992 single market).
III. Four Practical Steps
In order to build a "European pillar" capable of meeting these require-
ments, a number of steps, achievable within a relatively brief time span (3
to 4 years), could be taken:
1. ''Hannel II". The challenges of the present age should compel the
Atlantic Alliance to embark on a difficult, potentially divisive, rethinking of
74
its political aims and its strategy. Such an exercise should be undertaken at
the political level and cover the same sort of political ground as the Harmel
report of 1966 as well as the strategic ground of MC 14/3. If successful,
this effort would help re-make the Alliance relevant to our public opinions.
2. Abolishing the D.P.C. France will not rejoin the integrated military
commands. Yet, as Paris proclaims the existence of a single European
"strategic area", France will have to associate herself more closely with
allied defense planning. The procedure to achieve this could be simple: have
Defense Ministers meet in the framework of the Council, thereby short-
circuiting the D.P.C. The bodies run from the D.P.C. would go back to the
Council, with various forms of French involvement.
3. A Coordinated British-French-Gennan Defense Review. The three
principal European countries will be forced, in the next few years, to e~bark
on fundamental reviews of ,their defense priorities: France is burdened with
an over-ambitious 1987-1991 Military Programme; Great Britain had put off a
number of hard choices as a result of the South Atlantic war which will
have to be revisited soon; West Germany is faced with a convergence of
drastic demographic constraints and new programmes (e.g. EFA). It would
make sense to have Bonn, London and Paris, coordinate the timing and the
content of such reviews. This would be a major breakthrough towards a
"better defense" and real European pillar. In the present economic and
political climate, we cannot expect to increase defense spending beyond
current rates, but at least we could rationalize our expenditures.
4. Europeanized Anns Procurement. With the same objective in mind,
the European defense ministers should give new impetus to the two basic
proposals put forward at the IEPG meeting in Seville last year:
- Competitive bidding for defense procurement should progressively
become the norm, beginning with the least politically sensitive
items (subsystems, spares, ammunition). Such a decision to
establish a European defense industrial marketplace would be in
the logic of the 1992 Single Market.
- The setting up of a military version of ESPRIT a European DARPA
as it were - to avoid duplication of military R & D. This would
entail the pooling of a fraction of national R & D resources. This
will be painful for the bureaucracies involved. However, in this
field, as in others relating to the European pillar, the alternatives
look worse.
75
Introductory Remarks
l
Our greatest danger at present is that of euphoria. Our great task is to
be able to take advantage of the opportunities which the present situation
offers, and to protect ourselves against the possibility that Gorbachev is not
what we hoped, that he reverses course, or that he fails.
Alliance strategy since 1952 has been to rely on the threat of nuclear
weapons to deter Soviet expansionism and to compensate for the convention-
al inferiority which the Alliance has faced since its inception. NATO history
since then has largely been one of attempts to bolster the credibility of
deterrence, and therefore to bolster that strategy, pushed principally by the
U.S. against some European reluctance to build conventional strength to the
point where it · would be possible to defend Europe conventionally. The INF
deployment was the last step in the building of that credibility and the
filling out of the strategy of flexible response.
The INF Treaty has, at least temporarily, been something of a reversal
of that process. It is not clear what strategic purposes either the INF or the
START treaties serve, aside from getting rid of categories of weapons and
equating deep cuts with arms control. That aside, what the INF Treaty did
was to reduce NATO's reliance on nuclear weapons in Europe in favor of
several alternatives, among which we must now choose.
One alternative is greater reliance on U.S. strategic forces, something
the Alliance has been trying to get away from, and which would put an
additional burden on strategic forces at a time when START is reducing
those forces significantly. For example, 400 SLBM warheads are assigned to
NATO. After a START agreement, that would represent 35 to 40 percent of
all U.S. SLBM warheads in the Atlantic.
Another alternative would be to bolster NATO nuclear weapons:
modernization, avoiding the third zero. But if we had started arms control
rationally in Europe, we would have begun with the short-range and the
·battlefield weapons. These are of utility mostly now to demonstrate that we
are resisting the slippery slope toward denuclearization. They are hardly
adequate for deterrence.
Sea-launched cruise missiles present another opportunity. But there are
significant problems, including verification, how START will handle them in a
strategic role, whose vehicles would such missiles be on, and how would they
be managed.
Another route is to enhance our dual-capable aircraft. Again, that is a
mission we have been trying to get away from for some time, because our
tactical aircraft are needed for the conventional battle. To have them sitting
off the end of the runway, reserved for a nuclear mission, is a difficult
trade-off.
Conventional build-up is another possibility--to reduce the imbalance
which resulted in our dependence on a nuclear strategy in the first place.
This would be a very difficult process. The U.S. faces a budget crisis, and
the arguments for burden-sharing are getting louder. But this alternative has
to be seriously examined.
The last alternative is conventional arms control, to reduce the
76
imbalance by asymmetrical Soviet reductions. Many believe the Soviets would
never agree to this, but that is not necessarily so.' They do not have to
resolve their Eastern European strategy before they decide on conventional
arms control. They don't need all those forces to keep Eastern Europe
pacified. Moreover, they used outside forces, not forces on station, to put
down both the Hungarian and Czech uprisings. Conventional arms control
would require fairly deep asymmetries in order .that NATO forces not be
reduced below that point where they are able to constitute a viable defense,
and still be sufficiently deep for the Soviets to have any interest. Conven-
tional arms control is likely to take a very long time because it is not
nearly so simple as nuclear arms control, where the effects are more easily
calculable.
The Alliance has to decide what it wants. In START, the implications
of missile cuts down to 4900 missile warheads are to increase the vul-
nerability of our strategic forces, both ICMB's and SLBM's. We might well be
down to 17 or 18 Trident boats, perhaps only five or six on patrol in each
ocean--a very small number of boats carrying a very large number of
warheads. We ought to distribute those warheads on a large number of
boats--an expensive proposition. We will significantly increase the vul-
nerability of our ICBM force, or allow its attack by a lesser proportion of
the Soviet hard-target capable force. The only response we really have is
mobility, also very expensive. Defense is another option, further in the
future, and also expensive. We are looking toward mobility, but we are
asking the U.S. Air Force to decide between a mobile missile and a new
fighter aircraft; it's not hard to figure out what the Air Force will chose.
The clear consequence of these treaties is increased defense spending.
That will be counter-intuitive to the country and the Congress, which will
expect some kind of monetary dividend from the successful completion of
arms control. This will come at a time of severe budget crunch. The U.S.
defense program at present has been built on an estimate of an increase in
defense forces of eight to ten percent a year. The result will be calls for
burden-sharing with troop withdrawals almost inevitable. How will Europe
take the notion of burden sharing while the U.S. is reducing its defense
budget?
The political situation is paradoxical. We potentially face the greatest
opportunity for progress in negotiations with the Soviets since the beginning
of NATO. But the Alliance also faces its most dangerous period. Can we do
what is required? We first must decide what is required. The recent NATO
summit failed to address most of the serious problems facing the Alliance.
What do we want, in conventional forces, in nuclear forces, in arms control?
How do we get more bang for the buck? How do we deal with the cost-
sharing issues in a cooperative rather than an acrimonious way, especially at
a time when the Soviets and many in our midst are saying the threat has
vanished?
Strength and determination--plus Gorbachev and economic problems--
have brought the Soviets to the table. The question is, will the West give
away this opportunity through euphoria or indecision, or will we move into a
period of real progress?
77
Introductory Remarks
II.
The European-American relationship has never been an easy one, but
the difficulties should not make us forget Churchill's admonition that the
only thing worse than fighting with one's allies is fighting without them.
A simple extension of the status quo is probably not tenable, in view
of the existence of an agile, professional, creative Soviet leadership; the
reduction in U.S. military spending; the trend toward delegitimization of
nuclear deterrence; and, more importantly, the fading perception of the
Soviet threat--a trend that no doubt will have been encouraged by post-
summit euphoria. All of this exists notwithstanding undiminished Soviet
conventional capabilities whose relative weight will have been enhanced by
the INF and START treaties.
A number of new Alliance initiatives, along with measures leading
toward the construction of the European pillar, are a necessity. European
initiatives can provide positive inputs to the Alliance, and allow operations
which would not have been as readily feasible without such a European
inspiration. One recent example is the recent European participation in the
Gulf alongside the U.S. fleet. This can be compared to the rather lamentable
spectacle of the overt split between the Allies during the de-mining
operations in the Red Sea in 1984. In the security field, the Western
European Union platform on European security interests which was adopted
last October in the Hague provided direct positive input into the NATO
summit last March and into its communique.
In time, progress in such European initiatives will lead to competition
with the discussion drafting process within NATO, and this understandably
makes a part of the American body politic somewhat nervous. But these
sorts of reactions can be managed if it can be proven that there is enough
gained for the Alliance when there is European cooperation.
There are four short-term initiatives which can be undertaken between
now and 1992. These initiatives assume that the principal of reactivating the
Western European Union is a given. If this reactivation is not a success, the
present attempts at building a European pillar ·will end as did previous
efforts in . the 1950's and 1960's, with the rubble of so-called European
defense strewing an unchanged Alliance landscape. Nor is the issue of
European institutions in the field of security and defense raised. There are
many of them, and thus no compelling reason to create new ones. The
problem of harmonizing the institutional landscape is one that cannot be
resolved in the short term, until the effects of 1992 are clear. We should see
what can be done with what exists at present, without closing options.
Each of the four initiatives can be undertaken on stand-alone basis,
but it would be better to do them in a coordinated fashion.
The first suggestion, Harmel II, is not intended to destroy or dismantle
Harmel I as it was drafted in 1967. It remains a remarkable document, and
perhaps updating it might be sufficient. But something more is probably
required: an in-depth, .comprehensive, political, strategic review. This sort of
review should initially be conducted by a wise-man's group and should cover
a broader agenda than did Harmel I, with a considerably larger arms control
78
segment. This sort of exercise will be highly divisive. But we need to have
the debate and to arrive at some political common ground. The alternatives
1
to not doing so are worse. We would be condemned to reacting helter-skelter
to whatever proposals may come out of the Kremlin.
The second suggestion is the proposal to abolish the DPC. The bottom
line is that France should, and probably can, participate in the NATO
deft;nse-planning process under certain conditions. Conversely, France has
few incentives to reintegrate the military command as such.
The idea of a trilateral defense review is a target of opportunity, not
an attempt to create a directoire among the French, the Germans, and the
British. Rather, it flows from the fact that it will be necessary for each of
these three countries to deeply revise the present structure of their defense.
Resources are simply not adequate vis a vis existing force structures or
plans. This will, of course, be difficult. But, the net effect would be a major
rationalization of defense exp11nditure.
The forth proposal--already endorsed in principal by the ministers of
defense of the Independent European Program Group countries--is to open
arms procurement within Europe to competitive bidding.
The hardy perennial of burden-sharing will blossom quite spectacularly
during the new U.S. administration no matter who is elected. The budget
crunch will filter down and severely affect the American force structure.
Keeping that debate under control will be difficult, and anything the
Europeans can do to show that their efforts are contributing to improving
allied security will help. That is a clear rationale for the European pillar.
These initiatives taken to confront the short-term challenges can
provide a basis for more ambitious ventures in the future. But these will
depend on meeting the short-term challenges to .our security and defense.
Later on, we may consider building on the success or coping with the failure
of the process of European economic unification--the 1992 objective, whose
potential effects on the security landscape can only be guessed at at this
stage, but will certainly be of great importance, not least with respect to
Eastern Europe.
Introductory Remarks
Ill.
The Alliance faces a great many challenges, both internal and external.
Certainly, one can be optimistic about the West-West relations because we
have had a period of great success. Regardless of the strategic implications
of the INF agreement, the Alliance demonstrated cohesion and consensus in
its pursuit of the agreement. One of the major challenges now being faced is
where do we go from here.
There is a post-INF agenda which includes halving the strategic
arsenals, arriving at a stable conventional balance at a lower level, banning
chemical weapons, and reducing testing of nuclear weapons. There is a
consensus on these elements, but achieving them will be difficult. One of the
Alliance's highest priorities is the drawing up of a comprehensive concept of
79
------~---.-
..-.. ·-....,..,.·----:~~----.---~.~-~-~~,--
arms control on the one hand and defense posture on the other. If we do
not succeed in presenting to our people exactly why we still need some
nuclear weapons and why we can do without others, then we will be in
political trouble. We need to address this 'problem, taking into account that,
within the Alliance, there are a number of partners that have special
geopolitical problems with nuclear arms.
This is particularly important with regard to the Soviet emphasis on
denuclearization and the ability of Europe to resist it. It was interesting
that, after the INF agreement had been negotiated, it was broadly accepted
in the Netherlands, for example, that, even with the agreement, the Alliance
would still be relying on a nuclear component for Western security. That
would not have been true three or four years ago, because we could point to
no practical success in arms control. The INF agreement has had a big
impact, not only in raising popular expectations for more progress, but also
because it has shown that dealing with security is not only dealing with a
spiralling arms race. This is of political, psychological significance which
should not be overlooked.
We should take a stand against denuclearization. One can share the
lofty ideal expressed py Gorbachev and Reagan of a world that is totally
nuclear-free, but it is not · politically desirable to create such a political
illusion at the· present time. We should instead make it clear that, when
Gorbachev says that a nuclear war is not winnable, he is right and that is
exactly why the deterrent works and is credible. How you compose the
deterrent arsenal is another question altogether that belongs in the
discussion of establishing the comprehensive concept.
An issue which will certainly make West-West relations difficult in the
coming years is the matter of burden-sharing. Still, it can be resolved, as
long as the Europeans do not only think of burden sharing as sharing the
political authority, and as long as the Americans do not think of burden
sharing exclusively in terms of finance. European public relations in the
United States seem to have lagged behind in the past years on the subject
of the European contribution to the Alliance. Europeans should get in touch
with American Congressmen, because, in the Congress, there is the feeling
that the Europeans are lagging behind in their efforts. Actually, the level of
the European contribution, as indicated in a recent publication of the IEPG,
to the Alliance defense effort is quite impressive: 90 percent of the
manpower, 90 percent of the artillery, 80 percent of the tanks, 80 percent
of the combat aircraft, and 60 percent of the major warships. Furthermore,
Europeans also share burdens and risks of nuclear deterrence, not only
financially, but in terms of political burden sharing in the sense of having
nuclear weapons on their soil.
Further, when speaking about burden sharing, we have to think of the
European naval participation in the Gulf. There, the Western European Union
has shown one of its reasons for existence. What they did is, for the first
time in history, to identify a vital, out-of-area interest that affected their
own security, and moved to protect that interest. This bodes very well for
the West-West relationship, and contributes to solidarity, not only against
certain widely acknowledged threats, but also in other global issues for
which Europeans have tended to take too little responsibility. There is much
more similarity in the interests of the U.S. around the world and those of
80
Europe than one tends to think.
Another point of contention may be the American troop commitment in
Europe. The Europeans would much regret a reduction in this number
without any significant progress having been made in the conventional
stability talks in Vienna. Europe highly values the American contribution, but
an American threat to reduce this contribution unless Europeans contribute
more would be unacceptable. The freedom and security of Europe is a
common interest shared by the U.S.
Of course, Europeans must make the utmost effort to overcome these
bottlenecks. But it is true that the budget constraints faced by the U.S. are
also being faced to a large extent by the Europeans. Our margin of
manoeuvre is extremely small. We must all commit not to reduce defense
spending further, because that tendency is present in Europe as well. We
must at least maintain the level of what we are doing, and we must explore
closer defense cooperation among the Europeans, including the creation of
one industrial defense market in Europe.
It may be that, in the coming years, we will be more preoccupied with
West-West relations than with East-West relations.
Discussion
The view that the Alliance needed to develop a comprehensive concept
on which to base its future strategy in response to change in the Soviet
Union was widely endorsed by participants in the discussion. This was
particularly important, many speakers felt, as the Alliance moved toward the
next generation of arms control negotiations: START, short-range, and
conventional.
Our experience in the arms control area over the past five years, said
a German, underlined the need for a comprehensive concept. There had been
no systematic basis to the arms control proposals put forward by the West
during this period; proposals involving different systems had been advanced
at different times, without due consideration of their interrelationships. We
had to have a concept of what systems we needed for our security before
we made decisions about the next arms control priorities. In particular,
worried an International speaker, we had not yet determined what we wanted
in terms of arms control in the strategic area. An American added that we
had to stop making proposals to the Soviets on the basis that they would
never accept them. It would not be surprising, he continued, if, early in the
term of the next U.S. president, Gorbachev proposed a conventional arms
proposal along the lines of two-for-one asymmetry and a unilateral with-
drawal of two or three divisions from Eastern Europe. We had to get our
house in order promptly if we were to be in a position to respond to such a
proposal.
A comprehensive concept of our minimum defense needs was also
essential in political terms, said a Dutchman. Only with it could we convince
our peoples and parliaments that these minimum defense requirements had to
be kept up to date. It was also needed if we were to educate our publics
81
about the role of nuclear weapons in our collective security, said a Canadian.
It was an American's view that we had to think out together our options
and decide what kind of balance we needed 'militarily and politically to
maintain the vigor of the Alliance.
As to the appropriateness of convening a wise men's group along the
lines of the Harmel Report to chart a comprehensive concept, there was
some division of opinion. An International participant admitted he was uneasy
about "getting into a high-profile huddle" to decide where the Alliance was
going. If the future was not a logical extension of what we were already
doing, then we were going to have problems with our public consensus. In an
American's view, Harmel II ran the risk of becoming "divisive and
irrelevant". Any study, the outcome of which was already apparent, would
not be very useful, and would end up not so much a road map as a "wiring
diagram for an explosion". In defense of the concept of a Harmel II, an
International speaker observed that the original Harmel report was done in a
period of change, and a strong case could be made for repeating the effort.
In thinking about the future of the nuclear force structure in the U.S.
and Europe, said a German, the basic question was what structure we needed
to deter the Soviets and to reassure the Europeans about the U.S. commit-
ment. When discussing denuclearization, many in the security elite mirrored
the psychosis of the peace movement; what people in the peace movement
hoped for, people in the security elite feared. The issue in deciding the
future of land-based nuclear weapons in Europe was not denuclearization.
Even if we got rid of all land-based nuclear weapons in Europe, there would
still be air- and sea-based weapons with which to deter a Soviet attack.
Indeed, the U.S. commitment would be more reassuring to many Europeans if
it relied less on short-range and battlefield weapons. Germany would
certainly be less exposed without them. Most short-range weapons deployed
in Eastern Europe were conventional, anyway. Thus it would be to the West's
advantage to eliminate both the nuclear and the conventional option.
Therefore, the speaker concluded, he supported the third zero.
An American responded that it might be right that air- and sea-based
weapons would be enough to deter. But the Alliance had been trying to
bolster the ability of deterrence to make and Soviet strategy unwinnable.
Were we now going to test how much we could eliminate before deterrence
failed? A Dutch participant agreed that it would be unwise to get rid of
battlefield nuclear weapons unless we had an idea of what we were going to
do without them, or with what we were going to replace them.. A Canadian
argued that elimination of short-range nuclear weapons was not even an
adequate form of conventional arms reduction. It could produce a decoupling
between U.S. nuclear and conventional forces in Europe, resulting in the
isolation of American forces in Europe. It would tend to confine the U.S.
response to a Soviet attack to firing weapons from its own soil or from
international waters; this was not a fair sharing of the risk. The instruments
of nuclear deterrence should be spread fairly among the principal areas we
were trying to deter the Soviets from attacking.
An American underlined that Western strategy was deterrence, and that
nuclear weapons were a part of that strategy because they created "uncer-
82
tainties of such a gross nature" that no one could rationally calculate
objectives in a conflict. Conventional deterrence, on th~ other hand, was
notoriously unreliable, as 'the Europeans well knew. Another American warned
that, as we discussed nuclear and conventional weapons and the need to
strengthen them, we had to make sure the debate did not present nuclear
weapons as a compensation for the conventional imbalance. Otherwise, the
goal. of the Alliance would become conventional balance without nuclear
weapons, and we would end up denuclearizing ourselves.
Most speakers agreed that conventional arms negotiations would be
difficult, complex, and fraught with danger. An American warned that we had
to be careful in negotiating asymmetries in terms of such things as
establishing troop ratios, which might be attractive to the Soviets. It was
better to concentrate our efforts on hardware.
A British speaker agreed with the notion that the Soviets were unlikely
to agree to conventional redpctions in Eastern Europe before Gorbachev had
decided on the future of his policy there. The Soviet Army stationed there
was an instrument of social and political ·control. It was also a very
offensive army. There were no natural defenses in Eastern Europe, and there
was an enormous military infrastructure. All this made for a very unstable
military situation, compounded by the NATO doctrine of forward, mobile
defense.
The Soviets relied heavily on the tank, a weapon seriously out of date,
and vulnerable to a certain kind of defense--namely an obstacle large enough
so that a tank could not cross it. The West ought to get across the idea to
the Soviets that it would construct this sort of defense on the main Soviet
routes of advance into Western Europe unless they began removing their
forces. In addition, the military infrastructure should be included in
negotiations. If the Russians left behind in Eastern Europe a large in-
frastructure, they could always return. We had to bargain for a demilitariza-
tion of Eastern Europe.
An International speaker doubted that such a conventional deterrent
would work. He went on to say that he feared the inherent complexity of
the conventional negotiating process. There was no certainty that conven-
tional negotiations could run along the same lines as nuclear negotiations. It
was not possible to define what was a stable conventional balance. Indeed, if
there was such a thing, we would not need nuclear weapons.
The view that Eastern Europe could provide the real danger of East-
West conflict was expressed by a Canadian, who felt that NATO's strength
had limited the danger of a premeditated Soviet offensive against Western
Europe. In Eastern Europe, however, the instability brought about by change
could lead to the inadvertent escalation of a crisis into war. One of the
West's great challenges was going to be how to manage change in Eastern
Europe.
A German participant argued that the West, in defining its interests in
arms control, should give certain guarantees that we would not disrupt the
security relationship between the Soviet Union and its Eastern European
satellites. An American responded that he was troubled by the idea of
persuading the Russians to get rid of or redeploy some of their conventional
83
weapons in exchange for the West's promise not to undermine the Soviet
military position in Eastern Europe. In this context, an Austrian wondered
what the balance would be in an East-West conflict, in view of the fact that
many people in these countries hated their own leaders and the Soviet
Union.
A Dutch speaker felt reassured that Gorbachev was, at present, further
ahead in his thinking than the leaders of the satellites. The best strategy
for Western Europe to follow was to capitalize on the common cultural
heritage with Eastern Europe. These countries had a great interest in trying
to enhance cooperation in scientific, economic and cultural fields, and to
soften the consequences of the division of Europe. We should join in this
kind of cooperation without giving the Soviet Union the idea that we were
trying to drive a wedge between them and their satellites.
In the area of West-West relations, burden sharing was seen by most
speakers as the most challenging issue. Several American participants
addressed this matter. One urged that any formulation of a comprehensive
concept had to take burden sharing into account. It was bound to be a
major issue in the current year's elections. It was possible that the issue of
burden-sharing in the U.S. was more political talk than anything that would
be translated into budget action, but it had to be taken seriously.
Because of the fiscal situation in the U.S., said another American, the
next president would face the uncomfortable choice among raising taxes,
revising the budget, or simply allowing the deficit to rise. Burden-sharing
was a phrase American candidates could use to answer the question of what
to do about defense spending. It was a way of pointing the finger at
someone else.
A third speaker from the U.S. pointed out that the Congress was
motivated by more than just budgetary considerations. Many Americans were
asking why defense spending should be increased at all. Even with a
balanced budget, increasing military spending would be very difficult. Among
the reasons he cited: a skeptical view of the separateness of France within
the Alliance; questions about European unity; atrociously expensive U.S.
weapons procurement, with huge cost overruns and lack of controls;
interservice rivalries; a "frittering away'' of the Packard Commission reforms.
Much needed to be done to retrieve the confidence and support that existed
six years ago in the U.S. for adequate defense spending.
Marshalling Western public opinion in support of the objectives of the
Alliance was widely seen as a vitally important component in forging the
Alliance's future strategy. How, asked a Canadian, could we maintain
adequate public support for our defense policies and expenditures? We had
become victims of our own rhetoric by portraying the Soviet threat and
danger as a direct function of the size and strength of its military forces.
The image that Gorbachev now was projecting made that increasingly hard
for our publics to understand as a source of danger. We had to find ways to
get across to our publics a deeper understanding of the security problems
that existed in Europe. An American agreed, suggesting that we undertake a
84
i
I
f
I
I
!
!
I
I
i
l
'
!
I
f
~
l
"massive education program" on the nature of the Soviet Union.
A participant from Norway exprbsed particular concern about how to
arouse public support for the increased conventional expenditure that would
be brought about by a reduction in nuclear weapons. While the reality was a
huge Russian buildup in the Kola Peninsula and total control by the Russians
of the Polar Sea, Norwegian public opinion was becoming convinced that the
old enemy was disappearing.
An Austrian said that Europeans no longer believed that their security
and stability were sufficiently safeguarded by a large arsenal of weapons,
nuclear or otherwise. Indeed, there was an aversion to nuclear technologies,
whether military or non-military.
The answer, said a Dutch speaker, was to show that there was no
current alternative to nuclear weapons. At the same time, leaders had to
demonstrate that . they are Sl.Jfficiently concerned by the risks that they were
working to bring it down to the lowest possible level and still assure
security and stability.
NATO's challenge in the coming years was summarized in this discourse
by an International participant. The real problem we faced was change and
our perception of change. We in the West and our collective security were
inextricably involved in a process of change. We had to look at how much
had really changed in the Soviet Union, and how much only appeared to
have changed. Gorbachev did not want the West to fear the Soviet Union.
He had seen that saber rattling against Western Europe had produced only
Western unity.
The INF treaty was far simpler in its specifics than a negotiation on
conventional arms would be. It was, at the same time, enormous in its
ramifications--an unravelling of many of the rationales the West had
accepted for its security. For the Soviets, the INF agreement was the first
step toward the denuclearization of Europe. That, along with the dis-
appearance of NATO, and the U.S. departure from Europe, were Gorbachev's
objectives.
It was significant when Gorbachev said war was not inevitable, but it
was not an indication that Soviet external goals had changed. Perhaps there
was new thinking, but there was the same old military structure, with its
doctrine, organization, deployment, equipment, etc. There had been no
changes in Soviet production of armaments since Gorbachev came to power.
The Russians were proceeding to build new classes of nuclear submarines,
new carriers, and other weapons systems. All this indicated that it would be
hard for Gorbachev to change the military situation even if he wanted to.
What, then, could the West do? Most important,. it had to provide
stability in a time of transition by supporting and maintaining our strategy
of deterrence and defense. Otherwise, we would be contributing to the
dangerous aspects of the transition. We had to present to our adversaries
something they could understand as a stable position. The strategy of
forward defense and flexible response was not an orthodox one; it had to be
continually re-examined. But there was no alternative to flexible response;
nothing else would collectively satisfy the Alliance. We had to remain stable
and cohesive in order to face the Alliance's most difficult challenge.
85
In order to face a threat, we had to have a strategy, and a strategy
was no good without the 'resources to back it up. We had to modernize and
to restructure. We would not have the resources without public consensus on
the danger. Now, the public consensus was wavering, even about whether the
danger was there in the first place. We needed to look at deterrence as a
historical question--where it had worked and where it had not. And we
needed a comprehensive concept of what we were doing. This concept should
ask if we supported the strategy of flexible response and forward defense.
Our answer must be that we wanted NATO, we wanted the U.S. in Europe,
and we wanted nuclear weapons.
We needed to realize that disarmament was not peace. We need a
reaffirmation of our principles. We needed to master change and transition.
We did not need to greatly change our strategy, because there was really no
alternative. We needed a comprehensive approach to deterrence and defense
which took into account the common interest.
86
VIII. THE GULF AND AFGHANISTAN
Working Paper
Issues in the Iran-Iraq War
The political and military environment in the Persian Gulf has been
transformed during the past eighteen months. After nearly eight years of
brutal warfare between Iran and Iraq--and talk of a new Hundred Years
War--even the most cautiops optimism may seem misplaced. Nevertheless,
present trends appear to offer the most serious opportunity for negotiation
of a cease fire since 1982. The following is a brief review of key develop-
ments over the past year and a half:
1. Failure of the Karbala V Offensive. In January and February 1987,
Iran mounted one of the largest offensives of the war in an attempt to
break through Iraqi defenses at Basra. Karbala V had been meticulously
prepared for more than a year, and Iran benefited from significant infusions
of weaponry from the United ,States, Israel and China, among others. Karbala
V was hailed in advance as the "decisive offensive" of the war by Iran. But,
despite a supreme effort, it failed.
2. Iran's Change of Strategy. After this failure, the Iranian leadership
was forced to ask itself whether still another offensive the following year
would yield any different results. By June, the commander of the Revolution-
ary Guards announced a new strategy relying on a "series of limited
operations" along the border and guerrilla raids with the Kurds in northern
Iraq. Although Iran did not renounce its fundamental war aims, it ack-
nowledged tacitly that the war could not be won in a single, decisive
offensive. And some individuals in the Iranian leadership seemed to signal a
new willingness to consider a cease-fire if the proper terms were offered.
3. Entry of the Western Navies. In the wake of the Iran-Contra affair,
the United States undertook a more active role in the Gulf on the side of
the Arab states by reflagging eleven Kuwaiti tankers and deploying substan-
tial naval forces in the area. When Iran responded by placing mines in the
shipping lanes, naval forces of Belgium, the Netherlands and Italy joined
those of Great Britain, France and the United States in minesweeping and
patrol duties. Although each country acted on its own, these deployments
effectively represented the first introduction of a NATO presence into the
Gulf.
4. Resolution 598. On July 20, 1987, the United Nations Security
Council adopted a comprehensive resolution demanding a cease-fire and
withdrawal of forces in the Iran-Iraq war. This was the first time in its
history that the Security Council had unanimously invoked the mandatory
87
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter. The resolution called for an
immediate withdrawal of all forces to the international boundary before
other elements of a settlement, e.g. reparations, were discussed. Since Iran
was the only party holding territory outside its own boundaries, it was
widely anticipated that Iran would reject the resolution, thereby triggering a
second resolution imposing an arms embargo. For some U.N. members--
particularly the United States--the arms embargo against Iran was the main
objective.
5. Iranian Counter-Proposal. Contrary to expectations, Iran did not
reject the resolution. Instead, Iran offered to observe a cease-fire if an
impartial commission were established to determine who started the war. The
concept of an impartial commission had been written into Resolution 598 as
paragraph 6. . Iran believed, with some justification, that Iraq would be
identified as the original aggressor, thereby providing Iran with political
vindication and legal grounds for seeking reparations. Iraq refused to
consider any deviation from the original order of the paragraphs and sharply
escalated its attacks on Iranian civilian targets. Secretary General Perez de
Cuellar developed an "implementation plan" that provided for a commission to
begin work simultaneously with the beginning of the cease fire and began
consultations with the two parties.
6. The Iran AJR Affair. This diplomatic effort was interrupted by a
retaliatory exchange between the United States and Iran in September and
October 1987, after the United States attacked an Iranian minelaying ship in
the central Persian Gulf. By late December, tempers had cooled and a new
round of diplomatic efforts began. Through Syrian good offices, the Gulf
Cooperation .Council states opened direct discussions with Tehran.
7. Iran Moderates its Position. By February 1988, Iran indicated to the
U.N. Secretary General its willingness to accept all provisions of Resolution
598, including a formal cease fire .with U.N. supervision and the initiation of
troop withdrawal from Iraqi territory, on condition that these moves be
paralleled by the formation of a commission to fix responsibility for starting
the war. However, Iraq remained unwilling to consider any departure from
the original order of the paragraphs of the resolution. The United States
(president of the Security Council in February) insisted that Iranian offers
were merely a stalling tactic and redoubled its efforts to impose an arms
embargo on Iran. The U.S. efforts were supported by France and Great
Britain but encountered resistance from China and the Soviet Union, as well
as many of the non-permanent members of the Security Council, including
German, Japan and Italy.
8. The War Escalates. On March 1, Iraq initiated a new phase of the
war of the cities by firing nearly 100 modified SCUD missiles at Iranian
cities during a two-week period. Iran responded to this attack by launching
a ground attack in Kurdistan. As Iranian forces approached the town of
Halabjah, Iraq bombed the town with mustard and nerve gas, killing up to
5,000 of its own citizens as well as Iranian military personnel.
88
9. The Samuel B. Roberts Affair. li:J. early April, Iranian units placed
approximately 8-10 mines in the central Persian Gulf, one of which struck a
U.S. Navy ship on 'April 14. Four days later, the United States retaliated by
demolishing two Iranian oil platforms and sinking or damaging six Iranian
vessels. After this exchange, China announced that it would not participate
in an arms embargo against Iran, thereby removing whatever lingering hopes
the United States may have harbored about passage of a second resolution.
10. The Taking of Fao. On the same day as the U.S. attack, Iraqi forces
in a lightning thrust succeeded in retaking the Fao Peninsula, which Iranian
forces had occupied since February 1986. Except for the incursion in
Kurdistan, this effectively removed all Iranian troops from Iraqi soil.
This highly abbreviated summary of a complex series of events points
toward several general observations:
As of mid-March 1988, the ground forces of both sides were roughly
back to where they started when the war began in September 1980.
Over the 18-month period, the level of ground combat was desultory.
The war of the cities and the tanker war were entirely at the discretion of
Iraq, with Iran in a reactive mode.
The United States, by its naval presence and support for Iraq,
restored much of its credibility in the eyes of the Arab states of the Gulf
after the Iran-Contra debacle.
Iran, which relied entirely on the Strait of Hormuz to export its oil
from the Persian Gulf, could not challenge the naval supremacy of the
United States and its NATO allies in the region.
Despite the most recent clashes, Iran maintained its formal offer of
a conditional cease fire in the war. The seriousness of Iran's offer has yet
to be tested.
On the surface, this set of conditions would appear to offer a
promising basis for a new diplomatic effort, perhaps the best opportunity
since 1982 when Iran drove Iraqi forces out of Khuzestan. The "implementa-
tion plan" of the U.N. Secretary General in pursuance of Resolution 598, now
approved by the Security Council, appears to provide an appropriate basis for
such an effort.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union seem to have concluded
that the continuation of the war is contrary to their own national interests.
The Soviet Union, given its overwhelming internal problems and its
disastrous experience in Afghanistan, is showing signs of renewed interest in
multilateral diplomacy through the United Nations. The practical possibility
of superpower collaboration on regional issues through the U.N. was recently
demonstrated by their co-signature of the Geneva accords on Afghanistan.
Both Iran and Iraq are war-weary. Iraq is deeply in debt and, not
89
unlike England after World War I, has sacrificed the flower of an entire
generation to this war. Iran is struggling to maintain its critical oil exports
'and has begun to experience serious difficulties in mobilizing public support
for a war that it no longer believes it can win. Iran's failure to mount more
than· a token defense of Fao in April seemed to be more a reflection of
futility than incompetence.
All that being said, it is difficult to be even modestly optimistic about
the prospects for an end to the fighting. Iran, which has just completed its
third parliamentary election since the 1979 revolution, is in the midst of a
severe factional struggle for power. Khomeini is the essential glue that holds
the Iranian revolutionary system together, but he is now approaching his
86th birthday. Over the past year, those individuals in the Iranian leadership
who prefer a more traditional foreign policy have proved to be surprisingly
durable in the face of internal and external challenges, but that is no
guarantee of their survival even in the short term. Moreover, in a revolu-
tionary society, any evidence of accommodation with external enemies is
regarded with suspicion. Can Iran make good on its offer of observing even
a conditional cease fire? It is impossible to tell until it has been tried.
Iraq to date has refused to consider Iran's proposal of a comm1ss1on to
determine who started the war. After its recent victory in Fao, Iraq would
appear to be in a better position to be magnanimous. However, victory is
seldom a prelude to compromise. It is likely that Iraq will require some
measure of persuasion if it is to modify its stance. The United States and
the Soviet Union would seem to be perfectly positioned to make such an
appeal, but neither superpower has been willing to make even the slightest
gesture in that direction in the past, for fear of yielding a temporary
advantage.
The history of the Iran-Iraq war, like other conflicts in the Middle
East, has been a history of missed opportunities. If this moment is to be an
exception, it will require an exceptional measure of diplomatic skill and more
than a little luck. Those are commodities that have lately been in short
supply in the Persian Gulf.
Introductory Remarks
L
In confronting the Iran-Iraq war, the states of the Gulf Cooperation
Council, although they do not often achieve the reality of coordinating their
policies, are moved by some principles or emotions which they hold in
common. Hrst, they all are predominantly Arab states, and their ethnic and
cultural instincts draw them to support Iraq, even at the risk of endangering
their own national interests. Arab-Persian antagonism goes back a long way
and has been reinforced since the Second World War by the growth of the
Arab League and the trend toward the idea of Arab solidarity.
At the same time, these states are all, to some degree, suspicious of
Iraq and nervous about her long-term ambitions in the Gulf. They see her as
a populous, potentially powerful and potentially rich neighbor with a
90
revolutionary, so-called progressive, socialist regime fundamentally different
from and opposed to their own monarchical, 'traditional constitutions.
These states are also nervous about Iran, her revolution, her form of
Islam, her potential for subversion through the Shiite population in several
of the states. They fear that, in the short term, Iran might expand the war
to include them, and they know that in the long term, they will have to find
some means of living alongside Iran in peace and cooperation when the war
is over. So they try to avoid provoking Iran.
These common factors apply with different force and different
qualifications to the different states. The instinct of Arab unity which leads
Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to feel obliged to support their fellow Arabs in a
fight against the Iranians, is felt less strongly by Oman, for example, which
is on the periphery of the Arab world and has often followed an independent
line. Moreover, it, and the ,UA.E. are more geographically remote from Iraq,
and hence feel less nervous about future danger from Iraq. Saudi Arabia has
a common frontier with Iraq, which lies in a desert plain and offers no
military line of defense. Kuwait is even more vulnerable and knows that Iraq
has territorial claims against her.
With Iran, the UA.E., especially Dubai, have close and profitable
commercial ties, including shared oil production. They also have a large
Iranian population, and clearly it is in their interest to cultivate a friendly
relationship with Iran. Oman has reached the same conclusion. Kuwait and
Saudi Arabia have accepted that it is impossible for them to have a friendly
relationship with Iran. In the case of Kuwait, her geographical position has
made it impracticable to avoid helping Iraq or to conceal that help; this is
so partly for Saudi Arabia, and partly because they are ideological and
political enemies. Iran views Saudi Arabia as the stooge of the West. Saudi
Arabia has shown forbearance in the face of provocative Iranian attacks, but
seems now to have decided that patience and conciliation will not work. She
is dealing with Iran more confidently, no doubt in part because of the
Western naval presence in the Gulf.
As perhaps an offshoot of that confidence, Saudi Arabia may now be
preparing to establish diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. The
Russians would welcome such a move, and there is a body of opinion in
Saudi Arabia which has favored it for some time, if only to show the U.S.
that it is not true that the Saudis do not need to be wooed or humored
because they have nowhere else to go; or if only to vent the Saudis'
indignation at what they see as the humiliations imposed on them by
Washington over the negotiations on arms supplies. But King Fahd has so far
resisted any move toward Moscow, and it is unlikely the new mood of
confidence will help to change his mind. Saudi policy, both foreign and
domestic, has traditionally been very cautious. The Saudi purchase of Chinese
missiles should satisfy their indignation against Washington for a while,
especially as they are grateful for the American naval presence in the Gulf.
Still, the establishment of relations with the Soviet Union is a possibility.
Two other small states in the Gulf are Bahrain and Qatar, both of
which are close to Saudi Arabia and would likely follow the Saudi line. At
the moment, each has a reason for lying low and avoiding any action
provocative to Iran. Bahrain has a large Shiite population, and Qatar's oil
production is dependent on an island exposed in the Gulf. Anyway, neither
91
state is of great importance.
These differences in outlook are not necessarily a handicap to the GCC.
They enable it to keep open a channel of communication and negotiation
with Iran thrbugh some of its neighbors even though Iran is openly hostile
to others. They also make it difficult for Iran to adopt a monolithic policy
toward the Arab states of the Gulf.
Another factor makes it impossible to ascribe to the Gulf states a
single, consistent attitude to the war. In Saudi Arabia, at any rate, the
government sees the war as a disaster. It is constantly aware of the danger
of escalation, of the threat to its own security, of the cost of financial
assistance to Iraq, of the future cost of post-war reparations and recon-
struction, much of which is bound to fall on the Saudi treasury. The Saudi
people, on the other hand, who, because of the absence of democracy and
public debate, are much less aware of costs and dangers, are inclined to see
the war as a tolerable circumstance in which two potential enemies of their
country are exhausting themselves and thereby diminishing their power to
cause trouble in the future.
In the UA.E., especially Dubai, the war is actually bringing commercial
and financial benefits in the form of semi-illicit trade with Iran and useful
business for the ports and shipyards.
Though it has never been publicly declared, what in effect has
happened is that the NATO countries have taken sides in the war for Iraq
and against Iran. First, officially these countries are neutral. Second, none
has any great admiration for the present Iraqi regime. Third, the interven-
tion is ostensibly in defense of freedom of navigation, and yet it is Iran
that wants and needs free navigation and Iraq who wants to stop it.
Finally, the intervention was ostensibly at the request of Kuwait, which is
far from an ally or even close friend of the U.S. and the Western powers
and, while seeking this intervention, is also embarrassed by it.
So why have the NATO powers intervened in so one-sided a fashion?
Presumably because they have concluded that the one outcome of the war
that must be avoided is an Iranian victory, that although the Iraqi case is
far from being proven just, and although Iraq is far from being an agreeable
regime, it is at least predictable and can be dealt with and talked with.
Iran, meanwhile, is irrational, unmanageable, revolutionary, fanatical, etc.
And of course, we have been pressed into intervention by our friends King
Hussein and King Fahd, whose friendship is important to us and whose
friendship might have been lost and whose own position might have been
weakened had we not intervened.
This intervention has, in some respects, been realistic and hard headed
and probably right, but it has involved the West in inconsistencies and
convolutions. It is not clear how Jong it will last and how we should bring
it to an end.
92
Introductory Remarks
II.
The Iranian revolution is running· out of steam. Iran decided a year ago
that it could not win this war. This has had a significant effect not only on
the conduct of the war, but of the revolution itself. In the early days, Iran
believed that the world needed Iran, and not vice versa. Like most revolu-
tionary regimes, it was out to totally change the world. In the succeeding
ten years, the Iranians have learned that the reverse is true. Iran's
revolution is maturing in the sense that they have discovered that they have
problems of their own.
Since December, the focus of Iranian politics has shifted from the
external to the internal. Iran today is much more concerned about its
stagnant economy, the absence of progress on a whole series of social issues
that were promised during the revolution and which have never been
fulfilled, and an internal agenda that remains unmet. There also is a great
lack of popular enthusiasm for the war that has extended from the leader-
ship level down to the average man, to the point that it is now difficult to
mobilize the kind of support the war had in the past.
Iran has just been through an election process. Much publicity has been
given to the fact that the so-called radicals won. That is true, but the
radicals who won are radicals on the internal agenda who want to save the
revolution. The war is an obstacle; it is no longer something that holds them
together, or serves their purpose.
In addition, Khomeini is getting older. He is not as firm as he was in
the past in his leadership, and there is a sense in Iran that he is fading,
and that they better get their house in order before he disappears. In short,
after ten years, it is safe to say that the Iranian revolution is concerned
with building clericalism in one country, rather than exporting the revolu-
tion.
The war has now been turned over to the foreign ministry to try to
deal with it diplomatically. Over the past year, Iran has made a series of
quite forthcoming offers on the negotiating side. These have largely been
disregarded, primarily because the Western nations were more concerned
with imposing an arms embargo on Iran than with pursuing a genuine
ceasefire. Are the Iranians serious about these offers to obey Resolution
598? We won't know until we try, and so far we haven't been willing to try.
The U.N. Secretary General has proposed proximity talks between the two
sides to come up with a date of a ceasefire and the terms of reference of a
commission to look into the causes of the war, as well as other issues. To
date, the Iraqis have refused, and it looks as though the Iranians are
going to accept.
Islamic fundamentalism was overstated as a threat from the beginning,
although it was real. Many religious groups in the Arab world were aroused
by the image of Iran and its successful revolution. Those days are over. The
religious groups remain, but are no longer a political threat. The danger of
an Iranian victory in this war is close to zero, so the political implications
of Islamic fundamentalism are no longer what they were.
Because of Iran's shift to an internal agenda, there is a good possibility
93
that the war will end, maybe this year. This will require some diplomacy,
and a demonstration of will on the part of the countries involved that they
want the war to end. There have been many voices saying this war should
continue.
Pressure is going to grow over time for the U.S. and the other Western
countries to reduce their military presence in the Gulf, partly for economic
reasons, but also partly because we are trapped in an escalatory cycle. The
U.S. presence was useful to prove that we had not shifted to the Iranian
side, but the policy no longer makes much sense. We are presently at the
mercy of two abominable regimes. Whenever either decides to escalate the
war, we end up picking up the pieces after them, to no particular effect. Is
this now worthwhile?
Iran is quietly pursuing a set of openings to the U.S. and to the West,
trying to open up lines of communication. This is a continuation of its policy
during the Iran-Contra affair, when the connections began to get very
serious. The Iranians continue to pursue this connection.
With the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the one lesson they have
learned is that unilateralist adventures abroad have lost their appeal. The
Soviets have, in the process, rediscovered the United Nations. Thus, there is
a window of opportunity in the next several years when one might think of
using the U.N. in the way in which it was intended. Certainly if the Gulf
conflict is to be brought to an end, it will be the U.N. that does it. It is
relatively cost-free for the superpowers to support the Secretary General.
Many things could still go wrong. We are not talking about a good guy
and a bad guy in the Gulf, but rather two bad guys. To be on the side of
one and give up the possibility of doing a deal with the other is to shoot
ourselves in the foot. We should be more evenhanded and try to bring this
war to an end.
Introductory Remarks
III.
The .Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan can be explained by three
factors: the military and political stalemate in Afghanistan; the shift from an
active third-world policy to an emphasis on East-West and European issues; a
lesser emphasis by Gorbachev on the non-capitalist way of development for
third-world countries.
Why did the Soviets leave Afghanistan? From the beginning, they
wanted to avoid the Vietnam syndrome by keeping the Afghan war as a low-
level, local conflict, thus avoiding any escalation or direct spillover into
neighboring countries.
To keep the war at a low level meant not to go beyond a certain level
of involvement in number of troops, human and economic costs, and political
and diplomatic costs. That meant no more than 120,000 Soviet soldiers in
Afghanistan, no hot pursuit, as few casualties as possible, no diplomatic
isolation and, most important, consolidation of the Kabul regime, both
militarily and politically.
94
But, by 1986, it became obvious that it would be impossible to keep the
war within the framework of this "Afghan postulate". The regime was not
consolidated, Kabul's army was unable to fight without Soviet involvement,
condemnation by the U.N. General Assembly was getting increasing support,
Pakistan was not destabilized, and delivery of the Stingers and the growing
efficiency of the resistance foretold an increasingly bloody war, even if
Soviet troops were not yet endangered in their bases. Thus, the Soviets
faced either escalation or negotiation. In fact, they did neither; they decided
to withdraw.
The first consequence of their withdrawal is not necessarily that the
conflict will cease, but that the East-West dimension of the conflict will
fade away in the face of local, sometimes parochial, interests. The Geneva
Agreements are not a Peace Treaty. They do not settle any future regime in
Afghanistan. They are an agreement on the Soviet withdrawal, made possible
only because the Soviets d,ecided not to link their withdrawal with the
consolidation and legitimization of the Kabul regime.
The U.S. has indicated that it does not have strategic or vital interests
in Afghanistan, except not to have Soviet troops or a Communist regime
there. One of the consequences of Soviet withdrawal will be that American
influence in the area will probably decrease, and a new tension between
Pakistan and the U.S. over the nuclear issue will arise.
There will be a soft Soviet presence in the area. For the first time, as
far as governing Communist parties are concerned, the Soviets made no
linkage between their strategic interests and an ideological commitment: The
establishment of a Communist regime on the Soviet border is no longer· seen
as the best asset for implementing not only the security of the Soviet
borders, but also the strategic breakthrough of the empire.
But this does not mean that the Soviet Union will give up its interests
in Afghanistan. Soviet policy will be based on three objectives. First, they
will try to adapt very closely to the political situation that will follow the
withdrawal, without being bound to predetermined goals. the Soviets will
support the Najib regime as long as it survives; if it collapses, the Russians
will withdraw the remaining Communist forces to a security zone in the
north of Afghanistan that they will maintain as long as there is no strong
mujahedeen government in Kabul. Second, they will not risk being re-
involved militarily in Afghanistan. They will generally avoid any initiative
that could make them lose the political and diplomatic gains of the military
withdrawal. Third, they will seek to retain economic and cultural influence in
Afghanistan by using such factors as proximity, influence of Soviet-trained
students, cheapness of Soviet goods, and availability of scholarships.
There follow three hypotheses. First, Najib will not remain in charge,
but will collapse in less than a year. Second, a civil war along ethnic lines
is possible, but it will not be fundamentalists against moderates. Rather, it
will be Persian-speaking people against Pashtun-speaking people, or within
Pashtun-speaking groups. The third possibility is that there will be a
nominal but legitimate mujahedeen government in Kabul. The choice between
the last two hypotheses is mainly in the hands of the Pakistani Army, which
determines Pakistani policy. Pakistan has two objectives in Afghanistan.
First, they want to control the tribal area in order to reverse the old
Pakistan-Afghan issue. Second is to have a friendly government in Kabul--
95
that of the party of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. The problem is that this party is
the most extremist of all the Afghan parties, has little support inside
Afghanistan, and is mainly Pashtun. The coming to power of this party would
automatically trigger the outbreak of civil war in Afghanistan, the conse-
quence of which would be Lebanonization of Afghanistan. If that happens,
Pakistan will control the tribal Pashtun area, the Iranians will dominate the
Persian-speaking people, and the Uzbeks in the north could find some
protection from the Soviets. It is strange that the U.S. supported the
Pakistani policy almost from the beginning.
For the Soviet Union, the Afghan issue is a military defeat, but it
could mean a diplomatic breakthrough in the area. The conservative Arab
states are ready to talk with the Soviet Union. The ties between the Soviet
Union and Iran will also improve. Afghanistan was one of the few bones of
contention between them. Pakistan will also try to find some support from
the Soviet Union, especially if there is new tension between it and the U.S.
on the nuclear issue. Indeed, the Lebanonization of Afghanistan is in the
Pakistani interest because it needs to have a continuation of the tension in
Afghanistan in order to retain American support.
As for the pro-Soviet regimes, they might be worried about the Soviet
withdrawal. But it fits with Gorbachev's "do it yourself'' policy toward pro-
Soviet countries. The only real danger for these regimes from the Soviet
withdrawal is internal. One lesson of the withdrawal will be that Communism
is reversible. Second, it is that Communism has been beaten by Muslims. This
is of consequence to all Soviet Muslims in the long term, and to other
nationalities within the Soviet Union.
Discussion
A Turkish participant opened the discussion by giving an overview of
the Gulf conflict. The prolongation of the war was causing great instability
in the region. Neither side had been able to establish decisive superiority
over the other, and both were hurting. The war of the cities had seriously
damaged the morale of the Iranian people. Adding to the growing pressure
on Iran was its isolation internationally. Iran's military capabilities had been
damaged by the Iraqi attacks on the Fao Peninsula and by U.S. retaliation in
the Gulf. And Iran's economy was in a shambles. As for Iraq, its advantage
was in superior equipment and financial backing from other Arab states. But
its own resources were limited, and it was deeply in debt.
Iraq realized it could not force a military victory, so its aim was to
force Iran to the negotiating table. As for Iran, it seemed determined not to
renounce its fundamental war aims, but it was apparently seeking a peaceful
settlement, in part because it sought to regain international sympathy.
Hence, it had accepted Resolution 598. What was needed to achieve a
settlement was a new, more pragmatic and realistic approach than had been
tried. A formula based on the consent of both parties should be negotiated
with both sides confidentially. Turkey, which had good relations with both
96
~
?
i
I
I
I
I
'
sides and had remained strictly neutral, was ready to assist in reaching such
a solution. ,
What were the obstacles to the present efforts by the U.N. Secretary
General to reach a settlement? In the view of a Briton, the point had been
reached where all parties wanted an end to the war without victor or
vanquished. But Iran was still imposing conditions. Another potential obstacle
was that the presence of the Western navies in the Gulf caused an imbalance
that might deter Iran from coming to the conference table.
An American disagreed, saying that Iran had now accepted the new
negotiating plan put forward by the Secretary General. This plan included
the establishment of a commission to determine the blame for the war. The
Secretary General had modified Resolution 598 in a way that made it
satisfactory to Iran, so that the Iranians were showing signs of being ready
to talk. Meanwhile, the Iraqis were being stubborn.
An Austrian speaker worried that the war would not end soon because
there were too many who did not wish it to end. As long as the two sides
were bleeding each other, they presented less of a threat either militarily or
in terms of Islamic fundamentalism. A Briton responded that this might have
been so on the part of some Arab governments in the early days of the war,
but now all the Gulf countries were nervous and frightened by the war, and
wanted it to end.
With respect to Western bias toward Iraq, a longtime Bilderberg
participant from Switzerland, who was unable to attend the conference, put
the following views before the conference via a telex. It was Iraqi President
Saddam Hussein who bore primary responsibility for four aspects of the Gulf
conflict. First, he started the way by invading Iranian territory. Second, he
started the attacks against oil shipping in the Gulf. Third, he started the
bombardments of cities and civilian populations in Iran. Fourth, he started
the use of chemical weapons in the conflict.
In spite of Hussein's "deplorable role," the West had supported him
throughout the conflict. This was due more to antagonism against Iran than
to admiration for Hussein. Western support should continue for Iraq as a
country, for its army, and its people--but not for its president. It seemed
likely that, if Hussein stepped down or was otherwise removed, the door to a
peaceful settlement would open. Thus, the West should "terminate all support
for Hussein".
A British speaker said this view "filled (him) with unease". The West
could not afford to return to the days when it tried to engineer the
disappearance of leaders in other countries. We could not support Iraq and
not at the same time support its leader, however much we disapproved of
him. We could not get involved in conspiracies, no matter how much we
wanted to achieve a settlement.
An American argued that the West's support of Iraq was "essential and
proper". It was true we had no common interests with Saddam Hussein.
Indeed, he recognized that his interest was in not having the Iranian threat
totally removed. But getting rid of Hussein would not have ended the war;
rather, it would have given the Iranians a new incentive to pursue it. With
the war petering out, however, we should be thinking about how to
97
disentangle ourselves from Hussein, who might well turn into the "bully of
the region".
Participants in the discussion expressed considerably more interest in
the future of Western relations with Iran than with Iraq. A Swiss speaker,
whose view of Soviet foreign policy was that it aimed to "encircle China and
Europe", felt that the Soviet Union had an essential incentive to establish
friendly relations with Iran. This could put the Gulf war in an East-West
framework. Was it possible that a modus vivendi could be reached between
communists and Islamic fundamentalists for strategic reasons?
In an American's view, if the war ended without victor or vanquished,
the two superpowers would "start out essentially even" in the area. But the
Iranians were more threatened by the Soviet Union than by the U.S., and
they knew that. They would have to balance their superpower neighbor to
the north with the other superpower; they had nowhere else to go than to
reach an accommodation with the U.S. It was inevitable that some sort of
relationship would be resumed. But there was a tremendous internal power
struggle going on in Iran, and Khomeini's death could result in civil war, in
which the Soviets might be tempted to take sides in order to guarantee an
outcome they would prefer. So the potential for an East-West conflict over
Iran was there.
In another American's view, it made no sense for Iran and the U.S. to
be enemies. Besides China, Iran had the longest frontier with the ; Soviet
Union. And there was no logical American geopolitical objective in Iran. Why
then, was it so difficult for Iran and the U.S. to establish a dialogue?
It was difficult, came the answer from a countryman, because of three
factors: the Iranian revolution, the hostage crisis, and "Irangate". These
factors had fundamentally colored American attitudes toward Iran. We faced
a culture that had used the U.S. as a whipping boy, as a means of mobilizing
internal support. The result was a sense of hostility toward Iran on the part
of Americans.
Iran had made two "catastrophic errors in judgement". First, the
hostage crisis had immensely complicated its ability to conduct foreign
relations with the rest of the world, and with the U.N. Second, in 1982, Iran
did not stop with its successful repulsion of Iraq back to the original
boundaries. It could have claimed victory, but instead, Iran crossed the
border, and the result was total failure. Despite all this, the U.S. and Iran
had come close to establishing a relationship before the effort erupted
publicly in the form of Iran-Contra affair. Contacts stopped dead, and the
result had been a "trauma" in Washington which would have to be overcome
before new initiatives could be undertaken.
Several speakers wondered about what obstacles were presented by
Iran's apparent involvement in hostage-taking in Lebanon and its sponsorship
of international terrorism. An American responded that, in his view, the
connection between Iran and the hostage-taking in Lebanon had been
exaggerated. It was true that Shiite groups in Lebanon received training,
money, and· political support from Iran, but Iran's actual degree of control
over these groups' activities was only moderate. The real problem in Lebanon
was the state of anarchy there. As for international terrorism, the idea that
98
~~
't
'f,
-t
t
J
''I
::;::;::""'.t!~-;c;-':'2:;:;:,_~""-"""'"'"""'"""""'- bii!iifu!iilil<®'¥i!MM'*-~ p
Iran was "terror central" was overdone.
An American participant wondered what effect the outbreak of peace in
the Gulf might have on oil prices. Physical obstacles to the transportation of
oil would largely be removed. The need for resources for reconstruction
would be great. The need for financing for military purposes would be
reduced. So might some of the obstacles to OPEC political cooperation. The
probable result would be an increase in production and a decline in prices.
Oil planners expected a significant reduction in non-OPEC oil in the
nineties, and thus a significantly increased reliance on production in Saudi
Arabia, Iraq, and Iran. The West would be back to a state of great
dependence on the Gulf region.
A Briton agreed that the West would be substantially dependent on oil
from the Gulf by 1995. Therefore, the Western industrialized countries should
start talks with OPEC now. OPEC was in disarray. By 1995, it would not be,
and would be reluctant to 'compromise.
Peace would mean downward pressure on prices, agreed an American,
and a marginal increase in production. But he foresaw no collapse in oil
prices. Indeed, oil prices had shown remarkable stability in ten years of
instability in the Gulf--war, revolution, and attacks on shipping. The focus
on the Gulf as the primary source of supply did not mean a big increase in
oil prices in the next 20 years. We were not facing an oil crisis.
This prompted a Briton to suggest that now would be a good time for
the U.S. to impose a $.50 a gallon tax on gasoline as a means of attacking
the budget deficit and limit oil consumption. Two Americans responded that
such a measure made good sense on both counts, but was politically
impossible at the present time. One said that it would be more feasible if it
were phased in gradually. The other felt a gasoline tax would probably have
to be part of a package that included an oil import fee. Another American
worried about the impact a gasoline tax would have on the American
manufacturer.
The discussion of the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan focused on
two themes: what sort of government might come to power there, and what
effect the withdrawal might have on Pakistan.
An American wondered if the West had "helped create a new monster"
in the form of a radical Islamic regime coming to power in Kabul. But a
French speaker felt this was not a matter of great concern. There was no
common strategy among Islamic fundamentalist groups in the region.
Afghanistan's government would certainly be Islamic, but there were some
moderate fundamentalist groups that were pro-Western. What was more
important was the political shape and strategic alliances of the next Afghan
regime.
As far as Pakistan was concerned, an American felt that the obligations
placed on her by the Geneva accords could lead to pressure on Pakistan. The
Soviets might blame Pakistan if the civil war in Afghanistan continued.
Another American said that, although the Russians had charged the
Pakistanis with breaking the accords by continuing to supply the mujahedeen,
the pace of Soviet withdrawal had not slowed.
A third American expressed the view that one of the ironies of the
99
Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan was that Pakistan could become le~s
stable. There' was a danger that the U.S. might cut off aid. A countryman
observed that the combination of non-proliferation sentiment, Indian
pressure, Soviet complaints, and inconclusive civil war in Afghanistan could
separate the American perception of its interests in the area from Pakistan's
perception of hers. If the U.S. sooner or later abandoned or lost interest in
Pakistan, this would bolster the image of the U.S. as an unreliable, even
dangerous friend.
In a French speaker's view, the Soviet Union could pursue two
different courses with respect to Pakistan. First, it could try to foster the
disintegration of Pakistan along ethnic lines by exploiting ethnic divisions.
The pro-Soviet parties in Afghanistan were almost all ethnic parties. Second,
the Soviets might try to befriend Pakistan. Western policy toward Pakistan
should be to press for democratization. If the West was seen as supporting
General Zia, the opposition could become radicalized, and the army might
then court the Russians. As for the nuclear issue, it was too late. Pakistan
certainly already had the bomb. We could not let this determine the future
of Pakistan's relations with the West.
100
f
CLOSING
In closing the conference, Lord Roll expressed his view that the
standards of the Bilderberg Meetings had once again been well maintained
and that the purposes of Bilderberg had been well served.
On behalf of the participants, Lord Roll thanked the Austrian hosts, in
particular Chancellor Vranitzky. He also thanked all those who had made the
conference a success, including Dr. Georg Zimmer-Lehmann; Dr. Diemut
Kastner and her staff; the management and staff of the Interalpen-Hotel
Tyrol; the security staff; the Bilderberg Secretariat; and the interpreters. He
acknowledged with gratitude the contribution of the working paper authors,
the panelists, and the moderators.
101
