...
..
I I CS t""'
....
'
·-.
PERSONAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
MARIENLYST
CONFERENCE
9- II May Ig69
•
o:i
0
~
I:""'
t:I
<O
0
>
t'fl
z
~
:;.=
-
o:i
-
t-rj
~
t'fl
~
M
M
~
~
~
z
Q
'
°
M
t'
"
'
I
i$'.
Ol
z
~
tt::
<O
t'fl
0
Cf;
...,
,....
M
~
z
Q
Ul
•1
°'lili\iil!E"'
.."''"'M""A±""~,""\,,,,,,,,.¥,·'">*'"I
\tf
,j
CONTENTS
List of Participants
Introduction . . .
First Item of the Agenda
"Elements of instability in Western Society"
Summary of and introduction to American working paper.
Summary of and introduction to German working paper
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Second Item of the Agenda
"Conflicting attitudes within the Western World towards relations with
the ussR and the other Communist States of Eastern-Europe in the light of
recent events"
Summary of and introduction to International working paper
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
9
13
27
32
43
48
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON
HONORARY TREASURER:
JOHANNES MEYNEN
OBSERVER: H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX OF THE NETHERLANDS
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ALBERT, MICHEL
ALTMANN, RUEDIGER
BALL, GEORGE w.
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S.
BELL, DANIEL
BENEDIKTSSON, BJARNI
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BENTREM VAN DEN BERGH, GODFR!ED VAN
BERCHTOLD, WALTER
BIRGI, M. N URI
BISSELL, CLAUDE
BROOKE, EDWARD W.
CADIEUX, MARCEL
CARIGLIA, ANTONIO
CAVAZZA, FABIO LUCA
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
ITALY
INTERNATIONAL
GERMANY
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
leELAND
UNITED KINGDOM
NETHERLANDS
SWITZERLAND
TURKEY
CANADA
UNITED STATES
CANADA
ITALY
ITALY
UNITED STATES
5
CzERNETz, KARL AUSTRIA RICHARDSON, ELLIOT L. UNITED STATES
DAHRENDORF, RALF GERMANY RITTERBACH, MANFRED E. GERMANY
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES RoBERTs, SIR FRANK UNITED KINGDOM
DENMARK, PRINCE HENRIK OF DENMARK ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
DUCHENE, L. FRANCOIS INTERNATIONAL ROLL, SIR ERIC UNITED KINGDOM
FELDT, K.O. SWEDEN ROTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE FRANCE
FONTAINE, FRANCOIS FRANCE RusK, DEAN UNITED STATES
GREEN, JOHANNES DENMARK SANDEGREN, KAARE NORWAY
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G.S. CANADA SCHLEIMANN, j0RGEN DENMARK
HAMILTON, DENIS UNITED KINGDOM SCHMELZER, w. K. NORBERT NETHERLANDS
HAMILTON, EDWARD K. UNITED STATES SCHMIDT, HELMUT GERMANY
HARTLING, POUL DENMARK S0RENSEN, s. 0. DENMARK
HAUGE, GABRIEL UNITED STATES STAERCKE, ANDRE DE BELGIUM
HEATH, EDWARD UNITED KINGDOM STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
HELDRING, jEROME .L. NETHERLANDS TIDEMAND, OTTO G. NORWAY
H0EGH, LEIF NORWAY ULLMANN, MARC FRANCE
JANSSEN, DANIEL BELGIUM UMBRIGHT, VICTOR H. SWITZERLAND
JORDAN ]R., VERNON E. UNITEO STATES URI, PIERRE F. FRANCE
KAMPMANN, ]ENS . DENMA11.K V ALLARINO GANCIA, LORENZO ITALY
KENISTON, KENNETH UNITED STATES WAGNER, GERRIT A. NETHERLANDS
KocH, HANS H. DENMARK WALLENBERG, MARCUS SWEDEN
KOHNSTAMM, MAX INTERNATIONAL WorTRIN, MICHEL BELGIUM
KRAGi']ENS 0. DENMARK WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO GERMANY
KROGH, PETER F. UNITED STATES YLVISAKER, PAUL UNITED STATES
LANGE, HALYARD M. NORWAY
LANGSLET, LARS R. NORWAY
' IN ATTENDANCE:
LENDVAI, PAUL AUSTRIA
LITTEN, ]ENS GERMANY AsBECK, HENRIK J. BARON v AN NETHERLANDS
LUCHSINGER, FRED SWITZERLAND CITTADINI CESI, MARCHESE GIANG. ITALY
LuNs, JosEPH M.A.H. NETHERLANDS MAROTT, OLE DENMARK
McKINNEY-M0LLER, MAERSK DENMARK RoY, BERTIE LE NETHERLANDS
McLUHAN, MARSHALL CANADA VERNEDE, EDWIN NETHERLANDS
McNAMARA, RoliERT S. INTERNATIONAL
MORSE, DAVID A. INTERNATIONAL
MOYERS, BILL D. UNITED STATES
NETHERLANDS, PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
NYKOPP, ]OHAN A. FINLAND
0TTONE, PIERO ITALY
REVERDIN, OLIVIER SWITZERLAND
6 7
·:i1;;\:'i~}~i~i~;:;~,~~i~;~:.~"1;10i.i·::·.' ,.f11'1
II
~
INTRODUCTION
The eighteenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at Hotel Marie~lyst in Elsinore
(Denmark) on 9, ro and r 1 May 1969 under the Chairmanship ofH.R.H. The
Prince of the. Netherlands.
There were approximately 85 participants from the United States, Canada
and 14 Western European countries as well as from various international
organizations. They consisted of members of governments, politicians, promi-
nent businessmen, journalists, leading national and international civil servants
and outstanding representatives of the academic world and other groups.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke
in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization to which they might belong. In order to enable
participants to speak with the greatest possible frankness the discussions were
confidential, with no representatives of the press being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. Elements of instability in Western Society.
II. Conflicting attitudes within the Western World towards relations with the
USSR and the other Communist States of Eastern Europe in the light of
recent events.
9
•
,.
ELEMENTS OF INSTABILITY IN WESTERN SOCIETY
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands opened the Meeting and recalled
the Bilderberg rules of procedure.
The Prince proposed to send a telegram to His Majesty the King ofDenmark
in order to express the gratitude of the conference for the hospitality in Den-
mark. Another telegram was sent to Mr. Lamping - who had resigned as
Deputy Secretary General - in which he and Mrs. Lamping were thanked for
all the work they had done for the Bilderberg Meetings.
The Prince announced that Professor Pesmazoglou of Greece, who was
invited to come to the conference, was prevented to do so by the Greek authori-
ties.
H.R.H. mentioned that for the first time there was a substantial group of
much younger people among the participants and expressed his hope that the
discussion between the "generations" would be fruitful.
*
* *
The background for discussion of this item of the Agenda consisted of two
papers by a United States participant and by a German participant, which
had been distributed before the meeting.
SUMMARY OF THE AMERICAN WORKING PAPER ON
SOURCES OF INSTABILITY IN THE UNITED STATES
INTRODUCTION
For anyone considering the United States little more than a decade ago, a
question about the sources of political and social instability would seem an
improbable one. The United States was then seemingly at the height of its
powers. The communist world, after the Ig56-57 events in Poland and Hungary,
was apparently falling into disarray. Domestically, there had been eight years
of relatively high prosperity at stable prices. The threat of radical-right extre-
mism, in the shadow ofJoe McCarthy and his depredations, had faded away.
Social justice for the Negroes was under way. Like the public personality of
President Eisenhower himself, the country seemed bland, selfassured and
I3
eager to advance the broad, if platitudinous, conceptions of universalism in
foreign affairs and progress at home.
There were some small clouds on the horizon. Economic growth had slowed
down so that by the end of the· decade it was no longer rising at a sufficient rate
to match the increases in the labor force and in productivity. At the same time,
unemployment had risen to more than 6 percent ofthe labor force. But because
the greater number of unemployed were black and unskilled, with little means
for becoming politically effective, the unemployment situation, for the while,
was ignored. Toward the end of this term, President Eisenhower began
running a large budget deficit to increase demand, but the effort did not reach
a growing number of "hard-core" unemployed.
The paradox of the. Kennedy administration was that its very elan, and
activism,-the need to seem and be effective-in many respects, both in the
foreign field as well as at home, stimulated and unleashed the forces of turbu-
lence which rack the United States today.
It would be absurd to assume that such agitation and turbulence might not
h:;we come to the fore. The classic illustration of the trajectory of expectations,
first laid down by de Tocqueville· and repeated tediously since then by &ocial
scientists, tells us that no s6ciety which promises justice and slowly begins to
open the way, having admitted the legitimacy of the claims, can .expect to ride
out the consequent whirlwind in a comfortable fashion. But along with the
rising tumult of the blacks and the disadvantaged came an ambiguous war, and
the combination of the two, which reinforced each other, has led to rising
domestic violence, the alienation ofthe youth, and the growing challenge to the
legitimacy of the system among the intelligentsia and the leadership cadres of
the young, all of which have brought into question the very stability of the
system itself.
It would be equally foolish to assume that immediate and manifest causes,
important as they are, can wholly disorient a society as large and powerful as
the United States. Underneath, there have occurred upheavals, sociological
and technological, which have been reworking the social structure of the
society. These changes, four in number-the simultaneous creation of an urban
society, a national polity, a communal society, and a postindustrial world-will
outlast the immediate viscissitudes of the war and poverty and continue to
create deeper upheavals and tensions in the society. And beyond these structural
changes in the society lie three other areas of difficulty which will profoundly
affect the future of the United States: the rel<ttion of democracy to empire and
the question whether any democracy can maintain an imperial role; the
participation revolution, with its challenge to technocratic and meritocratic
modes of decision making; and the profound changes in culture, with funda-
14
f
!
!
lI
I
'
l
.I
r
I
I
mental anti-rational and anti-intellectual bias in the arts and in the modes of
experience and sensibility.
Considering the future of the United States one has to deal with these three
dimensions: the immediate political and social upheavals; the structural
changes; and the fundamental questions. of value and cultural choices. And if
one is to consider these questions in the light of the problem of social and
political instability, one must also turn, at first, to the consideration, at the
level of sociological theory, of those factors which precipitate instability and
revolution or counter-revolution in a society.
THE SOURCES OF INSTABILITY
The key question for any political system - this is the triumph of Max Weber
over Marx in contemporary social thought - is the legitimacy of the system.
As S. M. Lipset has written:
Legitimacy involves the capacity of the system to engender and
maintain the belief that the existing political institutions are the most
appropriate ones for the society. The extent to which contemporary
democratic political systems are legitimate depends in large measure
upon the ways in which the key issues which have historically divided
the society have been resolved.
While effectiveness is primarily instrumental, legitimacy is evalua-
tive. Groups regard a political system as legitimative or illegitimate
according to the way in which its values fit with theirs.
(S. M. Lipset, Political Man; New York, I963, p. 64)
If one looks at Western political society in the twentieth century, one can
identify seven factors which, in varying combinations, have resulted in the
social instability of the society and the consequent loss of legitimacy for the
political system:
r. The existence of unemployment as an insoluble problem of the I93os;
2. The existence of a parliamentary impasse (Italy, Portugal and Spain in the
I920s and 1930s);
3. The growth of private violence which led to the breakdown of authority
(Germany);
4. The disjuncture of sectors (industrialization and traditional agriculture:
Brazil);
5. Multi-racial or multi-tribal conflicts (India, Nigeria) and differences
between language groups (Belgium, Canada);
15
..
6. The alienation of the intelligentsia;
7. Humiliation in war (Wilhelminian Germany and Tzarist Russia).
Within this framework one can identify as the sources of instability and
strain in the United States: the Vietnam war, the alienation of youth, the
rancor of the blacks and the multiplicity of social problems which derive from
the structural changes in the society.
THE BREAK-UP OF CONSENSUS
A society mobilized to meet an external threat, where that threat can be
unambiguously defined, unifies a country.
The United States in the 1950s was a mobilized society. It was mobilized,
primarily, to meet the threat of international communism.· After an initial
demobilization in 1946-1947, there came a rapid build-up ofarms. The Korean
war brought about a vast expansion of a conventional arms force. NATO and
SEATO extended these arms, under a presumed nuclear shield, around the
world, and for the first time in American history a permanent military establish-
ment had been created.
By the end ofthe 1950s, the situation had changed. International communism
was no longer a monolith. Evil no longer seemed unambiguous. Different kinds
of communism had come to the fore. The United States was in the quixotic
position ofproviding aid to Tito and even to Gomulka. Ifthe Soviet Union was
still expansionist, that aggressiveness was more and more defined in traditional
great-power terms than as ideological fervor. The moralism which hadanimated
American foreign policy for a decade, particularly in the rhetoric of John
Foster Dulles, had become attenuated. Ironically, moralism, a feature of the
American style, was increasingly taken over by the opponents of the society,
by the New Left, who began to characterize the United States in the same
"totalistic" terms (as evil, sick, and bankrupt) as the United States previously
had characterized its political enemy, and who began to picture American
society itself in monolithic terms by such phrases as "the system'', etc.
Looked at historically, it is the 1950s, not the 1960s, that are the exception.
The degree of national consensus, in part through willing agreement, in part
through the silence of those who felt cowed, was itself momentary. What one
sees, then, in the 1960s, is the resumption of an historic leftism in American and
other societies. This leftism itself has no unified character. It is in part (in
origin, at least) the drive towards "inclusion" in the society, particularly of the
blacks and the poor; it is also, especially among the literary intelligentsia, part
of the cultural rebellion, an anti-bourgeois attitude, and finally, it takes on the
features of anarchism and nihilism, a revolt against the increasing pressures of
the technocratic organization of life in the society.
16
THE TENSION OF INCLUSION
The most obvious point of strain in American society, domestically, is race.
The militancy of the blacks, the fact of riot, the threat of further strife are
pervasive. How did it all come about?
The primary clue to the changing political role of the American Negro is
the recent, and remarkable, demographic shift.. In 1910, about ninety percent
of the Negroes in the United States lived in the South. As late as 1950, sixty-
eight percent still lived there. 1960 was the "dividing year"; at that point half
the Negro population was now in the North, and the balance has been shifting
strongly in this decade.
It was not only that the Negro has been leaving the South; he has become
urbanized as well. In 1910, just about three-fourths of the Negroes lived in
rural areas; by 1960, almost three-fourths of them lived in cities. In 1960, in
fact, for the first time in American history, American Negroes had become
more urban than whites.
Another social development - the movement, sometimes a flight - of the
white population to the suburbs left the Negro population with the possibility
of developing political power within the central city limits.
This changing demographic and political map allows us to see how the
black community begins to be able to mobilize effective social power. But by
itself it does not explain the trajectory of the "civil rights revolution" the
emergent black nationalism, or the temper of the black militants.
The turning point in the civil rights revolution was, clearly, the Supreme
Court decision in May, 1954, which struck down the principle of segregation
in public schools. In so doing, it emphasized the meaning of the term equaliry
as the overriding value in judging social change. It stated that blacks should
have full and equal access to public facilities and services in the nation. But
there were two further sociological consequences of this decision. One was the
fact that the highest court in the land had legitimated the demands of the
Negroes; and, second, that the moral initiative hadpassedintothehandsofthe
blacks. The burden ofproofwas now no longer on the Negro but on the white.
Since that year a number of distinct gains for the Negro population in the
field of income and education have been registered.
These advances mask, however, a more complicated aspect of mobility in the
American social structure. If one looks at the various studies of achievement
in the UnitedStates, most notably the so-called Coleman-Reporton performance
in the schools, it is clear that not race but social class is the primary variable.
The educational achievement of a child is associated primarily with class and
milieu rather than with race, religion, or color. The crucial point, of course, is
I 7
that racial discrimination has been one of the chief means of maintaining class
distance, and this has become the source of attack by the blacks. Thus, the
current demand of the young, militant, and agressive new leadership of the
blacks is primarily for open admission of all blacks to colleges, often regardless
of performance or standards, since college is clearly seen as the major route
of social mobility. One of the major variables, therefore, in any assessment of
future strain in the society is the measure of the blacks' success in changing the
class balance of the society.
This drive for inclusion is, in a radical way, accompanied by a cultural and
psychological mood 'which, paradoxically, emphasizes revolutionary senti-
ments. The fact that the blacks are such a small minority ofthe country - though
a large proportion of the i;naj'or urban areas - makes a genuine revolutionary
situation enormously difficult. Ifthe black community achieves a sense ofrapid
enough inclusion in the society- and this is 'as much a subjective question as
an objective one - the revolutionary language of the black intelligentsia will
become, if it persists, an empty ideology and mere rhetoric. If the sense of
fai!Ure increases then the mood of r~sentment will lead to further riots and
Strife.
THE CRISIS OF CREDIBILITY
· The sense ofdisorientation, clearly, is widespread in the United States today.
The alienation of the young and the militancy of the blacks are widely public-
ized phenomena. The rapidity of social change is always unsettling to large
masses of the population, and the sense of rapid social change, technological
and sociological, is perceived everywhere. A recent Gallup poll on the feelings
of Americans about religion shows a deep pessimism and a remarkable shift
of mood within the last decade.
How does one account for the. change of mood in this decade? Four factors
can be indicated:
I, .THE MULTIPLICITY OF SOCIAL PROBLEMS
In the decade and a half after World War II it was believed that economic
growth would, in time, solve all social problems. The Kennedy administration,
as a Democratic administration, turned its eyes more readily than the previous,
Republican administration to domestic affairs. It sought to make its record
in that field. But that very effort focussed public attention on questions that
previously had been ignored: poverty, housing, education, medical care, urban
sprawl, environmental pollution, and the like. On the one hand, there was
the recognition of the poor. On the other, there was the psychological fact, as
first remarked by Bertrand de Jouvenel, that families were finding that their
18
..
incomes had doubled, but that they were not living twice as well as before. It is
clear that the rapidly heightened awareness of these multiple social questions
has been instrumental in creating a sense of instability in the society.
2. THE BLACK RIOTS AND CRIME
From I963 to I967 there were "five hot summers" in which, each year, there
was a crescendo of rioting that, beginning in the south, passed quickly to the
north, so that in Watts, Detroit, Newark and Washington, sections of each city
went up in smoke. The Kerner Commission reports have shown that none of
these riots was organized. In each instance, a small event, usually an instance
of police brutality, or alleged police brutality, became a flare of wild rumors
and the tinderbox exploded. As in any social movement, wild, episodic,
rampaging beh~vior signals a first phase of action. The next phase is an effort
to create more disciplined militant actions. In the black communities today,
many contradictory currents are at work. There is predominantly the black
nationalism which now seeks to build distinct. black institutions, and makes
militant demands for resources towards those goals. But there are also move-
ments such as the Black Panthers which emphasize guerilla tactics and which
are ready to link up with white radical movements.
The growth of black militancy is in considerable measure responsible for
covert white "backlashes", a series of actions expressed most vividly for a
while, in the Wallace movement.
Typically, the support for Wallace in the north came mainly from blue-collar
workers and the ethnic groups in which they predominate, for the simple
reason that these groups, in status adjacent to the blacks., have felt the most
threatened.
Many of these fears are summed up in the issue of "law and order" and are
focussed principally on crime. Crime is a form of "unorganized" class struggle,
and the lowest groups in the society have always committed a disproportionate
number ofcrimes. What was in the past true ofthe Irish and the Italians is true
of the Negroes today. But Negro crime is more "visible", and, meshed with
the general tensions in the society, it causes more comment and fear.
3· THE ALIENATION OF YOUTH
One can find many sources for the growing alienation of youth in America
- and in any advanced industrial society. There is a common structural source,
which is the dropping of an "organizational harness" on youth, and at an
earlier and earlier age. The student rebellions today are, to simplify, the
beginning "class struggles" of the post-industrial society.
A post-industrial society has many features, but the principal one is the
r9
changed educational requirements in the society. An educational system which
used to reflect the status structure of the society now becomes the determinant
of class position in the society. The second fact is that the work of the post-
industrial society becomes more and more technical and, in the increasing
specialization and division oflabor, one finds a bureaucratization ofintellectual
~mployment, just as earlier there occured the breakdown of skills among
artisans and skilled mechanics.
In American society one finds th~se features among the youth. There is a
striking change of cohort, an increase of about one-third in their number, and
a consequent sense of increased competition for place. There is a· reduction of
the status ofthe college. A generation ago, going to college was still a distinctive
fact about status. Today, in the elite schools, more than 85 percent of the
graduates go on to some post-graduate work, so that in these places the college
becomes simply a way-station. A college degree is no longer the means of
stepping into the high plateau of society; rather, advancement involves a
continual process of professional training and retraining in order to keep up
with the new techniques and new knowledge being produced. In short, much
of the alienation of the young is a reaction to the social revolution that has
taken place in their own status.
4· THE VIETNAM WAR
If there is any single element which is the catalyst of all social tensions in
the United States, and perhaps even in the world, it is the Vietnam War. The
war is without parallel in American history. It is perceived as morally ambig-
uous, ifnot dubious, by a large portion, perhaps the majority of the population.
And in the conduct ofthe war there has arisen a critical problem ofcreditability
which, in extreme cases, is threatening to become a problem of legitimacy for
the society.
The creditability problem arose simply because the official optimism of the
Administration, particularly during 1964 and I965, was belied by events. But
obviously it has not been a problem of creditability alone. There is the moral
question that the means employed have been highly disproportionate to the
ends.
For the young, the Vietnam war has been the single most direct source of
alienation. The draft has increased anxiety about careers and the future.
Service in the armed forces is often regarded as at best a waste ofyears and at
worst an immoral complicity. Impotent themselves in affecting the course of
national policy - or so they have thought - the student generation has turned
its fury against the University as a symbol of the society. In turning against
the society any relation with government becomes suspect, and in the "dis-
20
{
tancing" of the student from the society, "the system" becomes a reified villain
guilty of all crimes. It is this estrangement of a large section ofthe future "elite"
of the society from the society which is the greatest cost of the Vietnam war.
Whether that estrangement ca~ be overcome is equally one of the great
questions about the.source of future stability of the United States.
THE STRUCTURAL REVOLUTION IN THE UNITED STATES
At present there are four major structural changes in the society. The first
is the demographic transformation, the· second the creation of a national
society, the third the emergence of a communal society, and the fourth a post-
industrial society. All these are taking place almost simultaneously. It is the
synchronism of these multiple revolutions which, au fond, has generated so
many strains in the social system.
I. THE DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSFORMATION
Since the end of World War II, there have been three major demographic
changes in the United States. The first has been a large population expansion,
the second the rapid urbanization of th~ country, and the third the racial
transformation of the central cities of the major urban areas.
President Johnson has pointed out in 1967 in his "Message on the Cities":
"In the remainder of this century urban population will double, city land will
double, and we will have to build in our cities as much as all that we have
built since the first colonists arrived on these ~hores. It is as if we had forty
years to.rebuild the entire url;>an United States".,
1t is this vast demographic and ecological upheaval which frames the present
and fu,ture task& of American .society.
2. THE NATIONAL SOCIETY
The United States is, for. the first time, a n~tional socie1y. It has Ion~ been
a "nation" in the sense of achieving a national identity and a national sym-
bolism. But it is only in the last thirty years, because of the revolution in com-
munication and transportation, that the United States has become a national
sociery in the fundamental sense that changes taking place in one section of the
society have an immediate and repercussive effect in all the others. One can
see this most clearly in the "contagion effects" of the race situation.
There are three broad problems which one can identify as a consequence of
the emergence of a national society.
a. The fact that social problems become national in scope. The ease of
migration throughout the country and the variabili1y in conditions add burdens
to particular parts.
21
b. The inadequacy of the present administrative structure. The United
States is composed of 50 states and there are 80.000 municipalities, each with
its own tax and sovereign powers. This is not decentralization, but disarray.
The extraordinary fact is that while the United States has the most modern
economy in the world, its polity remains Tudor in character, antiquated and
top heavy with a multiciplicity of overlapping jurisdictions. The failure to
achieve an efficient administrative structure is itself a contributing element to
the inability of cities or regions to have any effective planning.
c. The rise of plt"biscetary pclitics. In the United States there has been an
eclipse of spatial distance. One of the consequences is to make Washington
the central cockpit for all political argument and to focus attention on a single
source. Given the possibilities for violence which have been endemic in the
system, a new source of great strain has be:en created by the emergence of a
national society. The possibilities oforganizing direct mass pressure, as a means
whereby any group can obtain its demands becomes a further source of struc-
tural strain in the system.
3· THE COMMUNAL SOQIETY
The ~mergence of a ~ommunal society derives from two factors: the growth
of non-ma,rket public dec;isidn making, and the definition of social rights in
group, rather than individual, terms. In scale, both are distinctly new on the
Ameri~an scene, and both pose 'new kinds of problems for the society.
a. By non-market public decision making, is meant simply the growth of
problems which have to be settled by the public authorities, rather than through
the market mechanism. The laying out of roads, the planning of cities, the
organization of health care, the aayment for education, the cleaning up of
environmental pollution, the building of houses, all become matters of public
concern. Decision making has thus become politicalized and subject to all the
multiple, direct pressures of political decision making. This can lead to the
prediction that in the coming years there will be more and more group conflicts
in the society. To meet this, one has to try and see that such conflicts do not
take place along a single dimension (such as race or class), and thus polarize
society. Second, one has to begin to establish mechanisms ofpolitical bargaining
between groups.
b. By group rights, one means that claims on the community are decided
on the basis of group membership rather than on individual distinctions.
The demand for group rights will widen in the society, because social life
increasingly becomes organized on a group basis. The need to work out
philosophical legitimations and political mechanisms to adjudicate these con-
flicting claims will be another source of strain in the society in coming years.
22
~
4· THE POST-INDUSTRIAL SOCIETY
In a post-industrial society, which is only now beginning to emerge, we may
see fundamental changes in the institutional structure of the society that will
transform the stratification system of the society, principally in the bases of
class position and the modes of access to such position. The idea of a post-
industrial society is not meant to be a total picture ofsocial change. Industrial
societies such as the usA, the ussR, Germany and Japan have been organized
politically in different ways, and similarly the post-industrial society can as-
sume varying political forms.
Emphasis should be laid on one dimension of the post-industrial society:
the centrality of theoretical knowledge as the source of innovation and policy
analysis in the society. One can see this in the changing relation of scieJ:lce to
technology, and of economic theory to economic policy. What it suggests, in
sum, is that technological advance and economic growth in a society become
increasingly dependent on the codification oftheoretical knowledge and on the
technical character of policy analysis. Technique, however, can never define
the goals of a society, yet the choice of means, to the extent that _they affect
goals, provides a greater power for technocrats in the society. The tension
between technocratic and political decision making will become one of the
chief features of a post-industrial society.
THE FUTURE: THE SHORT AND LONG RUN
The immediate, pervasive question before the society is not the issue of the
blacks, tense as this is, but the alienation of the sensitive young. The drive of
the blacks is still for inclusion in the society, even though many want this on
their terms (e.g. an education adapted to black needs), and the problem is the
transfer of resources to meet those demands.
The mood of the radical and revolutionary young is more diffuse and
inchoate. There is no sense of a coherent set of demands, other than a gener-
alized attack on prevailing middle-class values which traditionally, in bour-
geois terms, means delayed gratification, psychological restraints, and ratio-
nalistic and technocratic modes of thought. The Vietnam war has given a
sharp and immediate focus to their discontents. For a small and significant
group this has led to a complete alienation from the society and the readiness
to become "urban guerillas" in an effort to destroy the society, and, failing
that, the University as a symbol of the society.
Moral questions apart, the ending of the Vietnam war is a necessary con-
dition for the future stability of the United States. Only a quick end to this
war will reduce many of the tensions felt by the young; only the redirection
23
of resources (about$ 30 billion a year) can begin to meet the problems of the
blacks and the poor.
But clearly the ending of the Vietnam war is only the beginning. The many
problems identified above, particularly those deriving from the structural
changes in American life, remain. Beyond these, however, are five more
generalized problems which a troubled society has only begun to be aware of
and has yet to confront.
I. THE RELATION OF DEMOCRACY TO EMPIRE
The United States after World War II could not go back to its earlier status
of a parochial power, with its national life, as in the 1920s and before, domi-
nated by the small town mentalities whlch had ruled it for so long. The United
States became an imperial power not because of any economic motivations
but because, as the strongest power, it was drawn (and went) into the ensuing
contest ofwill in all areas of the world, and thus it began to exert a predominant
influence, if not hegemony.
An imperial role is difficult for any nation, since it means the commitment
of large-scale resources, of men and wealth, which either have to be returned
with profit or which cause deep strain within. The relation between democracy
and empire is especially trying, and increasingly one can see that the imperial
role is not one that is fitting, in political structure and national style, for the
United States.
2. THE CREATION OF A NEW POLITICAL ELITE
An elite, at best, as in an Establishment, serves as a source of moral authority
and political wisdom. What has been interesting about the United States is
that in the decade and a half following World War II, a more or less coherent
political elite emerged that provided, in the area of foreign policy, a degree of
leadership. An elite is sometimes defined by its structural position in a society,
but the fact that men possess economic or political or military power, or stand
at the pinnacle ofan organization, does not necessarily mean they are an elite,
in the sense that their leadership is followed. In the United States the elite
that emerged was defined more by outlook - a cosmopolitan and worldwide
vision-rather than by structural position alone.
In the last decade, the influence of that major political elite has been
disappearing, and no comparable elite has arisen to temper policy and to
provide a source of judgment. The Kennedy administration sought, self-
consciously, with its panache and elan, to constitute itself as an elite, and among
the intellectuals and the young it gained an enthusiastic following if not a
moral authority. But this ended with the death of the young President.
24
"
Given the divisions in the society, the question whether an elite can emerge
is moot. If one follows the wisdom of a Bagehot, the existence of such an elite
is a necessary element in the creation of political authority in the society.
Without such an elite there is a problem of authoritative leadership.
3· THE FUTURE OF LIBERALISM?,
To a considerable extent, liberal social policy was associated with the rise of
Keynesianism and macro-economic planning. Economists have become highly
influential in government under the Kennedy, and Johnson administrations.
They became managers as well (the McNamara'. revolution in the Pentagon).
But in recent years there has been a growing skepticism abo~t the ability
of economists to manage the economy, as one sees in the case of Britain.
In social policy, particularly in the United States, the record of social
scientists is even more dismal. In the areas of education, welfare, and social
planning, there has been little knowledge that one can draw upon for policy
purposes. Social scientists have reluctantly begun to admit that the problems
are more "complex" than they thought.
The failure of liberalism, then, is in part a failure of knowledge. This is not
an answer to the liking of the New Left, which still presses for the easy sim-
plicisms. Yet tl1is, too, is a source of intellectual disarray and concern when one
realizes that a large, complex society, especially one that necessarily has to be
"future-oriented", requires social planning in order to meet the onrush of
social change.
4• THE PARTICIPATION REVOLUTION
What is evident everywhere is a society-wide uprising against bureaucracy,
and a desire for participation, a theme that is summed up in the phrase "People
ought to be able to affect the decision~ that fontrol their lives".
This upheaval from below takes many forms. In part, it is a revolt against
the idea of a meritocracy in which technical achievement alone becomes the
criterion of place in the society; in part, as in the case of the blacks, it is a form
of community self-assertion. Certainly the older political forms are no longer
adequate to meet this challenge.
To a considerable extent, the participation revolution is one form ofreaction
against the "professionalization" of society, and the emergent technocratic
decision making of a post-industrial society. And every advanced industrial
society will have to confront this phenomenon. What began years ago in the
factory through the trade unions has nowspread to theneighbourhood - because
of the politicalization of decision making in social affairs, described above in
the section on the communal society - and will, in the coming years, spread to
25
organizations as welL The older bureaucratic models of hierarchically orga-
nized, centralized organizations functioning through an intensive specialization
and division of labor clearly will have to be overhauled.
Yet "participatory democracy" is not the panacea its adherents make it out
to be. It is only one more way of posing the classical issues of political philos-
ophy: namely, who should make, and at what levels of government, what kind
of decisions for how large a social unit? And there are no clearcut answers to
these questions. But the questions will remain, and they will become exacerbated.
5· THE CHANGE IN CULTURAL SENSIBILIT:
The change of life style which was once restricted to a small group of artists
and was largely hidden from the society has now become the property of many
and is con,stantly publicized in the media and the filrrts. What is clear is that
the dominant mode in this new cultural sensibility is anti-intellectual and
anti-rational, .and this posl!s a very different question.
Philosophy has had its anti-i:o.tellectual currents and literature has been
anti-rational.' Yet always they were constrained by the shaping discipline of
art or the efforts to establish discourse. So far, at least, the new currents si~ply
remain at the level of anti-art.
Normally this would be a problem for the culture alone. But there are
crucial sociological problems as well. For the new style in culture spills overinto
politics and seeks to justify the destruction of civility and discourse. At its most
extreme, it seeks to substitute aesthetics, it becomes a justification of the
gesture, and of the extreme act.
Beyond this is another, more troublesome fact: that what we are witnessing
is an extreme disjunction between the culture and the social structure, the one
devoted to apocalyptic attitudes, the other to technocratic decision making.
How a society can live with such. a disjunction is a thorny question for the
future.
CODA
The long-range question is whether the diremption of the culture and social
structure may not be too. deep to be bridged, and whether the coherence of the
society may be in jeopardy. In between are the questions which affect the
broad mass of persons, their anxieties, their needs, their willingness to bear.the
costs of change and the degree of backlash which might arise from individuals
whose status is threatened. The first requisite for action is intelligent leadership,
and this is the .most problematic question of all -:- for any society.
26
.,
,,-.,
~
SUMMARY OF THE GERMAN WORKING PAPER ON SOURCES
OF POLITICAL CONFLICT IN DEVELOPED SOCIETIES
The author of the German working paper agreed with the thesis of the
author of the American working paper that only ten years ago it was generally
believed that the end of dramatic political antagonism, the end of ideology,
had arrived. The new society was to be a society of stable progress towards
more prosperity and less unrest. There was only the fear of some intellectuals
that pressures toward conformity within a democratic and bureaucratic society
might become a new source of strain.
In recent years we have seen that a number of events have turned the stable
and pacified society upside down. Many underprivileged mi.norities feel strongly
that their problems have not been solved at all (e.g. coloured people in the
us). In a pacified society like Sweden more and more people "opt out" by
drink or drugs.· Regionalism and regional nationalism celebrate unexpected
triumphs and the party system has become a dubious vehicle of expressing the
"democratic class struggle".
In short, there are many manifestations of conflict in modern societies, some
familiar, but most quite unfamiliar. There is moreover a growing sense that
such conflicts are likely to grow rather than shrink in intensity. It has become
necessary to reconsider such ideas as "the end ofideology", "pluralist society",
or "democratic class struggle" in order to understand the motive forces of the
developed world.
SOURCES OF CONFLICT
A first reason for conflict in modern society is the old class struggle about
citizenship. To enjoy the benefits of equal rights ofparticipation it takes more
than promises written into constitutions or universal suffrage. Both remain
empty formulae if and when the individual is unable to exercise his rights for
social reasons. At the present time there are many people in all developed
countries whose social position does not enable them to make full use of their
citizenship rights.
A psychological reason for this situation is that there is a great social distance
of information and of motivation between the world of working class families
and the.institutions ofdeveloped society like the institutions of higher learning,
those administering justice or even those providing health care. Here, the
psychological conditions of effective citizenship are missing, and the attempt
to create them becomes the source of new political conflicts.
This is even more evident with respect to the exercise of authority in many
institutions, including schools and universities as well as business enterprises,
27
armies and churches. Everywhere, those in dependent or inferior positions
demand to be treated as equals in rank, or in any case as citizens who must
not be pushedJaround as they still are today. Often, this demand takes the form
of a wish for formal participation in the process of decision making..
There is also an economic reason for the incompleteness of citizenship rights.
This is the replacement of class inequalities by sectoral disparities of develop-
ment. A modern, growth-oriented economy almost by nec.essity leads to new
forms of privilege. At any given time, certain sectors of the economy are more
favourably off than others; those who by accident or tradition earn their
living in these sectors find themselves in a very different· position from those
who do not.
However, both implications of the development of citizenship rights - the
survival of pre-modern attitudes and the emergence of sectoral disparities -
have one feature in common. They concern relatively minor problems in
comparison to the overwhelming strain caused in the 19th and early 20th
centuries by class differences of life chances - and also in comparison to
those major new sources of conflict which modern developed societies generate
today.
THE PARADOX OF CITIZENSHIP RIGHTS
Politics in so far as it aims at creating and maintaining citizenship rights for
all is characterized by a familiar, yet frightening paradox. Many of the mea-
sures which have to be taken in order to ensure a minimum of participation
are such as to threaten the very rights which they create. In order to generalize
certain life chances, institutions have to be set up which first restrict the life
chances of those who already had them, and later, of those to whom they were
newly given as well. In a certain sense, a policy of extending citizenship rights
seems almost bound to defeat its own ends. Equal citizenship means organiza-
tion, and organization means new restrictions of liberty.
Is this a necessary development? Are there not other systems related more
directly to the individual? Is it not possible to control the new bureaucracies
more effectively? At points such as this the great and the little utopias take off.
An ombudsman, supposed to protect the citizen from his administration, may
be able to help in the individual case; but he confirms the system precisely
by doing so.
This cannot mean that we should renounce such measures. Citizenship is
a necessary condition of freedom without privilege. But it means that we must
see the dangers inherent in such a course. Few have seen these dangers more
clearly than Max Weber in his political essays of 1918 on "Parliament and
Government in the New Germany", where he speaks about the prison (Gehii.use
28
~
·I
der Hiirigkeit) of the future which bureaucratic organization with its special-
iZation of trained skills, its delimitation of tasks, its rules and hierarchically
ordered conditions of super-· and subordination represents. People may one
day be forced to live in this prison, just like the fellachs in ancient Egypt.
That there are many who do not, and cannot be expected to share this
gloomy view, is in itself a source of conflict in modern societies. But even apart
from Weber's gloom, the paradox of citizenship and bureaucracy may well be
the point of departure for those antagonisms which already characterize the
developed world.
THE CAUSES OF PROTEST
There are by now as many explanations as there are manifestations ofstudent
unrest, so that even the attempt to add another one to them has its awkward-
ness. Still, it seems reasonably well confirmed by a host ofstudies of the subject
that underneath all local and specific issues which come to the fore in this
process, there is a deep-seated, and almost desperate protest against the inability
of modern society to effect change by participation.
The often incomplete promise of participation inherent in modern society
is completed; and yet the young people realize that much of this promise is
not going to be fulfilled.
The simultaneous recurrence of the humane dream of anarchy and the
practical inhumanity ofviolence appear as step-brothers, ifnot brothers in this
context. Anarchy, a society in which the power of men over men has been
totally abolished, is the counter•intage to bureaucracy; violence, a complete
disrespect for all prevailing rules of the game, is apparently the only way to
upset an established structure and thus begin a process of development which
may end in the desired utopia.
The call for charismatic leadership, the amazing recurrence of regionalism
and the many manifestations of a search for new "styles of!ife" like hippiedom,
drug-taking, alcoholism and the sexual revolution, all these seemingly un-
related phenomena are in fact expressions of the same protest against the
effects of a bureaucratized society.
THE CONTROLLING FORCES
It is sometimes claimed today, in view of student unrest and related phenom-
ena, that modern societies are threatened by revolutionary forces "from the
left'', that they have to protect themselves against the "danger of anarchy". A
revival of the demand for "law and order" is raised against outbreaks of violence
in universities and elsewhere. While regarded as sinister revivals of historical
authoritarianism by those at whom this demand is directed, it is only in part
29
maintained by traditional authoritarian groups bent on maintaining privilege
against modernity. In terms of the new and future trends of conflict in devel-
oped societies, it is not the Wallaces who demand our attention, but those for
whom "law and order" is a necessary condition of a planned, rational process
of growth and development towards the year 2000 in the interest of the many,
and of a more worthwhile society.
When Max Weber wrote about bureaucratization he used a fairly simple
term to identify a group variously described also as "establishment", as a
"power elite", or a "service class". The attempt in modern societies to control
change has led to a transformation of the process of decision making as well as
the groups involved. The amateur politician, has given way to an increasingly
homogeneous group of professionals in a variety of positions: professional
politicians, officials, advisers, "accredited" lobbyists and journalists, university
professots, assistants in many kinds of places. ·
Various as these positions may be, they do not, paradoxically, include those
oftop decision makers. Rather, it is the common characteristic ofthose holding
them that by the definitions of their places in society they are supposed to aid
those who ultimately make decisions, to translate the decisions of others 'into
the. increasingly complex and scientific language of modern practice, to serve
the incumbents ofpositions ~fpower. However, most of the time these m0dern
servants have no masters any more. While defined as aides, they are in fact
rulers.
Both in the political organisation of society and in that of important social
organizations and institutions scientifically trained experts have a crucial place,
and defend it by reference to the technical nature of the decisions which have
to be made. The question of political goals is rarely raised, indeed it may be
pushed aside as irrelevant; it is as ifthe availability ofmeans is the only relevant
issue in political debate.
Imperceptibly, the character of politics changes under these conditions.
Instead of reasoned decisions, we begin to find the search for adaptations to
allegedly inevitable social, economic, demographic and even military develop-
ments. Adaptive politics, characteristic of the service class society, means that
those who make decisions regard themselves as no more than executors of
intrinsic requirements of a "system" which as such is never put in doubt. That
there is little room for manoevre is one of the persistent claims of politicians of
this kind. Their alliance with those servants - scientists, technicians, bureau-
crats, ideologists - who promulgate the notion of technical politics is far-
reaching and often successful.
There are theorists of adaptive politics who claim that if there are flaws in
the political process of modern societies, they are technical flaws due to the
30
...
fact that we have not gone far enough in the direction ofa "technetronic age".
The conflict of interest between industrial workers and university students is
deep and incapable of solution in these terms. Workers - unlike many
clerical workers - belong to the groups which have a lot to gain from a more
scientifically organized society; students, especially those from middle-class
families, ask for the place of the individual in such a society.
ALTERNATIVES IN PRACTICAL POLITICS
In the present situation there are three major political positions as far as the
organi:i:ation ofour modern and highly bureaucratized society is concerned.
There are those who feel that modernization has gone far enough, and that
the only remedy for an increasingly egalitarian and rationalized society is the
defence ofthose traditions by which men were bound to each other in the past.
Reagan, Powell, de Gaulle represent very different political positions, and the
last in particular would certainly not be described correctly as a conversative;
but in all these men there is a traditional authoritarian streak which still has
a great deal ofsupport even in the most developed societies. In its more extreme
forms, this traditionalism ·may become associated with a demand for more
leadership, and for the persqnalization of power.
There are, secondly, those who believe in the increasing "rationalization" of
modern societies, in the rule of experts, and the effective organization of all
areas ofsociety. They see the hope of a more worthwhile future in the insistence
on the enormous potential of human knowledge and its application to all
problems facing man. Somewhere underneath these hopes there is often the
Marxian distinction between a realm ofnecessity and a realm ofIiberty, and the
notion that when the former is regulated most efficiently man is free to enjoy
himself in the latter.
It is in this position that we find some ofthe elements ofa "system" as Weber
described it and as many young people fear it today. For this we have models
right before our eyes in the socialist countries of the East which have for some
time become brutally technocratic societies under the cloak of an increasingly
irrelevant ideology.
The third major political position resulting from modern social developments
has its·extreme manifestations also. They are, above all, the utopian dreams ofa
society without power. But behind such extreme forms of expression there is
the search for a society which may combine the achievements of modernity
with an increase in human life chances. A new liberalism is at least conceivable;
it is indeed real in a number ofcountries. Its basis lies in the social achievements
for which liberals in the past have not been responsible, which were indeed
often resisted by them. Its goals, however, refer to the th:r:eats to human liberty
3I
_.,.,_ .. """'.'"~"~-··,....,..-~-----
•
inherent in a social development which tends to strenghten organization and
bureaucracy rather than the individual and his life chanches.
The present party system in the free societies betrays little trace of a clear
division along these lines. Almost every party must be described as a tenuous
coalition between at least two of the forces described here; and if we look at
particular decisions, the coalitions often extend beyond the borders ofindividual
parties. Radical students and authoritarian professors, autocratic leaders and
modern economists, liberals ofan old and of a new school ofthought, and other
incompatible groups frequently join forces - out of tradition, inertia, a mis-
understanding of their own interests, or merely because a reformation ofparty
systems meets with tremendous institutfonal difficulties in a society the major
problem of which may be described as that of effecting change. It is a sign of
progress that we have given up the ideology of the end of ideology. But having
done so, we must now raise the questions on which the future of liberty may
ultimately depend: How can we transform the existing organizations ofpolitical
conflict into more representative ones? Which rules of the game are capable,
under modern conditions, of preventing the success of the extreme manifesta-
tions inherent in each of these organizations? And, most important of all: How
can we strenghten a policy oriented to the life chances of the individual rather
than the efficiency of the whole or the privilege of the few?
DISCUSSION
The discussion of this item of the agenda was divided into two parts. The
first part was dedicated to the analysis of the elements of instability in Western
society. the second part to proposals for possible solutions.
ANALYSIS
In the analysis of the elements of instability a number of factors were pre-
sented by the participants in the discussion. They can be grouped under the
following headings.
ALIENATION
An American participant stated that he could not accept the assumption in
the American working paper that the alienation of the young was a dangerous
and irreconcilable thing. This would only be true if one accepted the premise
that the survival ofsociety as we know it, with the existing social structure and
contradictions, was the supreme goal of all its members. Neither the blacks nor
the young would accept this. Another American speaker preferred to speak of
polarization, not alienation of the young.
32
,.
An International participant, supported by a British speaker, did not even
think that youth was necessarily and systematically alienated. Not even from
politics as such, but only from the present terms in which politics are played.
Several speakers stressed the fact that history has shown many unstable
periods and that therefore the present unrest would fade away and disappear
from the front pages. However, several other participants disagreed, stating
that the present situation contained a number of new factors.
NEW FACTORS
A Danish participant said that the youth revolt was no mino.rity matt~r. It
may be carried by a minority ofactivists, but the May revolt in France of 1968
has shown that a minority can ignite an explosion, if there is some kind of
general discontent.
An American participant presented three factors which he considered new
in the present situation: the enormously increasing rate of social change; a
great affluence, which is the result of a liberal society, and which is taken for
granted by the young; and violence.
The importance'ofviolence as a factor was confirmed by a Canadian speaker,
who submitted that the TV-generation had lost the identity which their parents
had and therefore had become violent.
A Dutch participant believed that one factor that has been n·eglected so far
was the eroding influence of the educators themselves on the students. Their
questioning of all values, their scepticism on the present day world and its
conditions had contributed to the students unrest.
A German participant commented that in his view, it was a good thing that
some educators teach their s'tudents to be critical ofsome of the basic assump-
tions of the sodetyin which they are living. However, some speakers deplored
the lack of discipline among the young, as well as their denial of the value of
experience.
Various speakers agreed with the author of the American working paper
that the Vietnam war was one of the major elements of social tension in the
United States. There was, however, some disagreement whether the moral am-
biguity of the war as such, or the failure of the American political and military
strategy in Vietnam, together with the draft, was the major factor in the vehe-
ment protests.
A German participant submitted that it was useless to look for the factors
which caused instability. One should concentrate the discussion on how the
problems of the technocratic society could be solved. Solutions for a better
functioning of the political system would take away many causes of unrest.
33
THE POLITICAL SYSTEM
An International participant agreed with the analysis of bureaucratic society
given by the author of the German working paper. He questioned, however,
the thesis that decision makers search only for adaptations to allegedly in-
evitable developments and rarely raise the question of political goals.
The author of the working paper replied that in the process of political
decision making today, there was an immense difficulty in separating expertise
from decisions about goals. Therefore, habit and custom ruled to an extent
which was hardly justified and which made people think that far reaching
innovation was hardly possible.
A Dutch participant acknowledged that change is necessary. But changes
should be made by evolution and not by revolution. This evolution should be
undertaken by this generation. But in this generation there is a division between
those who think and study and those who act, this is true in politics, business
and all other sectors of life. There is, however, an ignorance of each other's
"metier". A dialogue between the two categories is mandatory.
PARTICIPATION
Many participants pointed to the lack of participation as a source of dis-
content. An American speaker described the complete helplessness of people
as far as the possibility of exercizing influence on the decisions that affect their
day to day life is concerned. Children are brought up with the ideal of a
participatory democracy. Later they are faced with institutions which refuse to
yield them any participation and which they can neither understand nor control.
This great difference between promise and performance was also mentioned
by another American speaker in relation to the black citizens of the United
States. Participation by blacks has been largely symbolic, which raises the
question of the black man's inclusion in participatory democracy.
A Swiss participant agreed with the principle ofparticipation, but he warned
that there always has to be a group of leaders who take responsibility for the
important decisions and their implementation.
A British speaker stated that there should be far more study by labour and
management on participation in the industrial decision making process.
A German participant added to this that both in university and the working
class, attention was focussed on the question if participation signified that the
establishment was responsible to some other establishment or to the individual
man. According to him, participation meant that the individual should be
given awareness of his role in the decision making process. This does not mean
that everyone takes part in this decision making process, but that one spreads
the participation in overall control.
34
"
THE FUTURE
Widely different prospects for the future were seen by various speakers.
A Belgian speaker - who had first expressed his deep regrets about the
absence of Professor Pesmazoglou whom he knew as a good European in the
best democratic sense of the word - expressed a rather optimistic view about
the developments at the universities.
It should be possible to experiment with new democratic structures on the
university level and train young people to carry responsabilities. This could
have a multiplier effect.
This view was shared by a Canadian participant who agreed with the advice
of a Dutch speake; that university authorities should try to respond unpredict-
ably to student demands and that they should not try only to restore law and
order. '
An American participant saw the churches as the next institutions to come
under attack. ·
A gloomy view was expressed by a Danish speaker who saw more violence
ahead, because the leadership of the students rejected present day society
completely.
An American participant added that in instability there is no regulation of
conflict; a reaction of moral outrage could possibly end up in totalitarian
politics through escalation.
More optimistic views were expressed by a French participant who believed
that in the countries where the major agitation took place, France and the
United States, there had been extremely exceptional conditions which probably
would not exist in the future.
An American speaker expressed his faith in the young generation in general,
citing many examples from personal experience. He believed that the one
percent irrational and destructive elements received too much attention.
SUMMING UP
In h:s resume ofthe analytical discussions an American participant mentioned
some points on which he thought there was some kind of consensus.
1. Instability is not confined to a country, a color or an economic group. There
is a contagion of discontent and probably of tactics and it is not confined to
Europe or the United States.
2. In the advanced Western societies, the radical students tend to come from
affluent backgrounds and not from the working class.
3. Those who have worked with a number of the militant young are impressed
with their knowledge, ability and potential. Therefore they tend to be more
35
•
optimistic about the young than those who are somewhat more remote.
4. What is happening among the young may be symptomatic for other parts
ofsociety. There is need to bring more humanity into the political, economic
and social institutions. Timely reforms are preferable to revolutionary
change.
5. Underlying the present discontents are both ancient moral problems; man
and his values, his spontaneity, his freedom, his relationship to other men,
his institutions and - a very new one - his fear of becoming a reflection of
the computer.
We will have to deal with these moral problems together with the political
and social problems before us and they will affect all that we do or leave
undone.
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
During the second part of the discussion a number of possible solutions were
presented.
NEW VISION
Several speakers stressed the necessity of giving the youth a new vision of
the future of our society; a common goal that could be striven after.
An International participant supported by a French, a British and a Belgian
participant, stated that the building of a United Europe should be this common
goal.
An American participant suggested that a world-wide fight on poverty could
act as a unifying force. It could focus the attention and involvement of the
whole world, because .it concerns the industrial and developing nations alike.
This proposal was wholeheartedly supported by an International participant
and two other American speakers.
It was also emphasized that all nations should be ready to enter a moratorium
on further nuclear armament. This could be important as the threat of thermo-
nuclear warfare is considered as one of the sources ofstress on youth and gives
rise to many apocalyptical views.
PARTICIPATION
Many speakers argued that the central issue of the future will be the
question of participation. In this connection a number of proposals were
presented.
A Norwegian and an Austrian participant concentrated their proposals on
36
.....
,,
the democratic parliamentary system, so that national parliaments could really
exercise control. The decision making process in political parties, universities
and industry should also become more open and democratic. These proposals
were supported by a Belgian, a Canadian and a Swiss participant.
Lowering of the voting age was illlOther measure proposed by several partic-
ipants. This would not be a panac!!a, but a symbolic gesture of some conse-
quence.
An American speaker thought that in the United States there is now more
participation than ever before. In practice this has meant that all groups were
opposing the others which showed the need for bargaining, A Dutch speaker,
however, called this theory of bargaining an elitist theory ofdemocracy which
is based on the distrust of the possibilities for the exercise ofreason by the mass.
THE QUEST FOR IDENTITY AND MORALITY
An American participant regretted that instability was often regarded as
attacking the status quo and therefore rejected. It was necessary to trace out
the obsolescent logic and practices of our society and our system and try to
define the logic of a new civilization which we have helped create but not yet
understood.
In this new civilization the use of force will be increasingly ineffective and
dangerous. One pays a very high price for force and gets very little in return.
A Dutch participant commented that the use of force by the constabulary
during the student revolts was only a reaction against and the result of the use
of force by those elements of society which generally denounce it.
The American speaker mentioned before stressed the necessity of a return
to morality. The new civilization was manageable only if one returned to the
rationality ofthe personal relatio:p.s between individual people. The young press
a college administrator or a policeman to the point where he has no mechanical
answers, then they watch his response. If he goes for the police, they have got
him. If, like Mr. Lindsay or others, he has the.courage to walk the streets alone
and deal with the "one-to-one logic", he walks safely.
Several American speakers and a French speaker asked for reform of the
obsolete educational system, which keeps the young in school much too long.
Education should be spread over the whole life cycle ofthe individual. A Dutch
participant added that the goal of education should be not only the trans-
mission of knowledge but also the training of the faculty of reason.
Another point in this respect was raised by an American speaker when he
stated that technology should be turned to humane pursuit.
The young look at technology as their master, but it can be and should be
37
their servant. Technology should be turned by government and industry to
fulfill the needs of the 70 percent of the world population who live at sub-
standard levels and it should not benefit just a handful.
GOVERNMENT MEASURES
Some proposals were made with regard)o the tasks of governments.
A number of speakers called for a vast program of urban development with
a steady flow ofmoney, in order to clean up the cities, promote public transport
and, in general, take away the sources ofstress which "big city life" puts on the
individual citizen.
Two American speakers called for a national service program, a cause to
which many young and old people could respond.
SUMMING UP
In summing up the discussions, the author of the German working paper
said that after listening to the debates he had a growing awareness of the
complexity of translating the analysis and the intentions on which one agrees
into practical policies.
When trying to think of solutions various people had very different sources
of instability in mind. There were those who had uppermost in their minds
the sources of instability connected with the establishment of equal citizenship
for all. They dealt with problems of poverty, the international class struggle,
the developing countries and the immediate problems ofnon-inclusion ofyouth.
On the other hand there were those who were more preoccupied with the
problems brought to the fore by students and other young people who believe
that the very affluence the others are longing for will create new problems,
very similar to the ones we have had before.
It would be easy to show that those who ask for equal citizenship could be
the fiercest opponents of those whose concern is the new affluent society. Still
they have certain elements in common namely a common concern of both
groups about the ability of our societies to effect the necessary changes.
This could be the starting point for trying to find political solutions for both
kinds of problems. There, was a need for people who have a clear sense of the
common goals of all divergent groups and for people wo have the ability to
develop political solutions and put them into practice.
The author of the American working paper concentrated his final remarks
on the question of how one could create more effective political institutions.
It will be necessary to~create mechanisms ofchange. Since we cannot do every-
38
..
thing we want to do at once, it is necessary to create priorities, which 5hould
be chosen according to their effectiveness. Next, it would be necessary to learn
forecasting.
Man has lived a long time on the basis ofadaptation and what is needed now
is anticipation.
39
......
......
~
CONFLICTING ATTITUDES WITHIN THE WESTERN
WORLD TOWARDS RELATIONS WITH THE USSR
AND OTHER COMMUNISTS STATES OF EASTERN
EUROPE IN THE LIGHT OF RECENT EVENTS
The background for discussion of this item consisted of a paper prepared by
an International participant. The paper had been distributed before the
meeting.
SUMMARY OF THE WORKING PAPER
AMERICAN-SOVIET RELATIONSHIP
The occupation of Czechoslovakia has proved that far from a European
security system being possible without the United States, the determination
of the Soviet Union to control eastern Europe has left room only for a dialogue
between the superpowers. Detente, European style (all European styles, gaullist
and non-gaullist) is blocked; detente "a la superpowers" remains open. They
alone seem to have room for manreuvre.
For all that, there is no guarantee they will succeed in achieving limited
truces. Even if they do so on the narrow front of missile limitations, there may
be no willingness or ability to extend understanding further afield. Crisis
centres like the Middle East are tests of the capacity of the superpowers to
moderate either their rivalry in the world or the freedom of allies and clients
to drag them into situations they cannot properly control.
Nevertheless, the logic of Russo-American fear of the nuclear arms race
and the slow but potentially chaotic diffusion of power around the world is
powerful and persistent. On the other hand the superpowers seem to have a
common desire to concentrate on internal issues, such as economic reform or
the cities, and damp down the costs of an arms race subject to increasing risks
and falling returns.
The growing common interests of the United States and the Soviet Union
are worldwide and they now mark the end of the Eurocentric system in which
the European powers are still stuck. Russia does not see Europeans as inter-
43
i j
locuteurs valables; the only nation with analogous worldwide concerns is the
United States.
From a European point of view, greater understanding between the super-
powers is basically hopeful. First, anything which helps maintain nuclear deter-
rence as near as possible to the present well understood and quasi-absolute
balance of terror is favourable to European security. Second, self-restraint by
the superpowers is a necessary pendant to the non-proliferation treaty, with its
invidious distinction between second-class non-nuclear powers with material
obligations and first-class nuclear ones without. Third, Europe has an interest
in the superpowers contributing more than they have done to the long-term
security of the world, which Europeans can no longer provide for themselves.
Fourth, in the most narrowly European terms, a us-ussR detente holds out
historically novel hopes of Europe's becoming a relative backwater while the
power struggles flare up elsewhere. This might even, ultimately, help detente
(from Brest to Brest as a German journalist has called it) between the smaller
powers of Europe.
A new problem may be the tension in American priorities between Russia
and medium or small allies in Europe (and elsewhere) as the non-proliferation
treaty negotiations have shown.
The more far-reaching issue is, however; that the idea that the United States
and the Soviet Union potentially have an exclusive relationship has become
embedded in establishment thinking in the West; and this marks a watershed
in politics. The superpowers will have to address their minds mostly to arms
control and they will have to look more toward the rising region of the Far
East, where the undefined threat of China looms and Japan continues its
breath-taking ascension to economic giganticism, and less towards Europe
which, whatever its latent crises, looks like being as near to an area of the
status quo as one can get on earth in coming years. Changes in America's policy
are less likely to come from changed assessments ofthe local situation in Europe
than from its continued slow sinking in the scale of priorities.
CONSEQUENCES OF SOCIAL CONFLICTS
This change is taking place against a background ofresurgent social conflicts
in the industrial world after a generation of exceptional civil quiet since the
early days of the Cold War.
Social instability is frequently associated with violence and even international
violence. Europe was an extremely disturbed continent before both world
wars. If a slump occurred, this would almost certainly radicalize an already
potentially radical situation, with incalculable effects. It could lead to author-
44
itarian regimes in many countries. But that docs not necessarily imply largc-
scale international violence.
If violence comes, it is more likely to do so in other ways: perhaps tensions
in eastern Europe leading the Soviet Union to over-react; or the increasingly
fluid Balkan-Mediterranean-Middle East frontier of NATO erupting in disor-
ders - national (as in Spain or Greece) or international (as between Greece
and Turkey, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia or once more Israel and the Arabs) -
and igniting major crises in Europe. None of these looks very likely to shake
Europe now; but a period of social upheavals could make such threats look
very different.
Still, the main effect of social instability on foreign policy is likely to be less
dramatic and more insidious: the injection ofisolationist attitudes into national
policies from both the left and the right. The effect on the United States could
be unilateralism; and on Western Europe fragmentation.
There are two aspects to neo-isolationism: the revival of ideology and the
revival of the state. The revival of ideology grafted on to older class or ethnic
struggles is radicalizing the young and the left. Stress is placed on "vah1es"
and "man" rather than on the last generation's idol, planning, which, as
"organization'', has now become the new devil, associated with technocrats,
"manipulation", and alienated individuals. This is a familiar twentieth century
problem. There has been a regular pendular swing between movements for
international organization (after both world wars) and the International of
radicals of goodwill (the Workers of the World before 19I4 and in the 30s and
now the Students of the World). There is a compulsion, explicable but unfor-
tunate, to regard the two as competitive rather than complementary.
For Europe this would mean fragmentation which makes it incapable of
producing a coherent impact even as a giant economic neutral.
This is the point where European and American priorities meet. The need
for the United States to exploit the opportunities for dialogue with the Soviet
Union and yet not lose the assets of cooperation with allies built up across
the world since the war, is more than an American interest. The United States
since the war has had two complementary strategies. One has been to maintain
the power balance with the Soviet Union. The other has been to develop a
political process, above all in the monetary and trade fields, with allies inside
the Lebensraum provided by the nuclear frontier. It is vital to maintain what
Professor Brzezinski has called this "Community of Developed Nations" and if
possible extend it.
If NATO, however, becomes part of a system where Americans and Europeans
feel alienated from one another, economic cooperation, without even breaking
down, can lose its political magnetism. The temptation for the United States,
45
faced by hopes of dialogue with Russia and difficulties with allies, is to simplify
foreign. relations by an increasing unilateralism in the Johnsonian manner.
This could be a fatal error, particularly as the Two will find it easier to incur
the odium of a Dual Hegemony than to make one work.
PRIMARY ISSUES
The immediate limits of discussion between the United States and its Euro-
pean allies on detente with Eastern Europe are set by neither but by the
Soviet Union. The Russians have shown up the Western Europeans as rather
naive marxists for thinking that growing economic and other contacts might
lead to political relaxation between the halves of Europe. They will brook no
threats, direct or indirect, to their political and military control of the eastern
half. Bridge-building will remain the most "aggressive" Western policy towards
Eastern Europe until the Russians take a Jess alarmist view of reform in the
satellites. Nevertheless, the occupation of Prague seems, so far, not to have
slowed up the limited but growing East-West trade, or other contacts. All the
Europeans can do for the moment is to continue increasing these and wait for
better times.
The primary issues for the moment are, therefore, those of intra-Western
relations. They are both economic and strategic. With regard to economic
issues, so far as trade is concerned, attention will probably be concentrated in
the coming years on absorbing the effects of the Kennedy round; holding off
protectionism, particularly in the light of the rapid ascension ofJapan; and
trying to go beyond tariffcuts to a more organic view ofhow freer international
trade can be managed. This, in the last resort, will depend on how succesfully
the world's monetary system is managed. For all the difficulties, the tendency
on this last point seems to be in the necessary direction of more collective
management. The economic politics of the West will be as vital in the early
Seventies as at every stage since. the. war.
With regard to strategic issues, President Nixon has shown he appreciates
the potential impact of Russo-American talks on Western Europe. This is more
than a question ofclimate: anything going beyond the narrowest self-limitations
of intercontinental missiles by the superpowers will edge toward the area of
disengagement in Europe. But, whatever the President's goodwill, the Euro-
peans will be in no position to make their priorities felt if, once again, they
speak at cross-purposes. To produce a voice that is heard,. they must speak as
often as possible as one. The minimum might be to set up a ministerial com-
mittee, with an eminent political figure as secretary, to coordinate their view
points. Subject to the inclusion of France, the WEU would probably be a
46
~
better model than a European caucus in NATO, since in NATO the number of
participants immediately rises to unmanageable proportions.
Nevertheless, in the end there is no substitute for material weight. This is
relevant to the issue of withdrawal of United States forces from Germany,
which was coming to a head in Congress when the occupation of Czecho-
slovakia temporarily scotched it. In the future, after a Russo-American agree-
ment and the first reaffirmations of Western solidarity, one must expect the
pressure to scale down American troops in Germany to 1-3 divisions to revive
in the early Seventies. This example would almost certainly be followed, if not
preceded, by a Canadian trek home. Since the Russians cannot in any real
sense withdraw from Europe, NATO would be left with a potentially dangerous
reliance on light-police actions at one end ofthe scale ofdeterrence and massive
retaliation by a vulnerable America at the other. This could be a real factor
in shaping the pressures of diplomacy in Europe in a direction more favourable
to the Soviet Union.
American acquiescence in the status quo delivers Russia from serious fears of
German reunification. This in turn weakens whatever arguments Russia may
have seen for West European integration as a container for Germany. The
tendency to see such integration as the longterm threat to Russian predomi-
nance in Europe will be strengthened by lack of an alternative. If, in addition,
the Americans feel they have less to fear from Russia, their enthusiasm for
West European unity, already less energetic, might wane. The West Europeans
themselves, less sure of their framework, might be more likely to re-insure
with both superpowers. The price to the Russians of keeping the Germans in
two minds in Europe (integration against further contacts with.East Germans)
might correspondingly fall. In such a case, Western Europe would remain weak,
divided and, in effect, "Finlandised".
In this light, the arguments for more European integration in defence are
powerful and· urgent. If the Europeans show signs of coming together, this
will give the Administration arguments in Congress to postpone troop with-
drawals. If they do take place, greater unity would give the Europeans better
means and confidence to cope with the resulting situation. If the Europeans
had coherent and mobile forces, conceived equally for operatiori.s in Germany
or on NATO's flanks, they might be able to maintain credible levels of non-
nuclear defence without incredible increases in budgets. That this implies
integration is suggested not only by the collective inefficiency of the present
several defence efforts in Europe but also by the experience of the United
States where Mr. McNamara produced big savings in procurement by unifying
many purchases for the three services.
The way forward for the moment might be to set up a Wise Men's group of
47
"
eminent non-governmental figures to see how more flexibility and mobility
can be given to European forces within NATO (for instance, by developing
NATO's Ace mobile forces for specifically European ends). This group could
stay in business on a "rolling plan" basis, looking at problems a generation
of weapons and policies ahead. Though inevitably advisory and no more at
this stage, it could, if authoritative, pave the way intellectually and politically
for a later European Defence Commission.
DISCUSSION
During the discussion of this item of the agenda, several speakers gave their
views on the political situation in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
THE SOVIET UNION
A British participant thought that there was very little change for the better
in the internal situation of the Soviet Union. The same was true with regard to
the Soviet attitude ofsuspicion to the outside world and the long term commu-
nist aims which were united with Russian ambitions. There were signs of a
move in the Soviet Union to what was called Bonapartism; it was unknown
where the police and the army stand. The situation looked rather worrying.
According to a German participant, the Soviet leaders were at present under
a heavy strain: The impact of the invasion in Czechoslovakia and of the Brezn-
jew doctrine on communists inside and outside the Warsaw Pact was disastrous
for the leading role of Soviet communism. It had destroyed the unity -0f world
communism; the fight for polycentrism, predicted by Togliatti was on every-
body's mind. This was fully understood by Moscow. This view was confirmed
by another British participant.
Two Norwegian speakers, supported by many other delegates, expressed
their great concern about the considerable increase in Soviet naval activity
on the high seas.
EASTERN EUROPE
An Austrian participant thought that the author of the working paper and
some speakers took a somewhat static view of the situation in Eastern Europe.
Tremendous changes were taking place, the Soviet Union was in the
middle of a colonial crisis. In many countries of the Soviet bloc there was a
rising nationalism. In this respect an Italian speaker said that in some Eastern
European countries a struggle was taking place to remove politics from the
economy. A better balance was sought betw< en war production and peace
consumption.
48
With regard to relations between the Soviet Union and the other countries
of Eastern Europe, a British participant believed that countries like Roumania
and Yugoslavia would fight the Russian armies, ifthey were invaded.
DETENTE
Many speakers agreed with the author of the working paper that under
these circumstances any form of detent.e between European countries was
blocked. Bridge-building would remain the most "aggressive" Western policy
towards Eastern Europe, until the Russians took a less alarmist view of reform
in the satellites. A Norwegian participant called in this respect the possibilities
ofbilateral contacts betwt!en East and West European countries illusory.
A Belgian speaker thought that in the nearby future the most interesting
developments would take place not between the blocs, but inside them.
However, many participants agreed with an Austrian speaker that it would
be necessary to keep the lines of communication open.
The Norwegian speaker mentioned before, supported by a Dutch participant,
thought that economic and cultural relations between Eastern and Western
Europe should be continued and, ifpossible, strengthened.
THE SUPERPOWERS
The thesis of the author of the working paper that the United States and the
Soviet Union had a common interest in a dialogue, was supported by a number
of speakers.
A Norwegian speaker said that Europe would do well to accept as a fact in
the present situation that peace depended on the two super-powers.
An American speaker emphasized that in the future there was a possibility
that four big powers would sit around the table: the Soviet Union, China, the
United States and Europe. The presence of the United States would depend
on the participation of Europe. There were a number of things which the
United States could not do alone and which Europe and the United States
could do very well in partnership.
In this respect a number of speakers, including two French and an
American participant, believed that Japan was the great emerging power. It
was therefore necessary to bring this country into an alliance with the West.
SECURITY CONFERENCE
A Swiss participant mentioned the European security conference proposed
by the Soviet Union. He thought that such a conference would not serve
any purpose for the West, since it was not the task of the West to stabilize
49
Soviet dominance in Eastern Europe. In this view he was supported by an
American speaker.
A Turkish participant thought that the Soviet Union would not be opposed
to the participation of the United States and Canada in a European security
conference, but there would certainly be disagreement on the conditions of
admittance of these two countries.
A German speaker believed that a conference within two or three years
would be a risky manoeuvre for the Soviet Union, because its Warsaw Pact
partners would then have recovered from the blow of the Czech invasion and
would therefore again feel more free to act on their own.
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE UNITED STATES AND WESTERN EUROPE
The discussion on the developments in the Atlantic Alliance centered around
the public opinion in the United States on American commitments in Europe,
the future of European unity, the situation in the Atlantic Alliance and the
criticism of the younger generation on NATO.
AMERICAN PUBLIC OPINION
An American participant stressed the fact that it was questionable if the
American people wanted to play the role of the world power described in the
working paper. There were in the United States signs of withdrawal. This
withdrawal was not limited to the United States; France had withdrawn
from NATO, Great Britain from South East Asia and East of Suez and Canada
was reducing its troops in NATO. Part of American public opinion was asking
why the United States could not do the same thing. There was no doctrine
of isolationism, but many people wanted to withdraw American troops
from Europe, which would also mean the withdrawal of nuclear weapons.
This view was confirmed by other American speakers. One of them added
that this would not mean the withdrawal of American business and invest-
ment, because the European market was still the most important foreign market.
About this last point an Italian participant remarked that American invest-
ment in Europe should be more constructive and help Europeans to find
greater strength in the world market. The difference in power is too big, there
is definitely a lack of balance.
A German speaker said that the remarks of the American participants about
withdrawal were not entirely new to Europe. The possibility of withdrawal
under certain circumstances was known and had been feared for years.
50
~
FUTURE OF EUROPEAN UNITY
A Dutch participant thought that in questions of European unity one should
not speak in terms of desirabilities, but in terms of facts. Everybody agreed
that Europe should unite. But the underlying assumption that there was a
Europe was wrong. The people of Europe were no more akin to each other than
they were, for instance, to the Americans. Europeans were not nationalists -
except for de Gaulle, but he is gone - but they were faced with their national
situation. (As an example of a national situation the speaker mentioned the im-
pact of the relations between the Flemish and Walloon population in Belgium
on Benelux cooperation). Under these circumstances it was difficult to be op-
timistic about the possibilities of European unity, also because the young were
not interested in it.
Many participants believed that Europe could not survive without a policy
of its own. In this respect and Italian an a French speaker thought that a
common commercial policy and a policy of industrial growth and open
markets were vei·y necessary.
A British participant strongly emphasized the urgency of monetary reform.
As far as the immediate situation was concerned, one should take the fever out
of markets and tranquilize the situation for some time ahead. The United
States should make clear where it stood in regard to the monetary system and
there should come an end to the ambivalence of governments concerning the
relationship between outward and inward investment and balances of pay-
ments, which so far have bedevilled the development of the multinational
corporation and the multinational economy.
With regard to political union and integration in defence in Europe, many
speakers believed that there was a need for progress. Two Norwegian partici-
pants thought that defence integration should take place within an Atlantic
community. An Icelandic speaker agreed with this view.
There was, however, no clear conception of what kind of Europe should be
built. One of the Norwegian speakers mentioned earlier said that a united
Europe should be a united Western Europe within the Atlantic Alliance.
Europe as an independent third force was an illusion and also disastrous, as
this would mean a third big nuclear power.
A Danish participant, however, stated that among others a strong indepen-
dent Europe would be important for the third world, which had so long been
locked in between the Soviet Union and the United States.
51
•
GERMANY
The German question was raised mostly in connection with the relations
to the Soviet Union.
A German participant pointed to a growing interest of the Russians as far
as the German attitude vis avis China was concerned. Fears were expressed in
the Soviet press of Russian encirclement by a German-Chinese coalition. On
the other hand, the Soviet Union sought the dialogue with Germany.
Another German speaker denied that the Federal Republic would try to
make a deal with China in order to threaten the Soviet Union He also state
that it was impossible that Germany would take the leadership in Western
Europe. No German leader nor the population believed in such a thing.
NATO
An American participant thought that there was no inherent incompatibility
between European unity and a strong Western alliance. On the contrary,
until and unless true detente - which would mean dissolution of the Warsaw
Pact - had been accomplished, it could not be in the interest of Europe or the
United States to relax the Western alliance.
This position was supported by several speakers. A French participant
added that it should be possible for France to rejoin NATO. This would depend,
however, on the possibility of transforming the alliance.
Another Frenchman added that a recent report of the French Chief of staff
had shown that the strategy of a "defense atoutes azimuts" was worthless; only
in NATO France could defend itself.
A Canadian speaker pointed out that the recent decision of the Canadian
Government to review its NATO policy did not mean that Canada would
become a neutral country. On the contrary, Canada had decided to reaffirm
its dedication to collective security and to NATO. However, at the same time a
phased reduction of the military contribution to NATO was foreseen.
A Dutch speaker asked why an orientation as had taken place in Canada,
had been done unilaterally. He regretted that such a review could not be
brought into a common framework.
NATO AND THE CREDIBILITY GAP
During the discussion a number of speakers addressed themselves to the
question ofwhat the author of the working paper had called "an intense dislike
of balance-of-power politics" by the young and the left, which lead "to a kind
of isolationism with an internationalist veneer".
An American speaker in this respect stated that the new generation had no
52
"
chance to remember the second world war and how to organize a durable
peace.
A Danish participant explained how difficult it was for the young to accept
the status quo in international politics without any possibility of change.
Either they lived in a small country which had no influence on world politics
or in a powerful country where one was so far from the political institutions
that any participation was an illusion.
How could one explain the need of NATO to the young when they gave
nothing to the principle of status quo? All alternatives to a status quo had
many nationalistic trends. The young generation would take over in the next
decades, but they were not too happy about doing this on the political premises
of today.
An American speaker thought that the young generation might ask questions
on the inclusion of Greece and Portugal in the so called free Western world;
why the possibility and necessity of an American anti-ballistic missile system
was not discussed and what were the responsibilities ofthe superpowers vis avis
the developing nations.
A Dutch speaker thought that the new generation could be convinced of the
indispensability of NATO and of a Western European political union if NATO
were defended more as a political framework than as a military framework.
Stressing the military balance between East and West by NATO and the
analogy of the present situation with the thirties was wrong. He supported the
American speaker mentioned above with regard to the NATO-membership of
Portugal and Greece. Another Dutch speaker answered to that that the ques-
tion of Greece and Portugal in NATO would be no problem if one looked at
NATO as a purely military organization and not as a political and ideological
one.
The necessity of a sense of history by the young was underlined by an
American speaker. He believed ·that it should be possible to bring younger
men in the councils of NATO and other organizations.
SUMMING UP
In summing up the discussions the author of the working paper said that he
thought that there was a high degree of agreement among a number of partici-
pants who were dealing with the organization of the world and the way in
which one should react to the given situation.
On the other hand there was a group who was dealing with horizons and
romantics of human aspirations. He thought that the anti-Americanism of
many young radicals to which some speakers had referred was not anti-
Americanism as such but an objection to balance of power politics.
53
..
I
f1
ill
11!
I
!I
'I
11
ii
11
!
He agreed with the many speakers who had stressed as new elements in a
relatively stable situation the fast rise of Japan as a big power, the Russian
maritime expansion and the possibilities of change within Eastern Europe
where the status quo, imposed by the Soviet Union after Prague, could very
well be only temporary.
With regard to European unity he thought that one should remind that the
difficulties during the integration process had laid in Europe and not in the
attitude of the United States toward Europe. The monetary and trading
system had to be intensified in order to keep up with the very rapid developments.
Next to this the Europeans should act more effectively to be able to deal with
the United States in the fields of the new technologies, the international compa-
ny, ocean space, satellites etc. because in these there is no balance.
It was rightly pointed out that one should not underestimate the social and
political differences within Europe. At the same time it would be a mistake to
think that one could not act because of this. Europeans were trying to make
their societies effective in the world on very specific points without working
toward a total fusion of these societies. In this regard the next two or three
years would be the testing time.
*
* *
Before closing the Meeting, His Royal Highness expressed the gratitude
of all those present to Mr.Terkelsen, Mr.S0rensen, Mr.Marott, the other
Danish hosts and Mr. H0egh for all they had done to make the Meeting such a
succes. The Prince also expressed his deep appreciation to the authors of the
working papers and thanked the members of the Secretariat as well as the
interpreters for their excellent work.
A United States participant thanked His Royal Highness on behalf of all
participants for the fascinating and stimulating Meeting.
54
