\
"
PERSQNAL AND
STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
NOT FOR PUBLICATION
EITHER IN WHOLE OR IN PART
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
MONT TREMBLANT
CONFERENCE
26 - 28 April 1g68
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
MONT TREMBLANT
CONFERENCE
26 - 28 April 1968
.(.'
j
CONTENTS
List of Participants
Introduction . . .
First item of the Agenda
"The Relations between the West and the Communist Countries"
Summary of and introduction to German working paper
Discussion . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . .
Second item of the Agenda
"Internationalization of Business"
Summary of and introduction to American working paper
Summary of and introduction to French working paper.
Summary of and introduction to French memorandum .
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Annex
Discussion on "American balance of payments"
5
9
13
22
35
40
46
48
59
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF THE NETHERLANDS
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
JOSEPH E. JOHNSON
DEPUTY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
Arnold T. LAMPING
OBSERVER: H.R.H. PRINCESS BEATRIX OF THE NETHERLANDS
AGNELLI, UMBERTO ITALY
ALLARD, jEAN v. CANADA
BAHR, EGON GERMANY
BALL, GEORGE w. UNITED STATES
BAUMGARTNER, WILFRID S. FRANCE
BEATON, LEONARD CANADA
BELANGER, MICHEL CANADA
BENEDIKTSSON, BJARNI leELAND
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC UNITED KINGDOM
BERG, FRITZ GERMANY
BIESHEUVEL, BAREND W. NETHERLANDS
BIRGI, M. NuRI TURKEY
BIRRENBACH, KURT GERMANY
BOOTH, ALAN R. INTERNATIONAL
BRIDGEMAN, SIR MAURICE R. UNITED KINGDOM
BRZEZINSKI, ZBIGNIEW UNITED STATES
5
BucHAN, THE HoN. ALASTAIR F. INTERNATIONAL PARIZEAU, JACQUES CANADA
CAMU, Lours BELGIUM PEARSON, LESTER B. CANADA
CHAMBERS, SIR PAUL UNITED KINGDOM PECCEI, AURELIO ITALY
COLLADO, EMILIO G. UNITED STATES PERKINS, ]AMES A. UNITED STATES
DEAN, ARTHUR H. UNITED STATES PIRELLI, LEOPOLDO ITALY
DEMING, FREDERICK L. UNITED STATES POWELL, J. ENOCH UNITED KINGDOM
DILLON, C. DOUGLAS UNITED STATES RAsMINSKY, Lours CANADA
DODGE, WILLIAM CANADA RITCHIE, RONALD S. CANADA
FoRD II, HENRY UNITED STATES ROCKEFELLER, DAVID UNITED STATES
FOUCHIER, JACQUES DE FRANCE RoNCHEY, ALBERTO ITALY
GATES JR., THOMAS S. UNITED STATES ROTHSCHILD, BARON EDMOND DE FRANCE
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G. s. CANADA RYAN, CLAUDE CANADA
HARTUNG, HENRI FRANCE RYAN, JOHN T. UNITED STATES
HAUGE, GABRIEL UNITED STATES SANDBERG, HERMAN W. NETHERLANDS
HEINZ II, HENRY J. UNITED STATES SHONFIELD, ANDREW A. UNITED KINGDOM
H121EGH, LEIF NORWAY SNOY ET D'0PPUERS, BARON BELGIUM
HOLMES, JOHN W. CANADA SOLVAY, JACQUES E. BELGIUM
JACKSON, HENRY M. UNITED STATES S0RENSEN, SVEND 0. DENMARK
KARSTEN, CHRISTIAN F. NETHERLANDS SPETHMANN, DIETER GERMANY
KEENER,]. WARD UNITED STATES SPINELLI, ALTIERO ITALY
Kurn, PIETER NETHERLANDS STILLE, UGo ITALY
LAMBERT, ALLEN T. CANADA STONE, SHEPARD UNITED STATES
LENDVAI, pAUL AUSTRIA TAVERNE, DrcK UNITED KINGDOM
LOWENTHAL, RICHARD GERMANY TERKELSEN, TERKEL M. DENMARK
LUNDVALL, D. BJORN H. SWEDEN THORNBROUGH, ALBERT A. CANADA
LUNS, JOSEPH M. A. H. NETHERLANDS TmEMAND, OTTO G. NORWAY
MARTIN, PAUL CANADA TRUDEAU, PIERRE E. CANADA
MATHIAS, CHARLES McC. UNITED STATES TtiRKMEN, ILTER TURKEY
McLEAN, WILLIAM F. CANADA UMBRIGHT, VICTOR D. SWITZERLAND
McNAMARA, RoBERT S. INTERNATIONAL VERNON, RAYMOND UNITED STATES
MENDES-FRANCE, PIERRE FRANCE VISSER 'T HooFT, WILLEM A. INTERNATIONAL
MoMMER, KARL GERMANY WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO GERMANY
MOYERS, BILL D. UNITED STATES
MURPHY, ROBERT D. UNITED STATES IN ATTENDANCE:
NETHERLANDS, H. R.H. PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
RoY, BERTIE LE NETHERLANDS
NIARCHOS, STAVROS S. INTERNATIONAL
NOGUEIRA, ALBERTO F. PORTUGAL
THILLAYE, BERNARD C. CANADA
NYKOPP, JOHAN A. FINLAND
VERNEDE, EDWIN NETHERLANDS
OLIVETTI, ROBERTO ITALY
OPPENHEIM, SIR DUNCAN M. UNITED KINGDOM
6 7
...
"
INTRODUCTION
The seventeenth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Lodge at Mont Trem-
blant (Canada) on 26, 27 and 28 April 1968 under the chairmanship of
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands.
There were 87 participants from the United States, Canada and fifteen
Western European countries as well as from various international organiza-
tions. They consisted of members of governments, politicians, prominent
businessmen, representatives of employers' organizations and trade unions,
journalists, leading national and international civil servants and important
figures in other fields.
In accordance with the rules adopted at each meeting, all participants
spoke in a purely personal capacity without in any way committing whatever
government or organization to which they might belong. In order to enable
participants to speak with the greatest possible frankness, the discussions were
confidential, the press not being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. The Relations between the West and the Communist Countries.
II. Internationalization of Business.
9
..
THE RELATIONS BETWEEN THE WEST AND THE
COMMUNIST COUNTRIES
H.R.H. The Prince of the Netherlands opened the meeting and recalled the
Bilderberg rules of procedure. The Prince expressed the hope that all partici-
pants from both sides of the Atlantic, the many newcomers certainly not
excepted, would take an active part in the discussion. In the Prince's opinion,
a frank exchange of views would be particularly valuable in the present
political circumstances, even if the prospects for European integration did not
appear very encouraging.
*
* *
The background for discussion of this item of the Agenda consisted of a
paper prepared by a German participant which was distributed before the
meeting.
SUMMARY OF AND INTRODUCTION TO
GERMAN WORKING PAPER
The author of this paper began by noting that for more than a decade
relations between the Western powers and the Soviet bloc had been charac-
terized by the development oflimited but important elements of co-operation
along with the persistence of overriding conflict. The conflict found expression
in the competitive development of armaments, in the continuing military
confrontation of the rival alliances in Europe, in the expansion of Soviet
influence in the Middle East, etc. At the same time, elements of East-West
co-operation had· developed both from the recognition of certain common
interests by the two "bloc leaders", specifically in avoiding a nuclear world
war and, more generally, in limiting the risks and burdens of their conflict,
as well as from the increasing tendency of the other members of both blocs to
pursue their individual national interests independently.
It was evident that in such a protracted conflict, periods of growing tension
were followed by periods of detente. The climate of detente, since the early
sixties, had encouraged the growth of new elements of co-operation across the
13
bloc lines, and had led to a marked loosening up of the formerly rigid political
fronts. Yet in the absence of serious efforts to negotiate solutions for the main
issues in the conflict, new developments in Viet-Nam, in the Middle East and
Mediterranean and in the arms race had undermined that climate. Just as
"peaceful co-existence'', in official Soviet terminology, had come to mean
no more than the absence of nuclear world war, so "detente'', in Western
diplomatic terminology, had become depreciated to mean little more than the
absence of an all-out confrontation between the super-powers or of an acute
crisis involving the two blocs as a whole.
The author noted that his paper confined itself to relations between the
Western powers and the states of the European Soviet bloc.
Three major shifts in East-West relations had occurred since the beginning
of the latest detente. The first concerned the relation of the military potential
of both sides; the second concerned the relative political cohesion of NATO
and the Warsaw Pact; the third concerned the diplomatic initiative in Europe.
1. The detente had been largely the product of American military superi-
ority, both in nuclear striking power and in the mobility of conventional
forces. While American superiority in the strategic nuclear field still existed,
this had tended in recent years to be reduced as a result of both the growth of
Soviet rocket forces and the installation of ABM's in Russia. The continuing
world-wide mobility ofAmerican conventional forces was visible in Viet-Nam,
but the new fact was the remarkable increase in Soviet mobility; the rapid
growth of the "Mediterranean detachment of the Black Sea Fleet" was
politically the most significant aspect of this new mobility. Further, the
proportion of American forces available for use in Europe had diminished
while the proportion of Soviet forces in Europe had not. Finally, the tendency
in recent years had been towards a reduction in the military effort of the
European member states ofNATO, and an increase in the strength and firepower
of Russia's allies in the Warsaw Pact.
2. Efforts to reduce the degree of independence acquired by Rumania had
failed, but Soviet leadership of the other member states of the Warsaw Pact
had been consolidated with marked success, even if that success had been
achieved at the price of considerable internal tensions in at least some member
states. Conversely, disintegrative tendencies within the Western alliance had
continued to increase. Its military potential had been weakened by the French
withdrawal from the integrated command structure, by the reductions of the
American forces under NATO command and by the lowering of the military
effort of other member states. Its loss of political cohesion had been demon-
strated by its inability to use the detente for developing joint proposals for
14
solving the outstanding issues of the East-West conflict in Europe and by the
growth of a competition between the leading Western powers for improving
their relations with Moscow by separate negotiations. Disagreements on the
conduct of diplomacy towards Russia, on atomic non-proliferation, on Viet-
Nam and on the Common Market had become muchmore prominent among the
NATO members than their common policies; and the growth of influential
anti-NATO currents was discernible in most of them.
3. The net effect of these developments was that the Soviet bloc had re-
covered the political initiative in Europe, largely because it had consistently
given priority to this theatre over other interests. It was Soviet proposals for a
European security system to replace NATO and the Warsaw Pact, or for some
form of revival of the Potsdam agreement for the control of Germany, that
formed the main material for diplomatic discussion in allied and neutral
European capitals. It was Soviet moves in the Middle East and the Mediter-
ranean and Soviet warnings on Berlin that determined Western expectations
about possible future crises. For the Soviets were, consciously and consistently,
using the detente to promote their solution of the conflict.
The two basic goals of Soviet policy in Europe had remained unchanged
for many years. They were the consolidation of the Soviet power sphere
including the universal acceptance of the present East German regime as
legitimate and permanent, and the dissolution of NATO and particularly of the
alliance between the United States and Western Germany.
Up to the Cuban crisis the Soviets sought to achieve these goals by pressure
on the Western position in Berlin. Khrushchev's successors had pursued these
same goals, but initially by radically different means: instead of seeking to
force the break up of NATO by threats, they had sought to promote its sponta-
neous disintegration by offering the parallel dissolution of the Warsaw Pact
and the alternative of a "European security system".
This offer, however, had been preceded and followed not only by practical
measures to strengthen military and political co-operation under the Warsaw
Pact, but by the conclusion or renewal of a series of bilateral treaties among
all member states except Rumania. These treaties, including in particular the
new treaties between the other member states and East Germany, bound the
signatories to continue their alliance for another twenty years - regardless of
any possible dissolution of the Warsaw Pact.
"European security" had come to be interpreted in Soviet statements
exclusively as security against "West German militarism and revanchism".
Instead of an all-round system of mutual guarantees among equal partners,
the Soviets had lately begun to propagate a partial return to the joint control
15
of the victorious powers over defeated Germany. Of course, if Western consent
to such an arrangement could be obtained, it would effectively break up the
present Western alliance without requiring steps on the Soviet side.
Along with the revival of Soviet initiatives in Europe, "harder" policies of
a revival of the arms race and of expanding the Soviet power sphere on
NATO's southern flank had developed in recent years.
In the arms control field, the Soviets had been reasonably co-operative on
the non-proliferation treaty, merely insisting that signatories whose civilian
nuclear installations were at present controlled by EURATOM must negotiate
arrangements to adapt themselves to the IAEA controls within a fixed time - an
issue which they perhaps hoped would create difficulties for the German
Federal Republic and between the latter and the United States.
On a problem of far more direct impact on the power relation between the
United States and the Soviet Union, the installation of anti-ballistic missiles,
the Soviet attitude had been far less co-operative. The Soviets had made it
dear that they would not negotiate a ceiling on ABM's unless a ceiling of
offensive strategic rockets was negotiated at the same time, and that their
objective in such a negotiation would be the replacement ofthe present United
States superiority in strategic nuclear weapons by parity. This would decisively
reduce the credibility of the nuclear protection at present offered by the
United States to its exposed allies.
Finally, Khrushchev's successors had steadily increased the Soviet Union's
political, economic and military stake in the Middle East. The Soviet role in
the Middle Eastern war of 1967 had to be considered in this context. This was
the one region of the Third World in which the Soviets had clearly advanced
from a mere "strategy of denial" to a deliberate policy of installing themselves
as the predominant power - a policy which had begun to pose a new threat
to NATO's Mediterranean flank.
In Viet-Nam the Soviets had been faced with the decision whether to
concentrate on diplomatic efforts to end the war in the interest of overall
detente, or to regard its continuation chiefly as a drain on American power and
prestige that might be useful to their own world position. The decision seemed
to have gone increasingly in the latter direction.
The author proceeded to trace the main outlines of the separate policies of
three Western states - the United States, France and the German Federal
Republic.
a) The United States, under President Kennedy, entered the detente without
a detailed plan for negotiating a solution of the central problem of the East-
West conflict, but with the definite intention of using the detente to make
those questions negotiable.
16
The high priority which the United States assigned to bilateral arms control
negotiations with Russia in general and to nuclear non-proliferation in
particular involved it almost at once in conflicts with its own allies: first the
Nassau agreement with Britain led to the sharpest French attack yet on
American "hegemony" and then the United States reacted to the French
proclamation of an independent "European" policy and to the simultaneous
signature of the Franco-German treaty by pushing the project of a "multi-
lateral nuclear force" - a project that was intended to preserve political unity
at least among the other leading NATO powers but which proved divisive
among them as well.
The newJohnson administration, faced with the growing difficulty offinding
European partners for a common policy of detente, not only dropped the
MLF-project, but lost active interest in using the detente for a constructive
initiative in European affairs. This attitude deepened as the imminent threat
of a collapse of the South-Vietnamese regime led to a shift of American
priorities from the European to the Asian and Pacific theatre, expressed not
only in a growing pressure for troop withdrawals from Europe, but in a ten-
dency to ignore the increasing deliveries of Soviet armaments to North Viet-
Nam, to hope for eventual Soviet help in inducing a less intransigent attitude
on the part of Hanoi, and therefore to regard the preservation of the climate
of detente with Moscow as valuable in itself, independent of Soviet behaviour
in Europe or elsewhere or even in the arms race.
President Johnson returned to a more active pursuit of East-West detente
in Europe, but he linked it to an explicit option to use the detente only to
lower the risks, burdens and barriers of the East-West conflict within the
framework of the opposing alliances rather than to try to transcend that
framework and prepare the ground for a European settlement. American
policy was thus striving to prevent a deteriorat_ion of the European status quo
with a minimum of military and diplomatic effort, not to explore ways for an
improvement by new initiatives.
In other fields, the United States had so far confined itself to reacting to
rising Soviet pressures piecemeal without seriously questioning their compati-
bility with the overall climate of detente. The United States had maintained
its Sixth Fleet in the Eastern Mediterranean but it had silently accepted the
growing activities of the Soviet fleet in these waters. The United States had
set limits to the new Soviet advances, but had lacked either the strength or the
will to stop them altogether.
b) France: The French Government of General de Gaulle saw in the
detente both the danger ofa Russo-American understanding on the permanent
domination of a divided Europe and the chance of creating a new European
17
settlement which would make both the opposing alliances and the physical
presence of their leading powers in the heart of the continent superfluous.
The French President seemed to have assumed from the outset that the
United States would be more opposed than the Soviet Union to any replace-
ment of the existing alliances, and that the diplomatic preparation for the
desired change would therefore have to be accomplished in contact with the
Soviets but without and to some extent against the United States. A Britain
wedded to its "special relationship" with the United States was equally
considered an opponent of the French vision of a "European Europe", while
Federal Germany, because of its vital interest in overcoming the German
partition, appeared as France's natural supporter on the new road.
French detente policy thus started logically with the l 963 veto against
British entry into the Common Market and with the simultaneous conclusion
of a treaty offriendship with the Federal Republic. But West German opinion
did not agree in seeing Washington as the main obstacle to any long-term
'change in the European status quo, and continued to regard close and confident
co-operation with Washington as indispensable for its short-term security. The
resulting divergence impelled General de Gaulle to pursue his rapprochement
with the Soviets as a priority task, in isolation from his NATO allies and with a
deliberate stress on those issues where he agreed with the Soviets rather than
with his allies. This policy reached its culmination in 1966 with France's
departure from NATO and General de Gaulle's visit to Moscow.
However, the search for Franco-Russian agreement on a new European
settlement met an obstacle, on the one hand, in the rigid Soviet commitment
to the maintenance of the Soviet power sphere, including an unchanged East
German regime dependent on Soviet military support, and, on the other, in
the French interest in an inter-European balance that could one day be
maintained without the American presence. For the French perceived clearly
that such a balance would require the willing co-operation ofthe West Germans
and would be incompatible with the presence of Soviet forces on the Elbe.
For these reasons, France had continued both to refuse diplomatic recognition
of the East German regime and to keep the Federal Government carefully
informed about her Eastern diplomacy, at the same time encouraging and
supporting all West German moves in a similar direction.
After the formation of a new Bonn Government committed to an active
improvement of relations with Eastern Europe, there was a marked revival
of Franco-German co-operation. Undeterred by the new hardening of Soviet
policy on the German question, France continued to support the new Bonn
diplomacy towards the member states of the Soviet bloc.
The development of an independent French nuclear capability had had
18
remarkably little impact on East-West relations and French withdrawal from
NATO's military organization, apart from increasing France's diplomatic free-
dom of manoeuvre, seemed to have mainly served the purpose of re-insuring
France against a possible involvement in the escalation of East-West conflicts
originating outside Europe.
The growing rigidity of the Soviet attitude to European problems made it
improbable that the new French strategic doctrine of all-round defence would
have concrete political effects, and permitted the assumption that France might
be willing in 1969 to renew her membership in the Atlantic Alliance, at least
provisionally and in a suitably loose form.
c) Germany: It might be said that, because ofits vital interest in overcoming
German partition, the Federal Republic had more to gain from a detente
that might loosen the status quo than any other Western power. Yet the
Adenauer Government at first interpreted "detente" merely as a Russo-American
agreement to cement the status quo and hence came to be regarded inter-
nationally as the principal obstacle to a lowering of the tensions and barriers
between East and West; and the damage to the international standing of the
Federal Republic was compounded by the .Adenauer Government's support
for the MLF-project, which was widely interpreted abroad as due to an urge
to gain "a finger on the nuclear trigger".
Under the leadership of Erhard and Schroder, West German foreign policy
was primarily governed by a stubborn desire to preserve the country's sheltered
existence as part of the Atlantic Alliance - irrespective of the fact that this
alliance no longer had a common policy. In practice, this meant both that it
became more one-sidedly dependent on American leadership at the very time
when less American leadership was available for Europe, and that it took a
more favourable attitude towards East-West detente. Yet the efforts of Herr
Schroder in particular to make use of the climate of detente to improve
Germany's relations with the East European states and diminish their fear of
Germany were frequently frustrated by the resistance of elements within the
governing majority that were either opposed in principle to any dealings with
the Communist world or wedded to demands for a revision of Germany's
Eastern frontiers that excluded any reconciliation with her Eastern neighbours.
The resulting paralysis led to Bonn's growing international isolation in the
latter part of l 966.
By the time the Erhard Government was replaced by the "grand coalition"
under Kiesinger and Brandt, a new Eastern policy had become possible.
The government declaration expressed the desire for full diplomatic relations
with all the Communist states of Eastern Europe in a spirit of reconciliation.
While refusing to recognize the East German Government as representative
19
1;;
I
and legitimate, the declaration also offered to deal with this government on
any level in order to obtain practical improvement for the human, economic
and cultural contacts between the inhabitants of both parts of Germany.
This change of policy suddenly projected the Federal Government not only
into the stream of detente, ending the danger of self-isolation, but into the
centre of debate within the Soviet bloc. When the Soviet Government, after
some hesitation, came down on the side of the "hard-liners'', the Czechs,
Hungarians and Bulgarians had provisionally to reject the West German bid
for normal diplomatic relations and to conclude bilateral twenty-year treaties
with East Germany instead. The question did not, however, disappear from
the international agenda: the West Germans kept their offers open, achieved
a trade agreement with Czechoslovakia in August 1967 and also initiated a
dialogue with the Soviets on a possible exchange of declarations renouncing
the use or threat of force, not only with them but with all the members of the
Soviet bloc. A Soviet demand to exchange similar declarations with East
Germany had not been flatly rejected. The net result of this new flexibility in
Bonn to date had been the appearance of growing differences on the appro-
priate response both in the Soviet Union itself and in the bloc.
The Bonn Government had not tried to influence the course of East-West
relations outside Europe. Its one overriding interest in the Third World had
remained to prevent the diplomatic recognition of the present East German
regime by non-Communist states, and in this it had continued to be successful.
The one other question on which Bonn's attitude was ofpotential importance
for East-West relations was the non-proliferation treaty. While no responsible
West German leader was interested in national control of nuclear weapons,
and the Bonn Government had no desire to obstruct the treaty, it felt obliged
to safeguard German interests on some specific points and felt it had been
insufficiently consulted in the early stages of negotiation. The wish to keep
the European option open had been met in the treaty for the case of a fully
federated West European state. Differences remained concerning the duration
of the treaty and the possibilities of revision, but the most important issue for
West Germany was an economic one - to make sure that the necessary in-
spection procedure would not expose German reactor technique to the eyes of
competitors. Yet the decisive political elements in the Federal Republic seemed
to be aware that a refusal to sign the treaty, or even a prolonged reluctance,
could do much more harm to its national interest than the treaty itself could
possibly cause.
In conclusion, the author of the paper said that what emerged "from the
course of Western policies during the years of detente was, on the one hand,
a hard core of continuing common interests and, on the other, a basic division
20
concerning the degree of readiness to take risks for the sake of attempting to
overcome the East-West conflict in Europe.
On the side of common interests, the need to maintain a balance of power
against the Soviet Union was accepted by all Western governments, including
that of General de Gaulle, though there were marked differences about the
amount of effort and sacrifice required for that purpose. Recognition of the
desirability of reducing the risks and burdens of the arms competition and
eliminating insofar as possible the barriers dividing East and West by the
promoting of economic and cultural exchanges had become equally general,
notwithstanding substantial disagreements on the prospects ofparticular forms
ofarms control. Finally, all those concerned, including the Germans themselves,
agreed that the guarantees against an uncontrolled increase in German
military strength in general and against the possibility of German nuclear
arms in particular should be no weaker than under the present system of
opposing alliances.
The basic division in the West, on the other hand, was between maintenance
of the existing alliances at a reduced level of cost and effort (a view shared
by the United States, Britain and some of the smaller Western countries) and
the replacement of those alliances by a new type of all-round security system
ending the partition of Europe and reducing the super-powers to the role of
guarantors from a distance (France being the principal exponent of this view).
The peculiarity of the intermediate position of the Federal Republic was that
it shared the French preference for a basic change, but not the French belief
that such a change could, should or need be achieved against American and
British resistance. The German view was, on the contrary, that the hardest
resistance against a real solution of European problems would continue to
come from the Soviets, and that it would not be possible to overcome it
without American and British support. This gave the Federal Republic in the
present phase a special interest in seeking to reconcile the views of its allies not
only for reasons of its immediate security, but also as a pre-condition for
achieving its long-range aim of a change in Eastern Germany.
As the hardening of Soviet policy and the partial success of Soviet efforts
to change the balance of power made both the preservation of detente at a
low level of effort and the achievement of constructive change by the isolated
action of France increasingly unlikely, the chances of such a reconciliation of
Western policies might eventually improve.
In introducing his paper the author followed the lines developed in the
preceding summary.
21
I''
i
il,1
I
On one point the author, however, wished to revise his paper. Since the
beginning of 1968 the trend for a reconstruction of the Eastern alliance had
to some extent been reversed. He specifically had in mind the Soviet reaction
to the new Eastern policy of the German Federal Government. In an effort
to prevent this new policy from improving West German relations with, and
influence in, Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union had tried to tighten contacts
in Eastern Europe beyond the degree which appeared acceptable to many
important elements in Eastern Europe. The Soviets had succeeded in inducing
all the countries concerned, Rumania excepted, to reject the offer ofdiplomatic
relations with the Federal Republic but this aim had only been reached at the
price ofincreasing tensions in some ofthese countries. In this context the author
referred to recent developments in Poland and Czechoslovakia.
Whereas the author had previously associated the harder Soviet policy
towards the West in regard to the German and the European question in
general with increasing confidence and impatience, he would now speak of
increasing insecurity coupled with impatience. The atmosphere of detente had
been largely dissipated by recent Soviet policies and this had obviously in-
fluenced the author's views on the changes in Western policy.
In its assumption that the Soviets could be swayed from their present
objectives without the full weight of the United States in the balance, General
de Gaulle's concept now appeared unrealistic. Conversely, the American
concept of detente between unchanged alliances would not, in its nature, be
stable.
Another element to be taken into account was the unwillingness of modem
youth to accept the necessity for continuing unchanged alliances, for continuing
the partition of Europe and of Germany.
The author concluded that the opportunity to make a major effort for
negotiated solutions during the present phase of detente was probably lost.
We would, however, have to prepare our own concepts for possible diplomatic
negotiations and negotiated solutions which, one day, might be put forward
as a common policy of the West, if the Soviets were willing to talk again. But
this was a long term prospect.
DISCUSSION
GENERAL SITUATION
Prior to the discussion of the various subjects raised in the paper, several
speakers gave their views on the general political and military situation in the
world.
22
A Canadian participant with particularly extensive international experience
noted that this situation had greatly deteriorated and suggested that co-opera-
tion in the Atlantic Alliance was declining because of the actual strengthening
of Europe, the existence ofAmerican commitments outside the Atlantic area and
the popular feeling that aggressionwas no longerlikelyin present circumstances.
A Portuguese speaker considered that the climate of detente had been
unfavourably influenced by recent Communist initiatives such as the Russian
naval penetration in the Mediterranean and in other areas and the stepping
up of ideological propaganda. United States, French, United Kingdom and
other participants concurred in the view that the political and military
activities of the Soviets in the Near East constituted a threat to NATO's South
Eastern flank.
Opinions varied concerning the extent to which a change in Russian
attitude and policy might be expected in the near future. Whereas an Italian
participant did not believe there was any continuity in Russian aggressive
policy, a Netherlands, a United Kingdom and a United States speaker were
among those who failed to see any improvement in the political behaviour of
the Soviets. An American and a Turkish speaker warned that the present
Soviet leaders could disappear overnight.
DETENTE
Against such a background the prospects of detente did not appear very
encouraging.
A United Kingdom speaker agreed with a remark made by the author of
the paper that the Russians used detente as a weapon in their political arsenal
against the West. A Canadian participant called the wish for detente "an
illusion" and an American speaker cautioned that the climate for detente could
change rapidly. A United Kingdom speaker described a policy of detente
without a clear line of action for the future as "nonsense'', and his opinion
was supported by a fellow countryman.
However, a Turkish participant said that we should go further on the road
to detente. This view was shared by many other speakers and it was suggested
that initiatives in this direction should come from the Western countries because
they were not aggressive and were less nationalistic than the Communist
countries of Europe.
BALANCE OF POWER
The balance of power was a subject to which various speakers referred in
their interventions and an American speaker agreed with the suggestion by
the author of the working paper that there was some move toward a change
23
'"'*
in that balance: Russia had come nearer to strategic parity and was interested
in achieving greater flexibility but the shift had not been as large as the author
had claimed and the West was militarily preponderant.
The author's pessimistic view was also contested by other participants.
A British speaker said that the basic balance of power between the United
States and the ussR was not moving in a direction unfavourable to the West.
There had been some modest increase in Soviet nuclear capability and some
element of mobility had been introduced into their forces but he did not
consider this threatening. Nor did he think that missile and retaliatory force
parity between the two sides would necessarily mean any decline in the
credibility of the United States guarantee to Europe.
An American participant disagreed strongly with the author's view that
there had been a recent shift in the balance of power to the advantage of the
Soviets. In fact, he continued, the United States has not possessed a position
of strategic nuclear superiority for many years; in terms of usable military
power or military power translatable into political advantage, parity in
strategic nuclear forces has existed for at least a decade. Furthermore, he did
not think that this parity had been or would in the future be a handicap to the
West, nor did he believe there was a significant risk of the Soviets moving to a
position of strategic nuclear superiority in the foreseeable future. In this
context he felt that both the increased mobility of Soviet forces and the recent
Soviet moves in the Mediterranean, although ofpsychological importance, had
little military significance.
Various other speakers emphasized that stresses also existed within the East
European area. A British speaker said that there was more disintegration in
Central and Eastern Europe than there was in the Atlantic Community while
a fellow countryman took the view that developments in Czechoslovakia
were far more serious for the Soviet Union than the previous defection of
Yugoslavia.
Yet another British speaker said that, now the standards ofliving were risingin
Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in Eastern Europe, people there were anxious
to get away from bondage to the Soviet Union. In his view, the West was
not taking sufficient advantage of this decreasing cohesion in the East and he
pointed out that some Eastern countries were anxious to get close to the West
not only industrially but also politically.
NATO STILL NECESSARY
Despite the belief of many participants that the balance of power had not
changed significantly to the disadvantage of the West, there was a general
consensus that it was still vital to preserve NATO.
24
A British speaker already quoted said that in present circumstances NATO
had three essential functions to perform:
1. to maintain the balance of power in Central Europe;
2. to keep a watch on an increasingly fluid diplomatic situation in the
Mediterranean;
3. to provide means of keeping the United States' allies in touch with the
relationship between Moscow and Washington.
Additionally, another British participant pointed out that the cohesion of
the Western Alliance was still very important in exploiting difficulties within
the Eastern bloc. For the East European states, too, there were advantages in
the existence of such a cohesive Western Alliance ,since, without it, Russia
might be tempted to put more pressure on the East European states.
A Portuguese speaker, at a subsequent stage, expressed surprise that no
mention had been made of either disarmament or of the United Nations as a
possible corrective to the unsatisfactory development of world relations.
ATLANTIC ALLIANCE NOT WHOLLY SATISFACTORY
Despite this consensus of opinion on the necessity of maintaining NATO
there was broad agreement that the state of the Atlantic Alliance was not
wholly satisfactory. A Canadian and a German participant were among those
who detected a weakening of co-operation within the Atlantic Community
while a Belgian speaker regretted that too little advantage had been taken of
the opportunities offered by the Rome Treaty: the six Common Market
countries had failed to reach greater political depth as well as territorial
extension.
A tendency on the part of the United States to deal with various problems
unilaterally - e.g. Viet-Nam, Latin America, - was blamed by a Canadian
participant as a factor which discouraged any sense of global responsibility
among America's allies and created a feeling of alienation in Western Europe.
PUBLIC OPINION ON NATO
In appraising the shortcomings and imperfections of the Atlantic Alliance,
considerable attention was paid to the unsatisfactory state of public opinion
vis-a-vis NATO. This was attributed by an Icelandic participant to the fact that
people felt the threat from Russia was less real than in the past, a view sup-
ported by a Canadian speaker. Along similar lines, a German participant said
that decreasing interest in NATO might be due to the fact that many people
thought that the real reason for the status quo was the existence of United
25
States nuclear capacity and that NATO was therefore not absolutely necessary
to their security.
Analysing the attitude of the public in the United States, a participant
from that country said that there was an opting out attitude toward NATO
among the younger generation. This was not merely passive and negative;
the new generation in America was concerned about racial justice, the problem
of the cities, etc. What was involved was not a withdrawal into a passive
troglodytic existence but a withdrawal so as to re-order priorities. In reply to
a question by the author of the paper, a United States participant answered
that no young American was inclined to believe that the United States was
in a position to produce security in practically any part of the world any more.
Another American agreed that public interest in NATO and its problems was
steadily declining in the United States, and not merely among young people.
The public was largely indifferent to European problems and was not even
concerned with the threat of the Soviet Union.
Turning to the attitude among young people in Europe, another American
concluded that they would not be alarmed by the possibility of an American
withdrawal of troops from Europe and this view was implicitly supported by
the author of the working paper when countering the suggestion by a British
participant that French action in leaving the military organization of NATO
was purely governmental. On the contrary, he said, there had not been a ripple
of opposition to De Gaulle's policy from French public opinion. There was a
growing opposition to NATO burdens in all European countries, especially
among the younger generation.
In the view of an international participant young people found it difficult
to understand NATO because they had no experience of the past. To them
NATO was set up to deal with problems of the past, and they were more inter-
ested in the future. They felt NATO's priorities to be wrong and, more specifically,
believed that improvement ofthe lot ofthe poorer countries was being hindered
by the expenditure of money and energy on military establishments.
A Netherlands participant saw an explanation for the present attitude of
European youth in the fact that the American image in Europe had been
"tarnished": young people were shocked by the war in Viet-Nam, by the
disintegration of American society and by the murder of President Kennedy
and Martin Luther King.
Various speakers stressed the importance of taking action to win the support
of the public for the Western Alliance. Suggestions included the need expressed
by a Norwegian speaker "not only to work for detente but to be seen to work
for it" and the further need, voiced by a Turkish speaker, to recognize that
that part of the public which failed to support NATO could be divided into
26
three sectors: one was disinterested because of its ignorance; another was
disinterested because, although it knew something of NATO, it did not know
enough to make a proper judgement; and still another was flatly hostile to
NATO. The first two sectors could be worked on and the speaker urged that
each country should study specific ways ofeffecting a change in public opinion.
He went on to say that discussions between NATO leaders should deal not only
with technical aspects but with the possible effect of their decisions on public
opinion. Finally, an Italian participant argued that we must offer the younger
generation new institutions for the management of detente policy.
GERMAN REUNIFICATION
Closely related to the subject of East-West relations was the German
question, particularly the problem of German reunification.
A German speaker explained the object of the new German "Ostpolitik"
which aimed at a greater flexibility and at an arrangement in Eastern Europe,
in close collaboration with the United States and the other allies.
An American speaker said that he found it difficult to imagine the reunifica-
tion of Germany being brought about through the creation of a new German
nation state of larger dimensions. He did not believe that ultimately either
Western Europe or the Soviet Union would permit this and held that we
would have to create a wider West European political framework designed to
absorb both East and West Germany. In this view the speaker was supported
by another German speaker.
The German participant first mentioned underlined that the partition of
Germany meant the partition of Europe and that European unification would
largely solve the German problem. If the German Democratic Republic were
to become a democratic state within a wider European framework, it would be
possible to reconsider the problem of reunification, more especially since all
sectors, including German youth, realized that Germany must not be allowed
to become a new threat.
THIRD WORLD
In this context some speakers touched on the problem of the Third World,
a subject which, strictly speaking, fell outside the scope of the Agenda.
An American speaker argued that European problems could not be isolated
from the existence of Third World instability and went on to say that the
Cold War might well be shifting predominantly to the area of the under-
developed nations. He wondered whether existing international arrangements
were sufficiently flexible and stable to absorb this new situation.
Similarly, a Portuguese participant advanced the view that the problem of
27
:·)
I
'I
!
i
1,,
,,
disarmament was directly connected with the question of economic develop-
ment not only in the Western world but also in the Third World. Ifthere were
no economic development there, then tension might increase and if tension
increased, there was less likelihood of bringing about disarmament.
PROPOSALS FOR IMPROVEMENT IN EUROPEAN RELATIONS
Against the above-mentioned analysis ofthe Atlantic problem, )Uanyspeakers
presented various proposals to improve the chances of detente, or at least to
arrive at more satisfactory global relations.
SECURITY SYSTEM
There was a visible trend in Europe, according to a German speaker,
already mentioned, towards the creation of a so-called European security
system designed to replace the present system ofblocs, and historical experience
of such systems, he suggested, was not encouraging. Creation of such a system,
for instance, without a solution having previously been found to the division of
Europe and the division of Germany could only lead to legitimization of the
status quo. Russia insisted on such a security system only to use it against the
Federal Republic.
Similar doubts as to the validity ofa European security system were expressed
by a Netherlands and a United States participant, the American stating that it
was a somewhat dangerous doctrine to recommend a security system to end
the division of Europe, bring about the reunification of Germany, etc., es-
pecially if it involved American withdrawal from Europe.
Nevertheless, a Canadian participant said that NATO itself was not really
an alliance of necessity but an early component of a European security system
which might later develop into a world security system. A British speaker
argued that, although the structure of alliances, especially our own, had to be
fundamentally altered, yet the existence of alliances was the only hope of
eventually negotiating some sort of bro.ader system of security in Europe. In
this concept he was supported by the United States participant just mentioned
who also favoured a solution of the problem in the context of a European
political framework with room for the East.
REDUCTION OF TROOPS IN EUROPE
The question of an eventual reduction of United States forces in Europe
was the subject of a number of comments.
The author ofthe working paper affirmed that American forces were needed
in Europe not only to deter a highly improbable attack but also as a vital
bargaining asset to overcome the partition of Europe. The Soviets must know
28
that the American troops would remain in Europe as long as the Russians
refused to leave.
Support for the continued presence ofAmerican troops was also forthcoming
from a Canadian participant who said that the United States had not only to
be involved in the general strategy of the area but also in the details: they even
had to know "what happens to a corporal on the autobahn". Unless America
was present, even at the lowest level, its guarantees could not operate safely.
On the other hand, another American said it was not true that the United
States had to maintain a very high level of forces in Western Europe in order
to prevent NATO from disintegrating. In view of the balance of payments
situation, a unilateral reduction of forces would probably be necessary anyway
and this could have real and positive advantages in encouraging a substantial
Soviet withdrawal while still enabling America to maintain a forcesufficient
to discourage any Soviet adventure.
Support for this approach was forthcoming from a German speaker who
said that neither the United States nor Germany alone would be prepared
indefinitely to bear all costs of maintaining the present forces. A reduction of
troops might be carried out in the hope that the Soviet Union, in line with its
own interests, would reduce theirs.
A Netherlands speaker wondered how the Russians might be induced to
leave the Elbe line. If Russian and American troops were both to leave, this
would adversely influence the existing balance of power and he wondered
what would be the value of the United States guarantee without the American
military presence?
In the subsequent discussion, various other speakers expressed similar doubts
as to the value of a "distant" United States guarantee.
A United States speaker said that it would be completely unrealistic to
assume that a withdrawal of United States troops from Europe would induce
Russia to give up the DDR and permit reunification.
A Canadian speaker wholly agreed that NATO was indispensable in present
circumstances but asked whether a general reduction of troops might not be
possible after the Viet-Nam war was over.
NATO VERSUS WARSAW PACT
Various speakers believed that insufficient use was made of the possibility
of achieving a detente by negotiations between the NATO and the Warsaw
powers.
However, a United Kingdom participant strongly objected to such an
arrangement at a moment when the Warsaw organization was in a state of
crisis. We would be exchanging a body in being for the weakening of a body
29
1·1
1
I
It~~
which was already in the process ofdisintegration. He believed, on the contrary,
that NATO should be strengthened with British troops which were to be with-
drawn from other parts of the world. Such a procedure would, moreover, be an
inducement to the Americans to keep their troops in Europe.
Another United Kingdom speaker supported this view: a NATO - Warsaw
"detente" would adversely influence the existing balance of power. It should
be borne in mind that, not long ago, 20-year treaties had been concluded
between Russia and Eastern European states which might replace the Warsaw
arrangement so that there would be no equivalence in a possible NATO -
Warsaw deal.
ECONOMIC SOLUTION
Several speakers wondered whether better relations between East and West
might not be reached along economic and financial lines.
Many speakers believed that it was desirable to increase trade contacts
with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union and, in this connection, a German
speaker pointed out that Eastern European countries still relied very largely
on the export of agricultural goods but that new measures taken by the
Brussels Community meant that such exports were decreasing and thus creating
a new difficulty in East-West relationships.
In the opinion of a French and of a United Kingdom participant, it was
essential to bring about a certain economic interpenetration of a progressive
kind between countries of the East and West.
Another note of caution was sounded by a British speaker who, while
agreeing that trade contacts should be increased, said we had to recognize that
we had not yet figured out a system which could tolerate a very high level of
trade between decentralized enterprise-oriented economies, on the one hand,
and state trading economies, on the other.
In the view of an Italian speaker, the central problem in East-West relations
was the development of the Soviet economy, its capacity to transform itself
into a modern economy and at the same time satisfy the increasing demand
for consumer goods. The results of the present reform of the Soviet economic
plan, he said, were uncertain. If successful, the Soviet Union might easily
keep its second place in the world and adopt policies of detente and even
co-operation with the West; conversely, failure of the reform would lead to
domestic turmoil and to a generally serious situation. The success ofthe reform,
he concluded, depended on Western support, all-out East-West agreements for
long-term credits, transfer of technology and management know-how, and the
opening of the Western markets to Soviet goods.
On the same subject of East-West trade, a Belgian speaker recalled that
30
there was a disposition in the Atlantic Treaty providing for economic planning
or co-ordination between the different countries and that this provision had
not been applied. He felt it could be used as a framework for the discussion
of new relations between East European and West European countries since,
without co-ordination, there might be competition between West European
countries regarding credits, etc., which could lead to an anarchic situation.
In reply, an American participant said that past efforts to use this provision
had not proved successful. The fact was that no common NATO policy existed
and he was not optimistic about any agreed policy being achieved.
The author of the paper submitted that major political issues would not be
solved by economic measures.
EAST-WEST APPROACH
The problem of which approach should be chosen to improve East-West
relations was widely discussed.
A United States participant believed that the more developed Western
countries should act collectively in efforts to reach arrangements with Eastern
European states.
Some speakers cautioned against thinking and acting unduly on the basis
of the "bloc mentality". A different approach should be adopted towards
Russia, on the one hand, and the various other Eastern European states, on
the other, the latter being less rigid and more willing to collaborate with the
Western world.
A number of speakers supported a Netherlands speaker who favoured bilat-
eral contacts as a method of reducing existing tensions. As a Norwegian
participant pointed out, such contacts were flexible, more direct and more
informal while the repercussions of any failure on a bilateral basis were less
serious than a failure ofbfoc discussions. A Turkish speaker, however, said that
bilateral efforts should not go beyond a certain point while an American also
said that such approaches had their limitations. Many East European countries
felt attracted towards Western multilateralism and no amount of contacts
between small nations could solve the central problem of Germany. For his
part, he felt that the OECD should open its doors to the East, a move which
might now appeal to the Czechs and later also to other East European nations.
What was needed, as he saw it, were new institutions for East-West relation-
ships - a quiet, discreet informal forum for discussion, something similar to the
Bilderberg meetings themselves.
A German participant said that greater cultural, scientific and other ex-
changes with Eastern countries, combined with disarmament arrangements
between both alliances, were pre-conditions for any further change in the
31
l°'\
i,i
I"
political scene. This speaker may be said to have summed up the general view
of the Meeting but a few speakers had referred in this context, even if margin-
ally, to the effect which a special relationship between the two "super-powers",
the United States and Soviet Russia, might have on the future development of
East-West relations.
32
~
ITEM II
I
INTERNATIONALIZATION OF BUSINESS
The groundwork for discussion ofthis item consisted ofthree papers prepared
by an American and two Frenchparticipants. These papers had been distributed
among participants some weeks before the meeting.
SUMMARY OF AND INTRODUCTION TO
AMERICAN WORKING PAPER
The author of the American paper observed that he would use the term
"world company" to signify a corporation, organized under the laws of a
domiciliary country, which met two standards:
First, it did business in substantially all non-Communist areas, obtained its
capital and raw materials, produced its goods and sold its products throughout
the world; and second, the management shaped its policies not in terms of
national economies but in terms of the overall world economy.
At a time when the demand for goods of every kind was multiplying almost
at a geometric rate while world resources remained finite, the world company
made a unique contribution, by enabling men for the first time in history to
deploy resources freely throughout the world in accordance with principles of
comparative advantage measured by the objective standard of profit.
For more than half a century, a handful of great companies had been active
around the world. Since the Second World War their number had multiplied
many times. How could we best preserve and advance the value of the world
company within the world political structure without excessive loss to other
values?
It was important to recognize the lack of phasing between the development
of the world company and the continued existence of an archaic political
structure ofnation states which was evolving only at glacier pace in response to
new world requirements. This lack of phasing was responsible for most of the
problems confronting the world company, which, in broad terms, could best
be considered with respect to two sets of relationships.
The first concerned relations between the government of the country in
which a world company was organized and the governments of the various
host states in which it operated. For a variety of reasons - such as the desire to
prevent evasion of their own laws or the wish to extend their own jurisdiction
35
,,,
1,..-
as far as possible - domiciliary governments frequently sought to control
activities of world companies even though those activities took place outside
their geographic boundaries. An example was the United States Government's
efforts to restrict foreign subsidiaries of American companies in their dealings
with Red China and today the United States was again stretching the principle
by requiring the repatriation of part of the monies that foreign subsidiaries of
American companies earned in various parts of the world.
Much more serious problems surrounded the second type of relationship -
that between a world corporation and the governments of the host states in
which it did business. Traditional international good manners as well as·
treaty stipulations would require that the corporation be accorded "national
treatment". Yet sometimes, because it did not fully respond to reality, this
principle was more honoured in the breach than the observance. No words in
a treaty could alter the fact that the absentee management of a world company
did not view its problems within the same frame of reference as a host govern-
ment, with its responsibility for the national economy, its reasons of national
pride, its interests and other elements.
Since a world company was more likely to be a dominant element of eco-
nomic power in a small nation than in a large one, the prosperity of many
less-developed countries was heavily dependent on decisions made by manage-
ments of world companies located five or six thousand miles away.
Problems of this kind were part of the uneasy context of North-South
relations, and hence confused by a wide range of tangential issues. The author
of the paper said he would therefore concentrate on the less cluttered problems
encountered and created by world companies in the industrialized nations of
the Northern Hemisphere.
Even here, the fact that most world companies were domiciled in America
was a significant political element that infected economic arrangements with
national jealousies and resentment; but if the world company had a great
potential for good as an instrument for efficiently utilizing resources, there was
no need to apologize for the sensible and vigorous way American industry had
organized itself to serve an expanding world economy. What American entre-
preneurs were doing was exactly what European industrialists should be doing
if the conditions existed in Europe that would make this possible.
Those conditions seemed to be in the making. Next summer, for the first
time in history, goods would move with full freedom throughout six
nations of Western Europe to serve the needs of 200 million people and the
writer was confident that the European Community would within a year
include Great Britain and very likely several other important European
trading nations.
36
J
Yet, great as the achievement had been, it still fell far short of what was
needed. An environment had to be created that would make Europe a seed
bed for new world companies, regardless of the preoccupation with the so-
called "technological gap" and concern about the "American invasion".
Until Europe achieved greater political unity, however, European business
was unlikely to make adequate progress toward a more satisfactory economic
structure. With the Treaty of Rome already ten years old, for instance, social,
fiscal and legal complications still made mergers across national lines difficult,
if not impossible.
The United States would welcome a European counter-invasion. IfEuropean
companies were buying American corporations and establishing production
sources in and outside the United States, it would be to everyone's advantage.
The development of a modern structure of enterprise in Europe - which
would probably not be possible without greater political unity - was by far
the best way to ease the problems of the world company in the advanced
nations.
To realize the full promise of the world company it was not enough to
liberalize world trade, including the free movement ofcapital. Ways would also
have to be found to assure peaceful co-existence between two overlapping
circles of authority - corporate managements and local host governments.
A limited amount could be accomplished by improved corporate diplomacy.
Over the past few years many world companies had sought to mitigate the
prejudices and fears they might otherwise engender by taking local partners,
employing local managers, etc. But, in many cases, the costs of seeking recog-
nition as a local citizen could be excessive. The peculiar genius of the world
company stemmed from its ability to view the world economy from a single
vantage point and to deploy resources without regard to national origin in
response to a common set of economic standards. The disadvantage of local
partners was that they were, in a sense, enemies of such mobility, since their
judgements were based on benefits to the local subsidiary rather than on the
interests of the world enterprise as a whole.
Conflicts were likely to occur, for example, with respect to dividend policy.
A local partner might wish earnings distributed while the management of the
world company might wish to plough them back - or vice versa. Or a local
partner might wish particular facilities expanded, while the world company
might find it more profitable to sell or abandon them.
Since the device oflocal partners was almost certain, therefore, to hobble the
ability of managements to gear their decisions freely to the world ecoaomy, its
indiscriminate use should not be encouraged. It might be wiser to approach
the problem centrally by internationalizing or denationalizing the parent.
37
Such a suggestion would be strengthened if the problem were considered on
a philosophical level as a case study in the legitimacy of power. Where was
there a legitimate base for the power of corporate managements to make
decisions that could profoundly affect the economic life of nations to whose
governments they were only responsible to a limited extent? Did corporate
managements have the right to make decisions affecting not only the mass of
shareholders but the economic welfare of whole communities and the pocket-
books of consumers?
There was no overriding political authority to supervise the totality of the
world company's operations nor was there any organic arrangement to prevent
national governments from interfering with the fulfilment of its role in world
commerce.
The author said he was not proposing a federal governmental structure at
the world level, or anything like it; but there was no reason why world com-
panies might not be accorded some form of denationalized status by a multi-
lateral treaty. Basically, his suggestion was that the world companies should
become quite literally citizens of the world. This implied the establishment
by treaty of something in the nature of an international companies law, ad-
ministered by a body made up of representatives drawn from signatory coun-
tries, who would not only exercize normal domiciliary supervision but would
also enforce the kinds ofarrangements that are normally included in treaties of
establishment.
Such an international companies law could set limits, for example, on the
restrictions that signatory states might be permitted to impose on companies
established under its sanction. The operative standard defining those limits
would be the freedom needed to preserve and protect the central principle
of assuring the most efficient use of world resources.
The author of the paper strongly urged that any such treaty should be out-
side the machinery of the United Nations and that, in the first instance, no
attempt should be made to gain signatories outside the small circle of indus-
trialized nations. Like the GATT, it would be regarded primarily as a mech-
anism for creating a code of rules among the major trading nations, reserving
the possibility that, over the years, it might provide a world charter as more
and more of the less-developed countries adhered to its provisions.
Obviously such an international company would have a central base of
operations since it was clearly necessary that there be a single profit centre.
And its operations in its home country would, of course, be subject to local
law to the extent that the organic treaty did not contain overruling regulations.
But in all cases the enterprise must become international. This meant, among
other things, that share ownership in the parent would have to be widely
38
dispersed so that the company conld not be regarded as the exclusive instru-
ment of a particular nation, which, in view ofthe under-developed state ofmost
national capital markets even in economically advanced countries, was not
likely to occur very soon. But, over the long pull, as in more and more countries
savings were effectively mobilized for investment, companies should assume an
increasingly denationalized character, while, at the same time, a gradual
internationalizing of Boards of Directors and parent company managements
could be expected.
Although some international treaty might be envisaged, directed solely at
resolving conflicts, an international companies act offered the best means of
preserving for all society the great potential ofthe world corporation. A common
companies law for the EEC together with a body of regulations to be adminis-
tered by the EEC Commission was within the realm of present-day contem-
plation. Conceived in these terms a world company law could serve a vital
economic purpose. At the same time its larger political implications should
not be wholly ignored. Freeing world business from national interference
through the creation of new world instrumentalities would inevitably, over
time, point up the inadequacy of our political arrangements. At least in a
small way it might thus serve to stimulate mankind to close the gap between
the archaic political structure of the world and the visions of commerce that
vault beyond confining national boundaries and foresee exploitation of the
full promise of the world company.
In his introduction, the author of the American paper said that there was
nothing peculiarly American about world companies. The reason that the
growth of world companies was more marked in the United States than else-
where was primarily a function of structure.
The speaker noted that the author of one of the other papers had deplored
the fact that world companies had resulted in the transfer of economic and
monetary sovereignty. But in the speaker's opinion as far as economic domina-
tion was concerned the basic problem was to reconcile the existence of world
companies with the legitimate exercise of power. The disparity in scale of
economic and political units in the United States and Europe was fundamental
and the best European answer was to get on with economic integration and
exploit the full potential of the Common Market. Meantime, the absence of a
European companies law was a great disappointment to Americans who, for
their part, should do nothing to stop or slow down direct investment. Turning
to the monetary aspect, the speaker said that what big companies were doing
by developing sources of production abroad was essentially a healthy process.
Europeans should not discourage this but, on the contrary, should try to export
39
capital themselves. In this connection, a very bad practice was the extra-
territorial application of laws of domiciliary countries while a major cause of
difficulty was the habit of European countries of"sitting" on their gold instead
of using it productively.
The speaker also said that the world company should not be so much inter-
nationalized as denationalized - in other words, that it should become a citizen
of the world.
After having strongly rejected the impression given by the author of the
second paper that Europe was becoming a United States colony, the speaker
remarked that the third paper was not so much directed against world com-
panies as towards the effects of commercial civilization as the author saw them.
For his part, the speaker doubted whether the present trend could be reversed.
SUMMARY OF AND INTRODUCTION TO
FRENCH WORKING PAPER
The author of the French paper began by pointing out that, while the
elimination of international trade barriers remained an important concern,
the implantation of businesses beyond their national frontiers was tending to
replace the export of finished goods, and this would certainly modify the basis
of inter-state relations in the future.
Political problems caused by the mushrooming of big corporations were
nothing new - the writer mentioned the political implications ofthe petroleum
companies in the immediate post World War II period - but a series offactors
over recent years had given a new character to the problem ofinternationalizing
business:
40
- Economic expansion had considerably accelerated the growth rate of
major corporations.
- Technological progress had increased at such a pace that research had
become a fundamental factor in development and in the corporate power
structure. The imposing budgets required to support research were in general
feasible only for corporations of the first magnitude.
- The scope of scientific and technological development had transformed the
export outlook: itwas no longer possible to export products without adapting
them inside the importing country to the needs of its national market; at
the same time the target market had to be made receptive to such products.
- Finally, the overwhelming majority of corporations able to support the
costs of internationalization happened to be businesses whose headquarters
were located in the United States. Therefore, problems raised on that
account did not really have a reciprocal character.
Strong arguments could certainly be advanced to demonstrate that, despite
~1
,\l[
I
i1f
!ii
iJ~
new elements, this form of internationalization still served as a conduit for
spreading prosperity and that host countries had every reason to welcome the
dynamism of big corporations established on their territory.
Now, however, a point had been reached where the advantages ofimmediate
efficiency were tending to enter into contradiction with human and longer-
term political imperatives.
On a short- and medium-term basis, the free development ofNorth Ameri-
can international corporations was probably the process that led, as far as
economic efficiency was concerned, to the most rapid rise of living standards
in developed countries. Only corporations with international operations were
able to spread out ever-increasing fixed costs over a sufficiently high volume of
business. These fixed costs were related to:
- expenses for research and development, which gave profitable returns only
when supported by significant budgets;
- human and technical factors in management (planning, financial controls,
marketing, computerized management, etc.).
When international companies held less than pure monopoly positions, the
direct advantages they offered in host countries to local businesses could be
manifold:
- They provided healthy competition, particularly desirable in European
business with its penchant for price-fixing agreements.
- They offered a concrete demonstration and example of the application of
modern methods in a local context.
- They trained management personnel who, at least in part, eventually
became available to national corporations.
Through its repercussions on the international monetary system, the devel-
opment of globe-girdling United States companies had indirectly been a
decisive factor in Western economic growth during the past 15 years.
Since the end of the Korean War, the United States balance of payments
deficit vis-a-vis non-American countries had enabled all other countries to
experience positive balanceofpayments situations: when Germany, for example,
showed a surplus, this did not necessarily cause a deficit to emerge in France,
Italy or Japan. As a result, these countries collectively found themselves able
to apply expansionist policies without being over-hindered by external restraints
as would have been the case under a system vigorously applying the gold
standard.
The United States deficit was closely linked to foreign investment. Inter-
national investments by major American corporations enabled the United
States to enter into short-term indebtedness, thereby creating liquidities, a
role which only the United States was able to play and on which economic
41
\
expansion depended. All parties recognized that this was not a deficit in the
usual meaning of the term.
Thus, directly or indirectly, the international growth of major United States
companies was one ofthe driving forces behind European expansion, just as the
Marshall Plan had been the source of European recovery.
At the same time, this growth had resulted in the transfer of a part of sover-
eignty into American hands: monetary sovereignty linked to the role of the
dollar, economic sovereignty tied to the functioning of international corpora-
tions. The writer here drew a parallel with the world role played in history
by the Catholic Church receiving its instructions from Rome.
The development of multinational firms signified, in practice, that an in-
creasing portion of a national community's work force would be employed
by such business; that vital decisions might be taken by bodies outside the
communities in question; that the intellectual and cultural life of these com-
munities could be transformed. Such an evolution could not fail to contain
specifically political implications and consequences which had also been recog-
nized in various United States circles. The writer stressed some aspects high-
lighted in two deeply reflective American studies:')
- The uneasiness of sovereign states over the existence on their territory of
business concerns that received orders from abroad, sometimes even
directly from a foreign state. This uneasiness was heightened by a feeling of
impotence: an international business refused permission to operate on a
given national territory could establish itselfjust across the frontiers ofthat
country, employ its citizens and penetrate its markets.
- The concentration of foreign businesses' activities in key sectors which
could progressively eliminate national corporations from those fields that
were shaping the future.
- The fact that local employees of such companies, whatever their nominal
position, frequently lacked real management responsibility and responsi-
bility with regard to research policy, such research being largely carried out
in the United States.
- The impossibility for national investors to underwrite capital investments
in branches of international groups.
- Disturbances on capital markets where American signatures enjoyed a
premium, and sometimes on the labour market, where habits of profes-
sional mobility would only slowly approximate to the cadence in the
United States.
1
) L. MonELL: "The Politics of Foreign Investment", Foreign Affairs, 1967.
R. VERNON: "Multinational Enterprise and National Sovereignty", Harvard Business Review,
March, 1967.
42
-~
--~!
I
'(
'~1(
I
,,
c
r
I
- The fact that self-financing had become more than ever the key to indus-
trial development. In business, this presupposed a dividend policy regulated
by investment prerequisites. Demands dictated by political powers foreign
to those where a business was established could tend to orient this dividend
policy and transfer to a foreign country the means of self-financing devel-
oped on a given national territory.
Additionally, heist countries could not but be alarmed by the potentially
increased vulnerability of their credit market and their balance of payments
because of the growth on their territory of businesses whose policies for repa-
triating profits were dictated from abroad and based on foreign conditions and
contingencies.
Finally, despite its unquestioned advantages as far as economic efficiency
was concerned, a development plan based on an internationalization of pro-
ductive economies too uniformly polarized towards the United States could not
be accepted without reservations by other countries.
In the light of the foregoing, constructive initiatives should be taken, both
by governments and by private business.
Concerted government action should first be directed towards finding a
satisfactory solution to the international monetary problem. No monetary
system could be accepted in the long run when it enabled a single country to
increase the foreign growth of its companies with the help of an uncontrolled
deficit in its balance of payments.
Government action should then seek to define an economic and juridical
framework in which there could be harmonization of the multilateral relations
between governments and that new economic and juridical entity, the inter-
national business.
Whilst such a framework should specify whatjurisdiction would be applicable
under what circumstances, it should stringently limit the rights of the state
over foreign affiliates. Specifically, it was indispensable that the United States
Government abandon the idea ofkeeping under its jurisdiction foreign affiliates
ofAmerican companies, at least in certain respects (trading with the enemy act,
anti-trust laws, etc.).
Such a framework should additionally define the special rules which inter-
national business should follow when establishing foreign affiliates. This would
be a sort of "good conduct code" covering the following areas:
- Foreign companies should avoid eliminating all competition in the sectors
in which they operated and, on the contrary, should seek to develope
healthy competition.
- The international company should give national companies access to its
scientific and technological resources.
43
- The international company should allow citizens of the countries in which
it had affiliates to participate in the company's most advanced activities
and occupy the principal management posts.
- The international company should also agree to conduct part of its basic
and applied research programmes in host countries.
To ensure respect for such a "good conduct code" it might well be necessary
to create a specialized international jurisdiction.
The author went on to say that anything that helped to increase the number
of truly international corporations of European origin would constitute a
decisive factor in ridding Europeans of their inferiority complex.
To achieve this, it would be necessary for such companies to be able to
operate profitably within the North American market, a development which
would also be of decided assistance in righting the United States balance of
payments deficit. But prior to achieving this truly world-wide dimension,
European industries would have to develop the ability to operate on a scale
commensurate with Europe as a whole.
Similarly, international companies should recognize that it can be good
policy to yield on the principle of controlling mo% of their foreign ventures
and to associate the greatest number of foreign nationals in the risks and
opportunities presented by their operations in different countries.
Holding companies could, in certain cases, perhaps provide sufficiently
flexible solutions. They might, for example, regroup and control all of a major
American company's European interests; their capital could be introduced
onto various stock markets. This formula, resulting in the creation of the first
truly European companies, would constitute a noteworthy contribution to the
defence of the dollar while, politically, it would be less controversial than
methods currently employed to finance European affiliates.
Turning to the role of banks and financial intermediaries, the author said
that the economic scene today was marked by the acceleration oftechnological
progress and, as a result, a strikingly quickened pace ofequipment obsolescence.
Because of this, problems of self-financing had moved into the forefront of
financial preoccupations; when funds for self-financing were insufficient,
problems oflong-term loans and increased capital funding became paramount.
In this context, European financiers would increasingly be called on to
provide a permanent form of support and, consequently, to take a closer
interest in those corporations in which they would increasingly be associates
and decreasingly mere creditors.
For their part, American industrialists operating in Europe - bi;fore they
reached the point at which the general public could become shareholders in
their companies - might find it desirable to associate European financiers in
44
their operations. The financier's role would be that of an active counsellor,
guiding the foreign industrialist through the jungle of unwritten national
rules.
More generally, within the formulae associating businesses of differing
nationalities the presence of financial third parties able to act as arbiters,
counsellors and, in a certain measure, catalysts, could be particularly beneficial.
In conclusion, the author of the paper recalled the historical development
which had resulted in decolonization which, despite the sometimes dramatic
difficulties involved, had come at the right time. It would be, in the author's
opinion, paradoxical and very dangerous if a new and anonymous form of
colonization were to emerge which would derive from the methods of business
expansion the means needed to establish a greater dominance. This would no
longer operate between developed and still primitive countries, but between
an industrial super-power and the industrialized countries of an older civiliza-
tion, countries anxious to preserve their long historic tradition but weighed
down by the lethargy of evolution that was the inevitable counterpart of the
tradition.
In introducing his paper, the author began by saying that he agreed with
the author of the American paper in feeling that the internationalization of
business should be considered primarily in regard to relations between the
industrialized countries of the Northern Hemisphere rather than in regard to
relations between developed and under-developed countries. This indicated
that the problem lay essentially within the framework of the United States'
relations with other Western countries.
The author said that the previous speaker had, at any rate implicitly,
presented economic efficiency as a paramount imperative which should be
the primary concern of nation states whose structure he considered archaic.
This had led the previous speaker to regard the key problem in respect of
world companies as consisting of protecting their freedom of action vis-a-vis
possible political demands put forward by those same nation states.
The speaker said that he concurred in hoping that political unity would
steadily develop in the Atlantic world and in believing that such unity neces-
sarily implied a prior unification of the European continent. However, he
emphasized that the diversity of European countries, whatever the resultant
economic disadvantages, would long remain a pre-condition for human liberty
and the cultural wealth of the Western world.
Continuing, the speaker said that the absence of a concerted control over
the internationalization of business embodied a particularly serious danger
45
insofar as it might ultimately lead to a diminution of the desire to achieve
international co-operation.
He went on to say that there should be a concerted effort on the part of
states to draw up a specific international agreement covering world companies.
He added that, whereas the previous speaker felt that such an agreement
should concentrate on the rights of such companies as citizens of the world, he
himself would prefer to emphasize their duties as citizens of the individual
countries in which they were operating.
Private business, in turn, should take spontaneous action: European firms
should try to achieve an international dimension and, more especially, to
establish themselves in North America and take advantage of the opportunities
there. The world companies themselves should likewise improve their struc-
tures, particularly their financial structures, so that their world-wide nature
would not be solely the product of their extensive implantation but also of the
international distribution of their capital. For their part, banks and other
financial agencies should assist the world companies, firstly, to extend their
implantation and, secondly, to achieve a satisfactory modus vivendi with the
population and the governments of the various countries where they operated.
SUMMARY OF AND INTRODUCTION TO
FRENCH MEMORANDUM
In a memorandum drafted by one of the French participants the author
began by noting that the internationalization of business signified the latter's
transition from the national to the world-wide level. From the social angle, this
meant that the problems involved in relations between human beings were
increased insofar as financial and technical divergencies were supplemented by
cultural, historical and linguistic differences.
At first glance, he said, the extension of science and technology to the
whole world gave, if not an impression of unity, at any rate one of growing
uniformity. A sort of international class was coming into being, made up of
men concerned with the same problems who would like to apply a mathemati-
cal formula to the world and have it considered as a vast technological and
economic organization. This was a social consequence of a technological
achievement.
The process involved several stages which seemed to make for closer contact
or, at any rate, a better understanding between technicians of different cultural
backgrounds. To begin with, it was "ethnocentric" with the parent company
deciding and imposing its policy abroad; then it became "polycentric" as the
local situation and the necessary degree of decentralization were accepted;
46
'~ )
T\
~:
~!
J:
,.,
~
!;
f\
jl
l
'I.I
"
~-
~
and, finally, it became "geocentric" insofar as it was conceived on a world-wide
scale and had world-wide aims.
Technically and socially, "geocentrism", because of what might be called
its transcendental internationalization, made for a closer relationship between
men of different race, language and education but having similar training
backgrounds and conceptual levels. On the other hand, as Professor Perlmutter
had said, from the legal point ofview, "the infrastructures of the international
community act as a brake where technological progress acts as a spur".
Thanks to the internationalization of business, the transition from the
concept of the national community, i.e. a sum of individuals limited to one
region, to that ofthe international society, i.e. a body ofcomplex and diversified
structures, and eventually that of the transnational community - the product
of geocentric impulses - was manifestly in line with man's instinctive search
for a real and authentic exchange which would embody that peace which is
universally desired. Why then was it no less obvious that this was extremely
difficult to bring about?
In the first place, this very geocentrism, while significant within a group
at international level, nonetheless remained limited to an entity which would
be better described by the word "coalition" than by the word "co-operation".
The element of distortion involved was the concept which treated profit as
the standard by which to measure the true value of labour. Reversing this
element would not consist of eliminating profit but of making it subordinate
to the quality of the products and the means of production. This implied that
concept of human value to which our contemporaries carefully avoid referring
in order to emphasize all the more strongly the concept of organization. The
geocentric enterprise should clearly express human values and the concepts
which underlay it.
In the second place, the trinomial formula "information-education-promo-
tion" was still not widely enough applied and this failure was at the root of
the superficial and emotive nature ofrelations which were all too often distorted
by a confusion between the image and the reality. It was evident that in-
formation, if it were to bring about any change in behaviour, must be accom-
panied by training adapted to the motives which governed the attitude involved.
Man was more and more powerful, had mastered matter, was less and less
restricted by distance, but he was still emotionally unstable and psychologically
ignorant and this hindered any genuine co-operation.
Finally, the contemporary economic and social system was apparently
developing only on a horizontal plane with no regard to the vertical process
leading towards a transcendency which was denied or, at best, rejected as
scientifically unproveable. But, equally, it had not been proved that happiness
47
could be ensured by limiting human activity to material realities. The transition
of business from the regional and national level to the world-wide level, like
the systematic development of technology, unless accompanied by parallel
research in respect of the inner reality of man and the harmony of his perso-
nality, could only lead to regression through a return to a narrow positivism.
In introducing his memorandum, the author said that the social aspect of
the internationalization of business ultimately reflected the problem of an
adaptation between rapid technical evolution, on the one hand, and, on the
other, the protection of certain human values to which we were all still
attached.
Emphasizing the difficulty of achieving a rapprochement between two large
blocs, he went on to say that this would perhaps be easier to bring about
through the intermediary of smaller countries and still easier through the
rapprochement of companies. Efforts directed at a common goal tended to
eliminate many barriers and misunderstandings and trans-national companies
developed a certain realism in international developments so that those
concerned came to regard political difficulties as unreal. Already, a cosmo-
politan elite ofsenior cadres was beginning to emerge but this development was
hindered by out-dated juridical infrastructures which also interfered with a
real possibility of achieving internationalism.
The speaker said that international companies should clearly express human
values and, in this connection, saw a pressing need for information through
wider exchanges, for permanent education to enable such information to be
constructive, and for a combination of these two elements leading to a genuine
promotion ofthe complete man - the technician combined with the family man
and the citizen.
DISCUSSION
A number of those participating in the subsequent discussion spoke from
personal experience derived from their leading position in world companies.
GENERAL ASPECTS OF THE WORLD COMPANY
A United States participant began by noting that the world company was
the logical result ofa development which had to be accepted whether one liked
it or not, and in this connection, a fellow countryman pointed out, by way of
example, that, as a rule, no American law prevented national companies from
extending their activities abroad.
48
i
i
,.;
'".I
:~1
Another American explained that the problem of the world company was
by no means a new one. The same difficulties which had to be faced today had
already been experienced decades ago in the United States when business
concerns in the Eastern states had extended their activities to the West and
had found the legislators there opposed to them.
A Canadian and a United States speaker concurred in the view that the
problem was not new but they emphasized that it had changed very considera-
bly in kind as well as in magnitude. A Netherlands participant, however,
warned against exaggerating the risks connected with the size of the world
·companies. Size was not power and, in many cases, very large world companies
were at the mercy ofthe governments ofsmall countries, as had been found, for
example, in relations with some ofthe Arab states.
In the subsequent discussion there was a wide measure of agreement as to
the advantages inherent in the existence of world companies. An American
speaker pointed out that international companies could help to spread economic
well-being and make a contribution to world unification, while a fellow
countryman noted that the advent of the American corporation abroad had
brought with it a considerable educational influence insofar as it had induced
some countries to apply new and creative methods of financing. A German
participant affirmed that world business was necessary to the progress of
research, technology and management.
In the view of an Italian participant, the world company could, by its
success, demonstrate the advantages of the Liberal concept on which it was
based as opposed to the Socialist principles of the state-owned company.
The latter could never be truly international and was indeed essentially
nationalistic.
At the same time, a number of those present stated that certain risks and
disadvantages were involved. The world company had, in many cases, become
unpopular because national companies in the "host" countries could not
compete with the far more advanced technology and practice of their foreign
rivals.
Referring to the very advanced and internationally minded forest products
industry of his country, a Finnish speaker stressed the great difficulties ex-
perienced by a small country like Finland in competing with the financially
preponderant international concerns in conquering new markets, these world
companies being, for example, in a position to "buy up" customers.
In the view of a Canadian participant, a potential source of difficulty lay
in the fact that world companies possessed great market powers and also had
a significant part of research and technological progress in their hands. The
risk to the host country was not that too little research would be done locally
49
'l•f
but that access to such research would be used as a crutch and that not enough
would be done nationally to keep domestic industries up to scratch. A Swedish
speaker suggested that international companies were partly responsible for the
brain drain.
Various speakers referred to the political implications of the issue. An
American speaker said that many nations were alarmed by what they con-
sidered to be semi-autonomous centres of economic decision and influence
within their boundaries and a similar view was echoed by a Netherlands
participant who believed there was a danger of world companies becoming
forces quite out of control. Similarly, a Belgian speaker said that there was a
distinct imbalance between the power of international companies and that of
most states.
A French speaker pointed out that the duty of each government was to see
that full employment was maintained and said that, rightly or wrongly,
governments were afraid that international concerns might cause their affiliate
factories to close down and thus put a large number of people out of work.
A Canadian speaker thought that the very dimensions of world companies
could prove unfortunate since size often led to rigidity of thinking, lack of
imagination and unwise experimentation combined with excessive caution.
A United Kingdom speaker put forward the view that a danger of inter-
national big business lay in the fact that it was very difficult to see inside a
major international company. Governments were compelled to be "visible" in
their activities within democratic societies but this was not true ofinternational
companies, which should recognize that it was part of their duty to be more
visible if they were to survive as efficient instruments. In this context a German
speaker pointed to the lack of democratic parliamentary control over the
growth of international machinery on all levels, a view with which a United
States, a Canadian and a Netherlands participant sympathized.
Nevertheless, the foregoing criticisms did not mean that world companies
were unpopular in all European countries. A Netherlands, a Belgian and a
German speaker, for example, were glad that world companies were operating
in their countries and said they would deplore a termination of their activities.
A Canadian speaker, while stressing the various economic, social and monetary
advantages of such foreign activities in his country, recognized, however, that
a political and even a psychological problem was involved for Canada.
SOCIAL ISSUES
Various speakers took up the social problems raised in the French memoran-
dum. A Belgian participant said that we would deserve the blame of young
people if we failed to affirm that the international company was essentially
50
\_____
a community of men which created human values and in this he was echoed
by a Canadian speaker who said that an international company, to be success-
ful, had to pay great attention to all the motivations ofpeople. Further support
for this view was forthcoming from an American speaker who argued that
there was not necessarily any incompatibility between efficiency and the ne-
cessary human considerations; the most effective organizations indeed were those
having the best human element. On the same lines, a Netherlands participant
noted that many international firms had been pioneers in regard to personnel
policy and the promotion of fertile human relationships.
The. author of the relevant memorandum summed up by saying that if we
concerned ourselves solely with efficiency to the exclusion of social goals, we
would have brilliant technological results but also an absence of enthusiasm;
if we concerned ourselves solely with objectives to the exclusion of efficiency,
we should probably deserve to be condemned by later generations. It was
essential to establish a synthesis which would lead to harmony.
INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ISSUES
The enormous growth of the world company had raised many international
issues and problems which were mentioned by various participants in the course
of the discussion.
The world company might not be a new phenomenon but the problem had
now gone far beyond the pre-war framework and this had, of course, had its
consequences.
An Austrian participant pointed out that problems of the kind presented
by the world company today had previously arisen particularly between
colonies and the metropolitan powers. Today, however, these problems had
become a source of friction between various developed Western countries and
more particularly between the United States and Europe.
However, other speakers pointed out that it would be a misconception to
assume that the world company was essentially an object of controversy
between the United States and Western Europe. A Netherlands speaker and
other participants, many of them officials of companies having their head
offices in European countries, warned against exaggerating the predominant
American character of the world companies and a United States speaker
pointed out that many European concerns had considerable interests in the
United States.
Nevertheless, the predominantly American nature of the world company
was recognized and an American speaker mentioned the asymmetry resulting
from the spectacular growth of the United States as an explanation of the
occasional exacerbation of relations between the countries concerned.
SI
It was generally admitted that a compromise should be reached and a
German speaker considered that this should take place on the basis of United
States - European parity.
One German and two Belgian speakers were among those who pointed out
that, in order to make such a compromise possible, Europe should be in a
position to act as a political unity, a point of view which had already been
stressed by the author of the American working paper.
In this context many other participants argued that the European idea was
still fully alive but that it would take a long time if we had to wait for the
achievement ofEuropean integration. The period ofone year mentioned in the
American paper was considered as decidedly optimistic.1)
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
Regardless of the possibility of international contractual settlement (dealt
with below}, various speakers indicated practical steps which might be taken
unilaterally by both sides to avoid or eliminate difficulties.
A British speaker stressed that, in taking decisions, parent companies should
always allow for the effects on the economy of the host countries, a point of
view which was strongly supported by a Netherlands, a United States and
other participants.
Concerning relations between governments and world companies, a British
speaker deprecated the tendency of governments to dictate the extent of
repatriation of profits and the investment policies of overseas companies. In
this same connection, an American participant said he agreed with the author
of the first working paper in opposing President Johnson's policy on the remit-
tance of earnings but added that this policy had since been so largely modified
that it was now virtually cancelled. Such prime causes of friction as efforts
by the country of the head office to exercise extra-territorial control over
exports, anti-trust legislation, etc., should be eliminated and countries should
not use corporations as instruments of national policy. A British participant
agreed that such action was to be deplored but he did not think this occurred
very frequently.
A Canadian speaker added that, for their part, host countries should not
act in a discriminatory way.
The question of local participation to eliminate possible frictions was also
extensively examined and a British participant already quoted at various times
argued that local capital should be taken into partnership and dividend.policy
1
) A special aspect of this item is dealt with in the Annex on the "American Balance of
Payments" on page 59·
52
should harmonize with local conditions. Wherever possible, moreover, real
management should be left in the hands of locals.
In this he had the support of an American speaker although the Netherlands
participant quoted above contended that it was impossible to assert that local
management should always be appointed: suitability for the job had to be the
determining factor. In any event, said another American, the people managing
an overseas company should always show a perceptiveness and an under-
standing of local and national interests involved.
The same speaker pointed out that the behaviour ofcompanies was basically
the behaviour ofpeople and that unless a company was a good corporate citizen
at home, it was unlikely to be a good corporate citizen abroad.
The importance of international corporations behaving as good corporate
citizens was also underlined by a fellow countryman who said that such cor-
porations should denationalize in the sense of decentralizing their operations
and research to the maximum. A similar approach was favoured by a Swedish
participant.
Conversely, a Canadian said he was left very cold by the concept of dena-
tionalization. He felt that it implied an elimination of differences in culture
and national attitudes which some companies had found very valuable.
A Belgian speaker wondered whether a denationalized status for world
companies based on multilateral treaties, as suggested by the author of the
first working paper, might not call on the machinery provided by GATT.
As far as the use ofinternational agencies was concerned, a French participant
suggested that efforts should be made in conjunction with ILO to see what
machinery should be established to ensure security of employment for workers
in the light of the existence of international companies, while two Canadian
speakers held that, more generally, some such body as OECD might contribute
a great deal by holding periodic seminars or conferences to discuss the func-
tioning of world corporations, perhaps along the lines of Bilderberg itself.
Finally, the issue of a "European counter-offensive" was widely discussed.
While recognizing that most European corporations were not big enough to
invest in the United States, a Netherlands speaker pointed out that America
itself put many difficulties in the way of European countries wishing to invest
in that country. A similar point was made by other speakers and in particular
by an international participant who said that Europe had shown great imag-
ination by not only allowing but actually welcoming American co-operation
and the establishment of American subsidiaries in Europe, adding that the
same could not be said of the United States attitude. Two Americans agreed
that some of the United States laws and practices with regard to foreign com-
panies were regrettable.
53
t.1:
\
On the other hand, a British speaker, whose point of view was, however,
contested by a fellow countryman, suggested that the absence of a European
counter-invasion was mainly attributable to the fact that investment in Europe
over the past decade or so had been more profitable since growth had been
faster in Europe than in the United States.
For the author of the second working paper, an increased flow of capital
investments from Europe to the United States would not only help to solve
the United States balance ofpayments problem but would also have important
political and psychological advantages since the extensive implantation of
European business in the United States would help to eliminate an inferiority
complex which introduced an emotive element into the situation.
CODE OF BEHAVIOUR
There was discussion of the suggestion put forward by the author of the
first working paper that conflicts connected with the world company might be
resolved by an international treaty, as an extension of a future company law
for the EEC. This gave rise to an extensive exchange of views, most speakers
referring to a "code of behaviour" in this context.
The American author's view was supported by the author of the French
paper who said that, in the absence of a code, however difficult it might be
to establish, we were reduced to simply having confidence in international
firms. A Belgian participant agreed with the desirability of a world code for
multi-national companies but felt that the first step should be to establish a
European code for European companies. Further support came from a United
Kingdom participant already quoted who felt that an international code
offered more hope ofprogress than the alternative, which might well be a series
of piecemeal administrative measures of an arbitrary and discriminatory
nature. Finally, a British speaker contended that those who refused any code
as a first step were "hiding their heads in the sand" because it was essential for
governments to undertake to do certain things together and for international
enterprises to follow a similar line.
A fellow countryman was among those who were opposed to any such code
since he considered it could only be extremely vague and superficial and hence
quite useless. If, by some chance, it could be made specific, then it would be
unacceptable both to world companies and to governments. The variety of
companies and the variety of operational methods was so great that there
could be no code.
Still another British participant said that he could see the attractions of a
code but was doubtful as to how effectively it would work out in practice,
particularly with respect to its enforceability. In some countries, national laws
54
already gave power to deal with such dangers as monopoly by foreign invest-
ment but this power was not always used because it could conflict with the
advantages provided by foreign investment. If such national powers were not
employed, he asked how any code could be enforced since the same conflict of
interest would arise.
In this context another British participant noted that those who had addressed
the meeting had in fact proposed four different types ofcode. Two speakers had
suggested a code governing the behaviour of countries towards foreign in-
vestors; two others had suggested a code governing companies' behaviour
towards host governments; the author of the first working paper had argued in
favour of a code to persuade countries to co-operate constructively in the
handling of trans-national enterprises; while he himself had recommended a
code to prevent countries from tangling with each other in their instructions
to multi-national enterprises. History suggested, he said, that the first two
concepts were "non-starters". The question was how to get countries to come
together co-operatively so as to enable international enterprises to carry out
activity across national boundaries and at the same time make those inter-
national enterprises responsible to a group of national authorities appropriate
in size and scope to the enterprises themselves.
The majority of those who took part in discussion of this question seemed to
agree in doubting the feasibility and desirability of any code of behaviour.
However, the author of the French working paper stressed that, however
difficult it might be to establish a code of good conduct and to decide which
international authority would enforce it, it would nonetheless be essential in
the future to do something. Such action would also enable governments to
reassure public !opinion that precautions had been taken and that there was
an agreement requiring firms to observe certain rules of good conduct so that
it was no longer necessary to rely solely on their innate sense ofgood behaviour.
Failure in the past, he said, should not discourage us from seeking to establish
a code since, unless we did so, we would have to face a widespread feeling of
frustration as international business developed and assumed a more and more
dominant role.
At an earlier stage the author of the American working paper, referring to
the reaction to most of his proposals, had noted that in the near future existing
conditions would have changed very considerably. For his part, he had not
the slightest doubt that, within a decade or so, some sort of institutional ar·
rangement would be unavoidable to cope with conflicts of sovereignty which
would have arisen by then.
*
* *
55
\.
)
Before closing the meeting, His Royal Highness expressed the gratitude of all
those present to Mr. Griffin and to the many other members of the Canadian
group for all they had done to make the meeting such a success, and to General
Allard for the valuable contribution of the Canadian Armed Forces. The
Prince also expressed his special appreciation to the authors of the working
papers and thanked the members of the Secretariat as well as the interpreters
for their excellent wark.
A United States participant thanked the Prince for the admirable way in
which he had chaired this very fascinating and stimulating meeting.
56
·-·,.."'·~
<mi
,,_,•
ANNEX
\
\
AMERICAN BALANCE OF PAYMENTS
Although the subject did not, strictlyspeaking, come within the compass ofthe
Agenda, at the end of the meeting several participants alluded to the United
States balance of payments problem. The most comprehensive· statement in
this connection was made by an American speaker who, on the basis ofdetailed
figures, explained that from the end of the war until 1957, the United States
had tried to bring about a better distribution of reserves throughout the
world. In a sense, he explained, the United States "did not care" that it was
confronted with trade disadvantages and that it had to meet the bulk ofdefence
costs. During the period from the end of the war until 1957, America did not
lose anything to speak of; thereafter its reserves began to run down.
He went on to say that both the United States and Europe had developed a
set ofbad habits since the war: the former had acquired the bad habit oftreating
deficits as automatically good and virtually a way of life, the latter adopted
the same attitude towards surpluses. America had continued to export capital
to a considerable extent with the result that the European reserve position
improved substantially while that of the United States declined correspond-
ingly. At the beginning of 1950, said the speaker, the volume of official dollars
held all over the world was about 4 billion; by the end of 1967, it was between
17 and 18 billion. In 1950, there were about 25 billion dollars in gold in the
United States; by 1967, about 11 or 12 billion.
In this context, he queried the observations made by the author of the
French paper concerning the United States incurring of short-term liabilities
abroad which enabled it to buy up foreign industries on a large scale. This, he
suggested, was "looking at the problem through the wrong end of the micro-
scope". The United States dollar balances were built up not just because of
capital outflow but for a whole complex of reasons: some capital export plus
very .heavy expenditure on military and other government accounts plus a
declining trade balance plus the demand for reserves from abroad.
The present situation, said the speaker, could not be allowed to continue.
The inescapable conclusion was that a different set of conditions had to be
established ifthe international monetary system was to be viable. Ifthe United
States was to go on exporting capital and to carry heavy defence burdens, it
would have to improve its current surplus. If the present system was to con-
59
tinue, Europe would have to reduce its current surplus and/or export capital
back to the United States and perhaps do more with respect to foreign exchange
costs incurred for common defence. Alternatives to the present system were
not appealing: we would probably have to work with what we had and for
this a joint United States-European effort was essential.
The author of the French paper replied that he fully agreed on the impor-
tance to Europe of United States capital and even the United States deficit
and the slight inflationary trend created in Europe. American private in-
vestment and the balance of payments deficit represented, so to speak, a
continuation of the Marshall Plan.
There was, however, a certain coincidence between the figures for the
American balance of payments deficit and those for the export of private
capital. The countries to which that capital was exported therefore had the
impression that such exportations were largely financed from the balance of
payments deficit and, since the same sums would not be available for invest-
ment in the United States were they themselves to have a balance ofpayments
deficit, they also had the impression that the reserve currency system was to
some extent unilateral and enabled America to enjoy an unduly privileged
position.
Nevertheless, he agreed that it was desirable to expand the export of Euro-
pean capital to the United States - for technical reasons, because it would
help to solve the American balance ofpayments problem, and for psychological
and political reasons because it would help to eliminate a certain inferiority
complex.
This, however, was not immediately practicable because European business
was still on too small a scale and also because European international companies
met with !lome difficulty in investing in the United States and operating busi-
nesses there.
A German participant stressed that the American balance of payments
deficit was not of the ordinary kind, since United States foreign assets were
increasing faster than liabilities and he added that a number of President
Johnson's proposals to overcome the deficit were regarded in Europe as highly
dangerous for European industries exporting to the United States. Conversely,
an American speaker observed that controls on direct foreign investment would
prevent a number ofsmall companies from getting into the international race
and further prevent existing international firms from investing as much as
they would have wished.
60
°'"ia
,,-.\w~~.;
'),''.'~,'
