..::..
0
(J)
s:~
::=..I
o)>
mr-
..::..
mo
0-
zZ
::::!
m
~
z::o
.,o
G>~
l>
mm
U'>
:::0
-<
A)~
(i)
..::..
~
mo
00
""
z
AJ
Oo
m
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
SANDEFJORD
CONFERENCE
14 - 16 May 1982
NOT FOR QUOTATION
i
I
I'
ii
i'
11
I
I ~
it
I
,I
J '
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS .................................... : . ......... 5
INTRODUCTION ........................................................11
I. DIVERGENT POLICIES AND ATTITUDES IN
THE NORTH ATLANTIC COMMUNITY
American Working Paper ............................................. 13
Belgian Working Paper ...............................................19
German Working Paper .............................................. .24
Discussion ...........................................................28
II. WHAT CAN ARMS CONTROL ACHIEVE?
German Working Paper .............................................. .32
International Working Paper.......... :............................... .34
American Working Paper .............................................39
Discussion ...........................................................43
III. THE MIDDLE EAST: ISSUES AT STAKE
American Working Paper ............................................. .48
British Working Paper ...................................... :: ....... .52
Discussion ...........................................................55
IV. ECONOMIC ISSUES: DOGMAS AND REALITIES
International Working Paper.......................................... .62
American Working Paper .............................................69
Discussion ...........................................................76
V DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
The Falkland Islands Crisis........................................... .82
East-West Relations: Poland, Trade, and Finance ......................86
CLOSING REMARKS ....................................................91
CHAIRMAN:
WALTER SCHEEL*
Former President of the Federal Republic of Germany
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.*
Dean, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University
HQNORARY TREASURER:
WILLEM F. DUISENBERG*
President, De Nederlandsche Bank N.V.
DEN
USA
AUS
FRO
USA
ORE
USA
FR
INT
NETH
TUR
ICE
NOR
AUS
ORE
SPA
TAGE ANDERSEN
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
HANNES ANDROSCH*
EGON BAHR
GEORGE W. BALL**
MARIA BECKET
JACK F. BENNETT*
GEORGES BERTHOIN
CHRISTOPH BERTRAM*
ERNST H. VAN DER HEUGEL**
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
BJORN BJARNASON
ORO HARLEM BRUNDTLAND
ERHARD BUSEK
COSTA CARRAS*
JAIME CARVAJAL URQUIJO
Managing Director and Chief Executive,
Den Danske Bank
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
Archer Daniels Midland Co.
Chairman of the Managing Board of
Directors, Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Member of Parliament; Author
Working Paper Session II
Senior Managing Director, Lehman
Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc.
Former Advisor to Ministers of
Coordination and Foreign Affairs
Director and Senior Vice President,
Exxon Corporation
European Chairman, '.f.he Trilateral
Commission
Director, The International Institute for
Strategic Studies; Author Working
Paper Session II
Professor of Internatonal Relations,
Leyden University; Director of
Companies
Director of Companies
Political Journalist, Morgunbladid
Member of Parliament, Former Prime
Minister
Deputy Mayor of Vienna, Former
Secretary General b.V.P.
Member of the Board, Union of Greek
Shipowners
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
Banco Urquijo
5
FIN
CAN
DEN
NETH
CAN
CAN
USA
USA
USA
FR
NOR
USA
USA
USA
SWE
ICE
SWI
USA
USA
FRG
DEN
USA
UK
AUS
CAN
USA
6
c. FREDRIK K. CASTREN
JEAN CHRETIEN
HENNING CHRISTOPHERSEN
WISSE DEKKER
PAUL DESMARAIS
WILLIAM A. DIMMA
HERMANN F. EILTS
MURRAY H. FINLEY*
PAUL B. FINNEY*
JEAN FRAN~OIS-PONCET
KNUT FRYDENLUND
EvAN G. GALBRAITH
CHARLES GETCHELL*
MEG GREENFIELD
STEN GUSTAFSSON*
GEIR HALLGRIMSSON*
FRITZ HALM
ROBERT A. HANSON
HENRY J. HEINZ II**
ALFRED HERRHAUSEN*
ERIK HOFFMEYER
KAREN E. HOUSE
ROBIN IBBS
HANS IGLER*
H.N.R. JACKMAN
VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.*
President and Chief Executive Officer,
Kymi Kymmene Oy
Minister of Justice and Attorney
General
Member of Parliament, Chairman of
the Foreign Affairs Committee
President, Philips Gloeilampenfabrieken
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
Power Corporation of Canada
President, A.E. LePage Ltd. and Board
Chairman, Polysar Ltd.
University Professor of International
Relations, Research Professor of
History and Political Science, Boston
University; Author Working Paper
Session III
President, Amalgamated Clothing and
Textile Workers Union
Editorial Director, Thomson Magazines
Former Minister of Foreign Affairs
Member of Parliament, Former Minister
of Foreign Affairs
U.S. Ambassador to France
Lawyer and Trustee
Editorial Page Editor, The Washington
Post
Managing Director, SAAB-SCANIA AB
Member of Parliament, Former Prime
Minister
Chairman of the Board of Directors,
SIG Swiss Industrial Company;
Chairman, Swiss Employers Union
President and Chief Operating Officer,
Deere & Company
Chairman of the Board, H.J. Heinz
Company; President, American Friends
of Bilderberg, Inc.
Managing Director, Deutsche Bank AG
Chairman of the Board of Governors,
Denmarks Nationalbank
Washington Correspondent, The Wall
Street Journal
Executive Director, Imperial Chemical
Industries; Former Head, Central Policy
Review Staff, Cabinet Office
Partner, Schoeller & Co.
Bankaktiengeseflschaft
Chairman of the Board, The Empire
Life Insurance Company
Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &
Feld (Attorneys-at-Law); Former
President, National Urban League
UK
USA
UK
FRG
INT
FR
BEL
FRG
INT
UK
INT
GRE
USA
INT
SWI
CAN
USA
USA
FR
POR
NETH
FR
NOR
NOR
NETH
CAN
DEN
IT
ELIE KEDOURIE
HENRY A. KISSINGER*
ANDREW KNIGHT*
(IELMUT KOHL
MAX KoHNSTAMM**
PHILIPPE LAGAYETTE
BARON LAMBERT*
OTTO L. GRAF LAMBSDORFF
JACQUES DE LAROSIERE
NIGEL LAWSON
EMILE VAN LENNEP
G.P. LIVANOS
WINSTON LORD*
JoSEPH M.A.H. LUNS
FRANZ LUTOLF*
DONALD S. MACDONALD*
BRUCE K. MACLAURY*
DAVID J. MAHONEY
JACQUES MA!SONROUGE
RoGEim MARTINS
HANS A.F.M.0. VAN MIERLO
THIERRY DE MONTBRLAL*
\_
ToR MouRSUND
Professor of Politics, University of
London; Author Working Paper Session
III
Former Secretary of State; Professor,
Center for Strategic and International
Studies, Georgetown University
Editor, The Economist
Chairman, CDU/CSU Parliamentary
Group
Former President, European University
Institute at Florence
I)irecteur de Cabinet, Ministry of
Economic Affairs and Finance; Author
Working Paper Session IV
Chairman, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert
S.A.
Minister of Economics
Managing Director, LM.F.
Member of Parliament, Secretary of
State for Energy
Secretary General, O.E.C.D.
Member of the Board, Union of Greek
Shipowners
President, Council on Foreign Relations
Secretary'General, N.A.T.O.
General Manager and Member of the
Executive Board, Swiss Bank
Corporation
Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy
President, The Brookings Institution
Chairman of the Board and Chief
Executive Officer, Norton Simon Inc.
Chairman of the Board, I.B.M. World
Trade Corporation
Chairman, "Simapre" Investment
Company; Former Secretary of State of
Industry
Minister of Defense
Director, French Institute of
International Relations; Professor of
Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
Managing Director and Chief Executive,
Christiania Bank og Kreditkasse
EINAR FR. NAGELL-ERICHSEN Managing Director,
Aftenposten/Schibstedgruppen
PRINCE CLAUS OF THE NETHERLANDS
JAMES R. NININGER President, The Conference Board of
NIELS N¢RLUND*
PIERO 0STELLINO
Canada
Editor-in-Chief, Berlingske Tidende
Columnist, Corriere della Sera
7
INT
UK
TUR
USA
USA
FRG
IT
USA
USA
INT
IT
UK
USA
UK
FR
IT
USA
BEL
NOR
NOR
UK
FRG
NETH
NOR
USA
NOR
SWE
NOR
8
SYLVIA 0STRY
DAVID OWEN
HALUK OZGUL
ROBERT L. PFALTZGRAFF, JR.
RICHARD PIPES
KARL Orl'O Pi:iHL
ROMANO PROD!*
JAMES ROCHE
DAVID ROCKEFELLER**
BERNARD W. ROGERS
VIRGINIO RoGNONI
LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN* *
ROBERT V. ROOSA
SIR JOHN SAINSBURY*
E. ANTOINE SEILLIBRE*
STEFANO SILVESTRI*
WILLIAM E. SIMON
HENRI F. SIMONET
ANDERS C. SIAASTAD
HERMOD SK!NLAND
LORD SoAMEs
THEO SOMMER*
ANDRE s. SPOOR
THORVALD STOLTENBERG
ROBERT S. STRAUSS
SVENN STRAY
BJORN SvEDBERG
OTTO GRIEG TIDEMAND
Head, Department of Economics and
Statistics, O.E.C.D.; Author Working
Paper Session IV
Joint Leader of the Social Democratic
Party, Member of Parliament, Former
Foreign Secretary
Ambassador of Turkey in Norway
Professor, Fletcher School of Law and
Diplomacy; Author Working Paper
Session II
Senior Staff Member, National Security
Council (Baird Professor of History,
Harvard University, on leave)
President, Deutsche Bundesbank
Professor of Industrial Economics,
University of Bologna
Senior Dep. Director, Policy Planning
Staff, Department of State
Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank
International Advisory Committee
Supreme Allied Commander Europe
Minister of Internal Affairs
Chairman, S.G. Warburg & Co. Ltd.
Senior Partner, Brown Brothers
Harriman & Company
Chairman, J. Sainsbury PLC
Director General, Compagnie
Generale d'Industrie et de
Participations
Deputy Director, Institute of
International Affairs
Chairman, Crescent Diversified Ltd.;
Former Secretary of the Treasury;
Author Working Paper Session IV
Member of Parliament; Author
Working Paper Session I
Minister of Defense
Deputy Governor of the Bank of
Norway
Publisher, Die Zeit
Editor-in-Chief, NRC Handelsblad
Member of the International Secretariat
of the Federation of Trade Unions
Partner, Aki'n, Gump, Strauss, Hauer &
Feld (Attorneys-at-Law); Former U.S.
Special Representative for Trade
Negotiations
Minister of Foreign Affairs
President, Telefonaktiebolaget LM
Ericsson
Shipowner; Former Minister of Defense
WI
TUR
SWI
POR
USA
USA
NOR
USA
NOR
SWE
FRG
FRG
METIN TOKER
VICTOR H. UMBRICHT**
ALEXANDRE DE AzEREDO
VAZ PINTO
PAUL A. VoLCKER
BEN J. WATTENBERG
NIELS WERRING, JR.*
JOSEPH H. WILLIAMS*
KAARE WILLOCH
LARS WOHLIN
OTTO WOLFF VON
AMERONGEN**
MANFRED WORNER
OBSERVERS:
CAN BERNARD c. THILLAYE
AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMANN
IN ATTENDANCE:
IT
CAN
FRG
NETH
FRG
USA
FRG
INT
FRG
FRG
FRG
CARLO ARBITARIO
JACQUES DEMERS
HANNO HARTMANN
ANNE HOOGENDOORN
R.K. LOCHNER
CHARLES MULLER
Gumo PERUZZO
GIANNI RAVASIO
RUDIGER VON ROSEN
FOLKMAR STOECKER
HORST TELTSCHIK
RAPPORTEURS:
USA CHARLES GETCHELL
USA GRANT F. WINTHROP
Columnist, Milliyet Newspaper
Mediator, East Africari Community;
Member of Board of Ciba-Geigy Ltd.
President, The Institute of Foreign
Investment; Former Minister of
Commerce
Chairman, Board of Governors, Federal
Reserve System
Senior Fellow, American Enterprise
Institute; Author Working Paper
Session I
Senior Partner, Wilh. Wilhelmsen
Chairman of the Board and Chiei
Executive Officer, The Williams
Companies
Prime Minister
Governor, Swedish Federal Bank
Chairman of the Board of
Management, Otto Wolff A.G.
Member of Parliament, CDU/CSU;
Author Working Paper Session I
Director, Strategic Policy Planning,
Department of National Defense
General Manager of
Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Personal Advisor to Minister Rognoni
Special Advisor, Office of the Minister
of Justice and Attorney General of
Canada
Assistant to Mr. Walter Scheel
Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
Accompanying Mr. Helmut Kohl as
interpreter
Assistant Secretary, American Friends
of Bilderberg; President, Murden & Co.
Assistant to the Minister of Economics
Assistant to Mr. Gaston Thorn
Head, President's Office, Deutsche
Bundesbank
Assistant to Mr. Walter Scheel
Head, Office of Mr. Helmut Kohl
9
11
;lt.11
,!
tl1
'ii
l.,
l
l;
.,
I. DIVERGENT POLICIES AND ATTITUDES IN
THE NORTH-ATLANTIC COMMUNITY
* * * *
''Attitudes and Policy:
How the Wealth Weapon Can Save the Alliance and Detente''
Working Paper Prepared py Ben J. Wattenberg
American Enterprise InstituJe ·
History plays tricks. In this time of apparent disarray, a remarkable confluence of
diverse global conditions offers the Western allies a long-cherished opportunity: to
make genuine detente work. The same confluence of conditions, if ignored, threatens
something else: the erosion and/or destruction of the alliance-and perhaps worse.
Consider the conditions:
I. The American Mood
Surely, the political incident that shaped the 1980 election in the U.S. was the taking
of the American hostages in Iran. The actual event itself, although dramm ·c, was
unexceptional. It was not the first time, nor will it be the last, that thugs or fanatics
will tweak the nose of a great power. What was remarkable, and revealing, was the
American reaction to the hostage capture.
Consider: In 1968, in the Pueblo incident, other Americans were incarcerated by a
third-rate foreign power. The crew of that vessel was held in a North Korean jail for
11 months. But the United States did not invade North Korea; it did not drop a bomb
of any type on Pyongyang; it did not dispatch a Falklands-style armada; it did not
even attempt a daring rescue-by-helicopter. President Johnson, in short, did roughly
what President Carter did in Iran-somewhat less in fact-and it wasn't much. Both
Presidents (correctly) negotiated to get our hostages freed without risking war. ~
When President Johnson pursued that strategy in 1968, foe-~ountry was restive
perhaps, seeking a quicker more muscular response, but it was surely a contained
restiveness. The folk wisdom did not interpret the event in North Korea as demon-
strating that America was "impotent." It was not said that the event revealed that
"the U.S. was not Number One anymore." Angry voters did not growl "it's about
time that America stopped getting pushed around all over the world."
Yet a dozen years later, in roughly similar circumstances, that was exactly the
reaction of the American people. A great political metaphor had taken shape; the 52
hostages came to be a national Rorschach test. Like the inkblots in the psychological
exam, the real meaning of the event was in the eye of the beholder. And what the
American people beheld was American impotence. They reacted with both rage and
resolve. And those emotions played a major role in unseating Jimmy Carter in
November.
These feelings-rage and resolve about perceived national impotence in the foreign
arena-had been growing steadily in the dozen years between the two hostage-taking
events. As the perception of the war in Vietnam changed from "winnable" to
"unwinnable," to "losable," to "lost,'' American tempers boiled.
As the decade went on, Americans heard about a great Soviet arms buildup, heard
about Soviet-sponsored takeovers in Africa and Asia, saw America excoriated in the
13
United Nations, saw gas lines form at their corner filling station because the fruits of
American technology, American capital and American markets had been turned
against America by a collection of Middle Eastern potentates. The reason Americans
perceived global impotence in the innocuous hostage situation was elementary: actual
global impotence.
Americans boiled. They elected Nixon over McGovern; they applauded when our
U.N. Ambassador Daniel P. Moynihan denounced the beggars at our gates. Ameri-
cans simmered-and, accordingly, many of them saluted Ronald Reagan's demand
that we not "give away" the Panama Canal, putting Reagan within an ace of the
Presidency four years before it was actually to happen.
By the end of the decade, as the hostage situation wore on and on, as the Soviets
marched into Afghanistan, American attitudes seemed to crystallize: get tough again.
That attitude-in external and internal affairs, amongst both the public and elites-
was in large measure responsible for Reagan's election.
It was an emotional attitude to be sure, but one that had a contact point in reality
and in sacrifice. In the early 1970's only 10 per cent of the American public favored
increasing the defense budget. By the end of the decade the figure climbed to 60 per
cent. Not for the first time, and hopefully not for the last, American leadership
responded to folk wisdom: Carter, elected on a pledge to cut defense budgets, ended
up raising them. Reagan has, despite budget pressure, continued that policy, and
upped the ante.
JI. The Credit Pusher and the Credit Junkie
As detente dawned in the early 1980's, there was comparatively little intercourse
between East and West. The theory of detente, in a word, was to create bridges-
economic, diplomatic, cultural, scientific, humanitarian. So valuable would these
bridges be to the Soviets, it was reasoned, that they would hesitate to make mischief
lest the bridges be burned.
Half of the policy of detente worked. The bridges were indeed built, particularly the
economic ones. In 1971, the total indebtedness of Soviet and satellite nations to the
West amounted to $8\1 billion. Just a decade later, in 1981, the sums involved are
estimated at a level of $80-$85 billion-a tenfold increase in a single decade.
Russians, Poles, Romanians, Hungarians and Czechs bathed in a lavish flow of
Western goods and services-almost all purchased with the aid of that ubiquitous,
fungible, miraculous commodity: hard currency credit. The credits came from
governments, from private banks, from banks guaranteed or subsidized by govern-
ments, from corporations, from corporations guaranteed or subsidized by govern-
ments-all with one common feature: the .flow went from West to East.
And so it came to pass by the time of Reagan that the nations of the West, wittingly
or unwittingly, had come to play the role of economic drug pusher. And it came to
pass that the nations of the East became credit junkies: without their credit fix they
could not eat or build, or drill for fuel, or earn-at least not very well.
III. The Credit Junkie's Response
In the last dozen years, however, the Soviets have not responded according to the
rules of detente. Some cliches are accurate: that the Soviets have gone through "the
most massive peacetime military build-up in all history" is one such.
At the same time, and probably related to their new military potency, the Soviets
have invaded one neighbor, repressed another, and pointed a.new array of behemoth-
sized nuclt... r missiles at the Western allies. They have used biological weapons in
14
a.--·-___,,--~
contravention of international law, sponsored international terrorism, financed gue-
rilla invasions and encouraged second-party invasions. They have established new
client states in Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Their expansionism and adventurism has in some, probably large, measure been
financed by the self-same flow of Western credits. A domestic ruble, replaced by an
imported dollar, franc or mark, may then be diverted to Afghanistan, Cambodia,
Vietnam, El Salvador, Cuba, Angola, Ethiopia-or to a new blue-water navy, or an
SS.-20 missile pointed at NATO targets.
JV. Is There a Plausible Response?
How could, how should, the allies respond in a way that accommodates both
American attitudes and international reality? In the modern world there would seem
to be four arrows in the quiver of statecraft: military, diplomatic, ideological,
economic. The arrows in the quiver of the West today are blunted, warped, bent and
Military: Our struggle now is to stay even, or get back to even. If there ever was a
unused.
time when America and/or the allies could have their way in superpower relations,
through sheer military might-that day is gone. It will not return.
Diplomatic: If there was a time when America and the allies could dominate and
direct the civic activity of the nations of the world-that time, too, is past. Americans
have become accustomed to seeing their nation used as a ritual punching bag at the
United Nations, a generally useless and amoral forum, but one that reveals how the
political land lies.
Ideological: There is much that can be done in the so-called "war of ideas," but we
enter the contest with one hand tied behind our back. Soviet television does not show
pictures of their dead soldiers returning from Afghanistan in body-bags; neither for
that matter does Western television. But four murdered journalists or four slain nuns
in El Salvador dominate our consciousness.
Economic: This arrow is different; it sits in the quiver: gleaming, straight,
available-and unused. As the power and diplomatic balance in the world has
changed, it has become clearer and clearer that the West's most potent instrumentality
of influence is our economic potency: technology, capital, distribution, resources,
markets. There is a wealth weapon.
V. The Opportunity
Such, then-, is the nature of our circumstance: finally a tough-minded leader of a
newly tough-minded nation, an adventurist and often malign adversary, an adversary
now hooked on economic heroin, and an available, plausible, effective and peaceful
And hbW have the Western nations responded? Cravenly. A Collapse Coalition
response.
formed on both sides of the Atlantic. In Europe, banks and businesses looked at the
Polish situation and said, "business as usual." After all, there were high unemploy-
ment rates to consider, let alone the reputations of promiscuous loan-givers. And so,
European governments issued statements of sympathy and outrage concerning the
political situation in Poland-and signed on the dotted line for a gas pipeline that
would provide a steady stream of Western currency to the Soviet Union. The same
governments that were ready to use wealth weaponry against the Argentines over the
momentous issue of the Falklands-found a dozen reasons why it would not be
appropriate to consider it in regard to Afghanistan or Poland. 15
On the American side of the ocean a second grouping of the Collapse Coalition
took shape. Richard Lesher, the President of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce,
announced to President Reagan that his organization had carefully weighed business
interests against American foreign policy interests and that he (Reagan) had better not
tamper with the pipeline because it "will only aggravate further our already poor
international reputation for reliability.'' The Chairman of the Chamber of Com-
merce, Donald Kendall, stated that pipeline politics amounted to a threat of "eco-
nomic warfare," choosing not to comment upon what kind of warfare was going on
in Afghanistan, or El Salvador, or Poland-or indeed what kind of warfare was
threatened by new missile deployments.
George Ball responded to the pipeline situation more cosmically. It will not do, he
says, for the leader of the Alliance to try to lead the alliance. Not only won't the
wealth weapon work with the pipeline, but it never works, certainly not if America
takes the lead. It does not work, Mr. Ball indicates, because it does not work: nations
end up acting in their own selfish, or best, interests. Mr. Ball chose not to address the
thought that perhaps the allies could be convinced this time to redefine what
constitutes their best interests in a time of both crisis and opportunity.
David Rockefeller toured Africa and stated (according to the Washington Post) that
the presence of thousands of Cuban troops and Russian advisers had no "direct
bearing on American business operations in Angola. Clearly, it has not interfered with
our banking relations." Dealing with socialist or Marxist countries, Rockefeller said,
"really does not cause us any problem at all ... We have found we can deal with just
about any kind of government, provided they are orderly and responsible.''
And then there was Thomas Theobald, Executive Vice President of Citibank-who,
immediately after the Polish crackdown, said "Who knows what political system
works? The only test we care about is: Can they pay their bills?"
VI. What Should Be Done?
And so, a golden moment slips past. As this is written (in early April), it appears as
if there will be no halting the gas pipeline; the French signed on while Solidarity
members were freezing in concentration camps. There is desultory talk about some
limiting of governmental credits and guarantees to the Soviet Union and her satellites,
or at least limiting government subsidies for credit. The argument is made that private
lending will dry up by itself because of recent unhappy financial precedents in Eastern
Europe. Banks, it is being said, will not loan to the East because they do not wish to
make bad loans. Never mind about arms build-ups, invasions, represssions, terrorism,
the Collapse Coalition seems to be saying in high moral dudgeon-the problem with
those Communists is that they don't pay their bills on time.
But the logic of the present situation, keyed to American attitudes, Soviet adventur-
ism, Eastern credit addiction and the related availability of the Wealth Weapon points
toward a different policy with a different goal: total Western inter-governmental
control of the West-to-East credit tap. A number of. such ideas are now being
considered in and out of government.
Suppose, for one example ofhow it might work, that a "water level" of credit were
to be established, based on the commercial activity of recent years. Right to extend
credit could then be granted to a consortium of lender nations by a proportional
formula-and be ratcheted down-or up-as the political situation warrants.
Under such a ge,neral plan, credit to the East would specifically not be awarded
primarily on the basis of credit-worthiness. After all, if banks and governments
merely say that credits will be cut because credit-worthiness is slipping-there is no
incentive for political accommodation by the East. In fact, there may be incentives for
16
even further adventurism: "do business with us or else you'll be sorry." Furthermore,
there is little possibility of reward: A Soviet bloc that is demilitarizing, a Soviet empire
that is shrinking, ought to get Western credit even if it is in financial trouble.
A West-to-East tap, or a variant thereof, could make a genuine detente work. It sets
into place the second aspect of the idea of detente: every tap needs a spigot, every
bridge a toll-booth. It would do this in a way that would neither embarass nor
humi!ill,te the Soviet Union; neither rewards or punishments need be keyed to specific
bargains.
VII. What Will Happen If No Action Is Taken?
Meanwhile that get-tough-again attitude still simmers in America. The public is
convinced that the allies are malingering, that American toughness has been met with
European limp-wristedness; that idealism has been met with decadence. One reflection
of the mood:
Do you think the United States' allies in Western Europe
are providing the right amount of support for American
foreign policies, or don't you think the allies are support-
ing the United States as much as they could?
Providing right amount of support
Not supporting as much as they should
Not sure
(NBC News poll, Jan. 1982)
11%
80%
9%
A CBS/New York Times poll at the same time showed that by a small majority
Americans believed the U.S. should be more forceful, "even if it increases the risk of
war." A plurality of Americans believe our sanctions of the Soviets have not been
tough enough (NBC). An almost 2: 1 majority believe that if further budget cuts must
be made because of projected deficits, such cuts should come from non-defense rather
than defense budgets. By 51-34 per cent, Americans want the CIA to have more power
(Roper, 3/81).
And if in the Congress, the columns, or the White House there is a good word to be
said for the &usmess/bank position, this observer has been unable to uncover it. The
Get-Tough-Again attitude in American politics is worth some further examination.
Toughness, when it reveals itself on the liberal side of the spectrum generally relates
to internation,alism: let's-join-hands-with-our-allies-to-save-the-world-for-democracy.
But that is not necessarily the feeling as it seems to develop on the conservative side.
Toughness there can take the form of internationalism. But the same get-tougher
spirit can often yield an attitude of: "If no one appreciates us, we'll do what we want
to do-alone." Or, even more severely: "the hell with the rest of the world." In a
word, toughness on the right can yield isolationism.
These alternative reflections of the same central theme place American foreign
policy at a tipping point today. The battle is no longer between tough and soft, but
between tough internationalism or tough isolationism. The combat is played out in
Congress regarding a Mansfield-type Amendment for troop withdrawals from Eu-
rope, in trade policy, in the State Department regarding aid to the Third World, in the
United Nations regarding Law of the Sea and other issues. Tough together or tough
alone.
New coalitions are forming. Business has a coalition partner, albeit an unlikely and
ironic one: the old soft left. For different reasons they preach the same cause: don't
be beastly to the barbarians.
But other, more powerful coalitions are forming, or are ready to form.
17
Consider: the Isolationist right and the New Politics isolationist left are no'
walking common ground: ·It's a big ocean, they say, let's have Fortress America. Th
internationalist Nee-Conservatives are talking about "global unilateralism." This is
different tradition from the isolationist one, but for different reasons both migb
prefer to redirect American strength away from Europe.
And there is the Welfare Left: they complain about too much American defens1
spending. But who will be the first to whisper in their ear that American defens1
spending must go up even further as and if the Soviet economy is propped up b:
European credits? Is it possible, the whisperers may whisper, that food stamps anc
college loans in America must be cut back because European bankers are craven a:
worst, short-sighted at best? (Perhaps the same person will whisper to Europeans tha1
as the Soviets are propped up, our defense costs go up, so do our deficits, so do om
interest rates, and so do European rates, aborting economic recovery on the Conti-
nent.) Sometimes it seems as if only poor Alexander Haig is left saying, "Let's try and
wait for the Europeans."
It should go without saying that if Americ:i's mood of toughness is transmuted into
an isolationist/unilateralist coalition, the two quickest losers will be the unwitting
agents of its formation: European governments-and business interests on both sides
of the ocean.
VIII. The Options Now
The Europeans could respond to the mood of U.S. toughness by saying: "We
wanted tough leadership for the Alliance, now we've got it: Hooray!" That option,
alas, has gone by the boards, in some part because of American heavy-handedness.
Or, the Europeans could simply say, "No." So far, as interpreted on the American
side of the ocean, that has been the tone of the reaction. Or, the Europeans could say,
"Obviously, our interests are not identical with those of America, but we understand
America's view and we look forward to ways of mutual accommodation."
For starters, they could put America's tough President to a tough test. For he has
been no glorious freedom-fighter himself: one of his earliest official acts involved
cancelling a U.S. grain embargo that his allegedly soft-line predecessor had placed on
the Soviet Union in retaliation for their invasion of Afghanistan. The Soviets now
have Afghanistan and the grain.
No particular apology is offered here for Reagan's folly. In his favor, let it be said
that he is now at least talking a good game. Test him.
IX. Combatting Decadence
Instead, the Western governments, Western business interests, and Western media
join together to dig a great hole which may well serve the function of self-interment.
Collectively, we look at our economies and in a classic democratic orgy of overstate-
ment and self-pity announce that things have never been worse and a depression is just
around the corner. That's why we must continue the JJipeline; we need the jobs,
unemployment is so high. That's why we must give credit'to the Soviets; we must get
markets for our factories. That's why we Americans must sell grain to the Soviets;
American farmers have never had it so bad.
The facts are different and do not yield a case for such self-inflicted blackmail. In
Europe and the United States the data show only "a decrease in the rate of increase of
economic growth." And even if one should accept the most gloomy, most overstated
assessment of our current collective economic position, it comes out this way:
18
"Having attained the highest level of prosperity in human history; we are now on a
economic plateau."
The nations whose citizens meet in Oslo at the Bilderberg meeting are not only th
most prosperous grouping of nations in human history, but the most free, mos
innovative, the healthiest and-considered broadly beyond mere arms-the mos
powerful and the most influential.
Yet, when challenged, our nations dither in decadence, while we continue provision
ing our adversaries. The case is made for "pragmatism"-to save 1,000 jobs, tc
ignore the Soviet roots of terrorism, to tut-tut the Poles. But if we cannot rally orn
citizens to protect and promote our common values, we may find ourselves asking twc
questions that the assembly in Oslo may choose to consider:
- Isn't idealism now the most pragmatic course?
- Are we sacrificing freedom on the altar of free enterprise?
Reference: The Wealth Weap•m by Ben J. Wattenberg and Richard J. Whalen. Transaction Books. 1980
* *
*
"A European's Thoughts on the State of the Alliance"
Wai-king Paper Prepared by Henry Simonet
Member of Parliament, Belgium
1. Once again, the Alliance is a prey to misunderstanding, susp1c10n and re-
proaches. There is nothing new about that; it will probably happen again. But we
should not allow the recurring character of these strains to mislead us as to the nature
and seriousness of the underlying differences of opinion. It would be dangerous to
look upon these misfirings in the machinery of the Alliance as the rule, while
consistency of ideas and harmony of action are a blessed exception. "Every fit man is
sick but doesn't know it," said Doctor Knock in the play by Jules Romaine. But to
apply this aphorism to the Alliance would be to minimize its crises, which are tending
to become routine, with brief interruptions of understanding and confidence. It is true
that any alliance by its nature often involves friction, especially in peacetime, when
the enemy's direct threat is not sufficient to silence grievances and-with difficulty-
stifle frustrations and grudges. It is even more liable to friction if it has succeeded in
achieving the purpose that its founders set themselves, namely to maintain peace while
safeguarding its members' independence against the common enemy. That is still the
distinguishing feature of our Alliance and its great merit-great but less and less
recognized, especially by the postwar generations. It is true that crises can be regarded
to some extent as an index of health and vigor. But to treat them as passing episodes
and accept them philosphically would be very dangerous to the Alliance's durability.
Each of the crises that has shaken the Atlantic Alliance has of course had its own
distinctive character, while sharing certain features with comparable earlier episodes.
Yet it would be wrong to derive any consolation from the similarity between the
current difficulties and those of this or that previous quarrel. Above all, I believe that
a thorough analysis of the current crisis is essential because if it was to become
endemic, the Alliance would probably not survive. Of course, it would not break up in
a spectacular collapse; it would simply wither away through lack of substance, a
19
perceived common objective or a will to maintain a common destiny. Our American
friends are apt to say nostalgically that "Old soldiers never die, they just fade away."
It may seem out of place to apply such gloomy thoughts to the Atlantic Alliance
today. But it is worth thinking about it.
2. It is worth asking a few questions, the reply to which might provide an insight
into the nature of the present crisis and the special features that distinguish it from
previous periods of strain and altercation.
First of all, do the Europeans still have the same concept of their security as their
American (and Canadian) allies?' Or, on the contrary, do the Atlantic partners have
such different viewpoints of the dangers that they risk drifting apart?
Next, what would be the outcome of a unilateralist trend in the United States
coupled with a European tendency to be isolationist about conflicts and clashes
outside what Europe considers to be the perimeter of Atlantic solidarity?
This two-fold trend, which derives from different approaches, but is parallel in its
consequences, cannot be ruled out as an academic hypothesis.
Next, can it be assumed that the balance of political, strategic and economic force
between the superpowers, between them and their allies and between the democratic
and Third World countries has withstood the passage of time sufficiently well for
everything to revert to normal once the storm is over? Normal would of course mean
that the disputes would go on but without major risks to the cohesion of the Alliance.
There are of course a good many other questions that should be put in any analysis
of the ''state of the Alliance.'' But they are not easy to frame and above all it might
be unwise to put them too clearly. A short time ago, Mr. Brzezinski defined the
balance of power between the United States and the USSR as "an ambiguous
equivalence." Without wishing to pass judgment on this diagnosis, I will confine
myself to putting a question and· then a secondary question:
I. Have not the Alliance-and especially the nature of American strategy where
Europe is concerned-and the degree of commitment of the European partners
become "ambiguous" also?
2. If that is true, is it better to allow a certain ambiguity to continue or to put an
end to it?
Of course, any human organization has a tendency at some time or other in its
history to need a certain ambiguity if it is to withstand the contradictions that cannot
be sorted out in the immediate future. But it is reasonable to doubt whether the
Alliance can continue permanently in a state of ambiguity over, for example, the
strategic doctrine of the United States and its extension to the Alliance, or over the
"code of rewards and punishments" to be observed by the Alliance in dealing with the
Eastern countries (including the USSR) in accordance with their behavior. Are the
Europeans inclined to lean towards the positive part of the so-called "linkage"
policy', whereas the United States is apt to emphasize the punitive aspect?
3. If we set out to define the European positions more clearly, looking beyond the
public statements m~de with varying emphasis, the ambiguity does not disappear. In
practice, the Europeans' attitude towards the "detente-defense" diptych is less clear-
cut than the United States would probably wish.
'In fact, are the acrimonious exchanges between the partners triangular? At first sight, no. United States-
Canada on the one hand and United States-Europe on the other, whereas the Europe-Canada diptych
seems to be more harmonious. But the Canadians' silence should not be taken to mean agreement with
their European allies on strategic matters.
'Which is then regarded as a way of relaxing the subjection of the East European countries to the USSR.
The developments in Poland show how necessary it is to have a common, in-depth analysis.
20
Iri .some quarters there is certainly a willingness to find explanations, not to say
attenuating circumstances, for any infringements by the USSR of the code of
detente, whether written (e.g., in the Helsinki treaty) or tacit. As in previous cases
of tension, there is the same suspicion on the European side that the United States
will take its decisions unilaterally and without any genuine prior consultation. It is
even argued sometimes that domestic considerations come first. The Europeans have
not been slow-rightly or wrongly is not the question for the time being-to retort to
the Americans when being reproached by them for concluding contracts for the
s_upply of gas with the USSR, that the Americans were not so fussy when it came to
exporting grain.
4. The relative strengths of the super-powers and of the allies themselves have
changed over the past 15 years without the fact being fully realized by public opinion
in general. Where their security is concerned, the Europeans continue to assert, with
relative unanimity, that tl}eir own is bound up with that of the United States. In other
words, there is no danger that the politico-strategic link, which is the whole basis of
the Alliance, will disappear. Nevertheless, voices are being raised irt Europe by what
is undoubtedly a minority but one that has powerful backing from the organization
of its supporters, to preach the anti-nuclear gospel. Of course, their message is
grossly over-simplified, but it appeals to a large segment of public opinion. The Euro-
American divergence emerges in other words-in the Europeans'
(a) analysis of the political and economic environment governing their security.
They charge the United States with being dominated by an adversary relation-
ship with the USSR, which in their view affects the US judgment of situations
in which the endogenous factors are more important than East-West rivalry.
The fact that some of these criticisms are not always unbiased (e.g., the
insistence of the European Left on calling down a plague on "both imperial-
isms") naturally does not make the United States more inclined to listen readily
to criticisms of this kind.
(b) in the Europeans' perception of the conditions governing their sec-..irity. For
them, defense and security are multi-dimensional-in other words they are not
solely a matter of arms and equipment. The political and economic dimensions
seem to them to be equally important, both as a condition and as a means.
As a condition, because social stability and an economy capable of bearing a
major defense burden are essential to achieve this end. As a means, because a
policy Gf economic co-operation calculated to bring about a reform in the
structure of the opposing system (as in Eastern Europe) or in an unstable system
which is tending to move closer to communism for lack of any Western
alternative, is-for the Europeans-a decisive argument in favor of creating a
politico-economic environment favoring detente. The lack of any Alliance
philosophy as to the policy to be pursued towards Eastern Europe is a
dangerous shortcoming, as is amply borne out by the disjointed Western
reactions to events in Afghanistan and Poland.
(c) in the conviction (which is not new) on the part of some of them that the
security of the United States is no longer identical with the security of Europe.
In their view, if the United States had to choose between its. own survival and
the protection of its European allies through nuclear deterrence, it would opt
for the former. This view, which has had some illustrious advocates, has gained
ground. I hope I shall not be taxed with anti-Americanism if I point out that a
number of assertions by American statesmen, whether in office or not, have
helped to undermine the sometimes wavering confidence of Europe in
America's determination to link its destiny to the strategic security of Europe.
The recent advocacy by a number of prominent experts of unilateral renuncia-
2·1
tion of a nuclear first strike is calculated to increase this disquiet. Here we have the
seed of a new paradox.
5. The Europeans were irritated by the speech made by Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger in 1973, in which he restricted them to a largely regional role. The way in
which they assert their determination to have a voice in world affairs is sometimes ill
received in the United States.
Europeans are apt to save their indignation for the policies of their ally which they
consider worthy of condemnation, while trying to throttle back their indignation
where the Soviet Union is concerned. When they are asked to realize the psychological
and political effect of what seems to American opinion to be an unfair attitude and
one that is not compatible with Alliance solidarity, they reply, somewhat casually,
that after all, the United States is bound to guarantee Europe's security because
Europe forms part of its strategic security zone. This does not mean at all that
European opinion is leaning towards the USSR-as some pacifist movements are
openly tending to do. It merely means that Europe hopes to be spared a nuclear
cataclysm compared with which the two previous wars would look like painful but
manageable episodes. But does not this hope entail underestimating the dangers of
Soviet militarism, for example, by treating the steady growth of the military expendi-
tun~ of the USSR and its satellites and their armed interventions in Third World
countries as purely defensive in character?
6. When the objection is raised of a direct understanding between the super-
owers, reached outside Europe, there are those who readily agree that what would be
acceptable to the Great Powers where Europe was concerned would certainly be
acceptable to Europe itself. In other words, we are witnessing the emergence of a
school without any-as yet-declared principles, of active as opposed to passive
neutralism. What I call "active" neutralism would involve leaving the strategic and
military security of Europe to the super-powers in order to maintain the peace that has
prevailed there for the past 37 years, while retaining the ability to project its political
influence and economic interests throughout the world. Utopian though this calucla-
tion may seem, it would be a mistake to ignore or belittle it. Some American circles
that are irritated by the reluctance of the European countries to face up to the
necessities of collective security (for example over the deployment of theatre
weapons)' do not seem to be far from treating it as a form of active neutralism. It is
obvious that there is a cont.radiction between this state of mind and the continuation
of the Alliance. But it is not certain that this is clearly realized, despite American
warnings. The fact is that part of European opinion is no longer really afraid of the
USSR, which it regards as having a politico-economic system that has lost all
credibility. Nor does it take quite seriously either the strategic guarantee or the
warnings of the United States. This skepticism, which is due as much to factors
peculiar to Europe as to others arising in America, incidentally goes hand in hand
with a sincere attachment to our common values, both human and political. In Euro-
American relations, the paradox is the rule and the norm is the exception. Europeans
like to have an America which is strong and vulnerable. Strong, because that is a pre-
condition of their security. Vulnerable, because it gives them plenty of room for
maneuver, plus the satisfaction of being able to preach!
7. This psychological background is vital to any understanding of the Atlantic
relationship. In addition, there are a number of circ1.1mstantial factors which give the
current difficulties their distinctive character. In other words, what reproaches are the
'The difficulty encountered by the US Administration in taking a final decision about the stationing of the
MX missile shows that any final decision of this type is not easy to take.
22
European allies levelling at their partner this time which are different from the usual
catalogue of recriminations that are periodically exchanged by the allies? Two of the
criticisms are new or at least expressed with abnormal precision and acrimony.
On the economic side, a very clear majority of Europeans are in disagreemnt, not
with the ultimate aims of United States economic and financial policy, but with its
immediate objectives-which they consider to be incompatible'-and with the
methods being used to achieve them. Everybody wili recollect the objections raised by
most of the European leaders against American interest rate policy.
A second criticism relates to the world view of United States foreign policy, which
tends to reduce all international strains and clashes to rivalry between the super-
powers. For example, the European analysis of the deep-seated insecurity prevailing
in the Near and Middle East and the measures required to reduce it differs
appreciably from the American by placing greater emphasis on the factors that are
specific to the region. This approach was made clear in the Venice declaration by the
Council of Europe.
The third criticism complements the second to some extent. Not only would the
United States do its standing in European eyes grave harm by interpreting tensions in
terms of the duel between the super-powers, but it would aggravate the tensions by
stressing the military aspect to the detriment of the others. The importance attached
to this aspect is readily understandable to those in Europe who are worried by the
unrelenting military build-up of the USSR. But while there is no fundamental
divergence between the majority of Europeans and the United States over the need to
maintain a global and regional balance with the USSR, the former believe that the
United States does not attach sufficient importance to the economic and social
factors or to the endogenous causes of instability, especially in the Third World.
From the purely military standpoint, the Europeans find it hard to grasp a
methodology under which targets are set for the growth of military expenditure (a
procedure which they are apt to regard as a way of avoiding the politically awkward
problem of conscription) before defining the approach and the stragtegy to be
reflected in the budget.
The foregoing are a few of the points which distinguish the current crisis from its
predecessors.
I have ignored the now traditional reproach levelled by Europeans against their
partner, namely the lack of consistency at the foreign policy-making level in the
United States-.!<or one thing, it is not new and nobody is immune from this reproach.
And for another, it seems to me to be an inseparable feature of the political and
administrative operation of the American government. And lastly, it reflects a living
democracy and a dynamic society. The Europeans might help the Alliance as a whole
by putting forward their own preferences with sufficient consistency and cohesion to
compel the United States to do the same.
In conclusion
The majority of Europeans do not believe that there is any alternative to the
Alliance with the United States and Canada. Of course, they do not always realize the
unfavorable impact on American opinion and on a number of policy-makers
(especially in the legislature) of what are regarded in the United States as lapses from
solidarity with and within the Alliance or as a refusal to face up to the risks entailed
'Balance the budget, raise military expenditure and cut taxes. European skepticism appears to be widely
shared in the United States.
23
by their own security. But the majority of Europeans are not tempted by a neutrality
guaranteed by the super-powers. They know that at a time of crisis between the latter,
it would leave Europe as the potential prey of the USSR, which would probably be
unable to resist the temptation of threatening them with annihilation. In the short
term, at any rate, Europe is not prepared either to trust the USSR or to assume full
responsibility for its defense.
The points of friction that have developed between Europe and the United States
cannot therefore be regarded as part of a process of deliberate divergence but rather
as warnings among Allies designed to prevent such a divergence, which would be the
prelude to dismemberment.
But this cannot be avoided by verbal expressions of good will alone.
* *
*
"Divergent Policies and Attitudes in the North Atlantic Community"
Working Paper Prepared by Manfred Worner
Member of Parliament, Federal Republic of Germany
I. The increasing threat to the political, military and economic security of the
Alliance partners has not strengthened the inner cohesion of NATO. On the contrary,
the Alliance today appears to be endangered by the presence in it of divergent political
and social developments rather than by outside factors. This applies also, and not
least, to the incipient decoupling of Western Europe from the United States. The
Soviet foreign and security policy, aimed at transforming Western Europe into a
"zone of peace and detente" shows a masterful ability in exploiting conflicts of
interest within the Alliance for its own ends. It follows the classical approach of
"divide et impera", i.e., "divide and rule."
II. Divergencies in policies and attitudes do not merely exist between Europeans
on the one hand and Americans on the other. The crisi~ of the Alliance is not limited
to growing transatlantic alienation. What are in some cases profound political
differences of opinion also exist between the European partners, as is borne out by the
numerous co-ordination problems and frequent disagreement in the context of
European Political Co-operation (EPC). A glaring example qf this is the position odd-
man-out Greece has recently adopted in practically all fundamental foreign and
security policy questions.
Although the growing interdependence of problems requires close co-ordination
and joint strategies, the principle of acting in a way that is supportive of the Alliance
is being put into practice less and less. National egoism, regionalism and the danger of
unilaterialism are on the increase, as reflected by the inability of the West to rapidly
formulate and gain acceptance for a joint policy on sanctions in respect of the Soviet
Union.
III. Our political and economic interests do not always coincide. This is only
natural in an alliance consisting of free and sovereign sta!es. Conflicts of interest and
political differences of opinion are, in any event, not a disquieting matter, as long as
there is an area of fundamental agreement, something that is absolutely necessary if
one is to arrive at a balance of interests. However, when there are divergencies in the
Alliance on fundamental positions, there is cause for serious concern. This is the case
in the following areas in particular:
24
1. Fundamental and up to now largely identical values are drifting apart. The
shared conviction of the priority of fundamental freedoms and human rights,
as well as political and national self-determination, stands in contrast to a
growing vafue neutralism, i.e., a growing indifference to these values. Some
European countries, particularly the Federal Republic of Germany, are plagued
by doubts and uncertainty as to their own values and objectives, as well as by a
remarkable loss of contact with reality. While the United States is once more
becoming aware of its strength and French defense efforts, for example,
designed to maintain peace in freedom are supported by a broad majority of
the population, in other countries fear, passiveness, conformism and appease-
ment are having an increasingly determining influence on foreign and security
policy. Pacifism, neutralism and anti-Americanism have become the politicial
credo of a vociferous minority.
2. Divergent assessments of the motives, objectives and strategies of Soviet policy
lead to different concepts as regards detente and relations with the East. One
group interprets the doctrine of "peaceful coexistence" as a means employed
by the Soviet Union to weaken the Western ability to offer resistance and
undermine its defense readiness. They advocate a policy of strength with regard
to the Soviet Union. Other governments interpret the motives of the Soviet
Union as being predominantly defensive, despite its policy of continuing a
massive military build-up, and they consider the Soviet Union to be status-quo
oriented, at least in Europe. They are inclined towards a continuation
of detente policy at all costs and pin their hopes mainly on negotiations,
conducted primarily with a view to bringing about arms control and disarma-
ment. Between these two extremes there are a number of intermediary posi-
tions.
3. Different conceptions of military political and economic security have emerged
as a consequence of these fundamental divergencies. Consequently there are
also different views- on_the instruments and possible strategies for preserving
security in the future. Individual political groupings in Western Europe advo-
cate equal security partnerships with the United States and the Soviet Union.
The objective is to establish a European-wide system of security, preferably
without atomic weapons. This objective will remain utopian until the Soviet
Union becomes willing to practice political and ideological self-restraint. Since
there are no indications for this whatsoever, our objective must be as much as
possible to eliminate the risk of political abuse of military powe't'by the Soviet
Union, reduce the crisis-proneness of the Alliance and preserve the political
capacity to act and the self-determination of our allies based on the principle of
indivisible security.
Another factor of divergence, important in the long term for our economic
security, concerns the close connection between security and development
policy. What is controversial in particular is the extent to which, within the
framework of North-South co-operation, one's own security policy interests
should play a role. Closely related to this and equally controversial is the
question of members of the Alliance assuming responsibilities outside of the
NATO region.
4. One of the most explosive problems in the Alliance is the different orientations
of the partners in the field ofeconomic policy. What is involved here is not just
the controversy on interest rates, protectionism or an uninterrupted supply of
energy and raw materials at acceptable prices. Much more will depend on the
ability of the Western industrial countries to adjust and react to the profound
structural changes emerging in the world economy than on other problems of
25
the Alliance. Growing structural unemployment and the accompanying strain
on the social budget could undermine the will for national self-defense in same
countries.
5. Today there are already unmistakable and measurable divergencies with respect
to the value attributed to defense spending in the various national catalogues of
tasks. The same applies to the ability and willingness to gain acceptance for
urgent security policy necessities competing with domestic desires and priori-
ties. As is evident from the NATO two-track decision, there is an increasing
tendency in some partner countries to undercut controversial defense policy
decisions by referring to current or future negotiations or by pointing out
undesirable repercussions for the detente process.
6. Strategic planning is an area marked by an extraordinarily important and by
now open disagreement among the NATO partners. A change in the American
attitude towards the defense of Europe and a marked shift of American
strategy towards the crisis areas in the Near and Middle East, Southern Asia
and in the Caribbean have made these divergencies clear. In addition to this,
there are the differences of opinion on the strategy of "flexible response" and
on related individual questions such as the future role of tactical-nuclear and
conventional forces.
Closely related to this is the controversy on the objectives of arms control
and disarmament negotiations, i.e., whether such negotiations can be seen as an
instrument of political detente, or whether they should be conducted primarily
with an eye to military security requirements.
IV. "Statesmen are ultimately judged not by their contemplation of dilemmas but
by their ability to conceive alternatives." (Kissinger)
The following points are of urgent importance for overcoming the present critical
developments in the North Atlantic Community:
26
1. A realistic and shared assessment of the motives, objectives and strategy of the
Soviet Union. This includes, not least, the ideological and propagandistic
components of Soviet power policy.
2. We will have to make it much clearer to the "silent majority" than has been the
case in the past that it is the contrast between socialist dictatorship and a liberal
economic and social system which is the actual cause of tensions between East
and West (freedom offensive). Above all, we will have to invest far more
energy, time and thought in transmitting to young people the fundamental
values which can give them guidance.
3. The military superiority of the Soviet Union, especially in Europe, must under
no circumstances be consolidated, not even by arms control and disarmamenl
negotiations. Adequate defense efforts on the part of all partners are indispens·
able.
4. The Alliance must formulate and gain acceptance for a new and comprehensiv,
strategy for dealing with the Soviet Union in the future. It will be of decisiv
importance to agree on joint approaches in the economic and financial sector
(credits, technology transfer, etc.). As this is the only area in which the Sovie
Union is dependent on co-operation on the condition that it exercise restraint i
world politics, the West has an opportunity to exert considerable influence o
the Soviet Union. If .we do not take advantage of this opportunity, we w;
continue to be played off against each other.
5. The strategy debate in the North Atlantic Community must be conducted l
soberly including domestic and alliance policy factors. We need a securi
policy concept, which takes into account
- the steadily growing military potential of the Soviet Union;
the "nuclear borderline situation/' as a result of which the strategic
rationality and political legitimacy of all attempts to eliminate the problem-
atic weak points of the NATO posture are being called into question;
- the defense policy options on both sides of the Atlantic.
It will be'Of decisive importance to limit the military and political employability
of Soviet military power by linking Soviet decisions on the use of military power
with specific (if possibly incalculable) risks.
6. Against this backdrop we will have to develop new approaches to bring the
objectives, methods and criteria of arms control policy in line with defense
policy requirements.
7. A realistic discussion of the problem of sharing work and burdens inside and
outside of the Alliance is indispensable. It is particularly important that the
effects of crises and potential conflicts outside of the NATO region on the
Alliance and individual partner countries be included.
8. Europe cannot and must not be restricted to playing a merely regional role
within the Alliance. We should explore new avenues of transatlantic co-
operation with a Europe capable of acting. The objective must be to unite
Europe in the field of defense policy and expand Europe's own contribution in
order to place NATO firmly on two pillars and alleviate the imbalance in the
relationship between the United States and Europe.
9. Finally, in the interest of the Allies themselves, it will be necessary to reassert
the principle of acting in a manner supportive of the Alliance.
V. Questions:
1. For what reasons has the Alliance thus far failed adequately to respond to the
continuing build-up of military and political power on the part of the Soviet
Union?
2. Are the Western democracies still capable at all of conducting a long-term and
coherent foreign and security policy that will do justice to the Soviet challenge?
3. Will the present forms and structures of Western cooperation (NATO, EC,
OECD) be sufficient on a long-term basis or do we need to establish new
overall conditions?·-.
4. Is there a majority in the Western industrial countries that is convinced of the
superiority of a liberal economic and social system? If such a majority exists,
what can we do to mobilize it?
5. Can Europe be an independent third power within the framework of a
European-wide peace order spanning the two political btocs?
6. Is there an alternative to securing peace by means of a strategy of deterrence? If
there is not, what would have to be done in order to maintain or restore its
credibility?
7. Are stability and a balance of power sufficient criteria for a comprehensive
security policy? What are the medium and long-term prerequisites for economic
security?
* *
*
27
DISCUSSION
Chairman: Walter Scheel
In discussing divergent policies and attitudes, several speakers who had attended
past Bilderberg Meetings said that they felt a sense of deja vu. Differences among the
alliance partners, especially those on either side of the Atlantic, were a recurring
Bilderberg theme. Some participants were inclined to attach more significance to these
differences than were others, but there was agreement that they hampered the
effectiveness of the alliance.
The clearest expression of divergences in governmental policies lay in the discussion
of the nature of the Soviet threat and of economic policies toward the countries of the
East Bloc. But divergent popular attitudes loomed in many participants' views as even
more ominous. Some speakers called on political leaders to exert greater influence
over public opinion; others felt that only changes in the structure of the alliance could
secure the endorsement of public opinion that was its underpinning.
Attitudes toward the Soviet Union. An American saw in his countryman's working
paper a dangerous and distorted view of the Soviet Union. This view, which he said
was more prevalent in the Reagan Administration than in any previous one, held that
the Soviet Union was the "source of all evil" and that U.S. policy should be to
confront it at every opportunity and seek to promote its downfall. In practice, those
in Washington who held this view had lost out to advocates of the more traditional
approach which recognized the reality of the Soviet Union's existence and sought to
find ways to live with it.
The Reagan Administration's foreign policy had so far been "quite reasonable and
sensible," in a Belgian speaker's opinion, but many Europeans found the rhetoric
coming out of Washington alarming. Words that followed one line and actions that
followed another promoted confusion. The gulf between what was said and what was
done was bound to create distortions in the expression of foreign policy and lead to
transatlantic misunderstanding. If the "get tough" attitude described in the American
working paper became a basis for policy, we were in for trouble.
Why had the U.S. moved away from detente just 10 years after it had emerged as
the basis for NATO dealings with the Soviet Union? A German felt that the answer
lay in the massive Soviet military expansion of the last decade and the resulting shift
in the military balance. The theory behind detente had been that a relaxing of tensions
and opening up of trade and other relations between East and West would make the
Soviets less assertive and expansionist. But they had failed to show restraint and
moderation. They had practiced cooperation only where it was useful for them and
confrontation when it was detrimental to the West and to the world. The fault of the
West was that it had used "only the carrot, and not the stick." But in Europe there
was a strong inclination not to abandon the policy of det'ente. It had led to benefits
Europe did not want to give up. Germany especially, because it was a divided country,
had profited from detente in such ways as the easing of the Berlin situation.
Differences in our assessment of the Soviet threat aside, we could all agree that the
East Bloc was in serious trouble. What we were seeing there, suggested a British
speaker, was nothing less than the failure of the communist system. Poland was in
revolt, Soviet agriculture had made no progress in 20 years, and Soviet incursions
around the world had met with little success. An American elaborated on this last
point, saying that any minor territorial gains the Soviets had made in Africa were
more than offset by the diastrous loss of influence resulting from Egypt's defection
from the Soviet orb. Indeed, we were making too much of the Soviet threat, the
speaker believed. The most troublesome developments of the past decade (the rise of
28
OPEC, the fall of the Shah, the Arab-Israeli situation, etc.) had had nothing to do
with the Soviet Union.
Our approach to the Soviet Union, argued the German author, should be guided by
the assumption that it is "the last classical empire," and that it is in decline. It faced a
choice: either'reform or break down. The West's problem was that it could not know
when this breakdown might occur and it had little influence over domestic develop-
ments in the Soviet Union. Our policy should be neither to stabilize nor destabilize the
Warsaw Pact countries; it should not put them in-a situation they could only escape
by force, not should it help Soviet leaders escape change. Western policy, in short,
had to combine elements of cooperation with elements of containment. The goal
should be to create favorable conditions for change inside the Soviet Union.
Economic policy toward the East. There was considerable divergence over the
extent to which the NATO countries should extend economic cooperation to the
Soviet Union and its satellites. The American working paper's call for the establish-
ment of a formal mechanism to tie economic cooperation to Soviet behavior found
little support among those who represented the business and banking communities on
both sides of the Atlantic. ·
A Dutch speaker faulted the American author for proposing to use such a delicate
weapon as the wealth weapon as a "club to hit the Soviet Union and its satellites."
While it was true that not since World War II had the Soviet economy been in such
disastrous straits and therefore the opportunity to use the wealth weapon so great, it
was worth remembering that it was a sophisticated weapon, to be used selectively. The
Soviet Union was not the same as its satellites. It would be a mistake, for example, to
use the wealth weapon against Hungary, which was "silently and efficiently doing
what Poland tried to do out loud." We should approach every Warsaw Pact country
differently, based on its own situation.
The free market system, an American argued, was something we could peacefully
export to the Soviet satellites. It gave us the opportunity to drive a wedge between
them and the Soviet Union in a non-confrontational way. A Portugese participant
added that just as the Marxist elements in Angola and Mozambique had come to the
conclusion that the Soviets made bad commercial partners, so would the Soviet
satellites. It was likely that the Soviet Union would disintegrate from the sides rather
than at the center, and the economic weapon could be useful in peacefully furthering
this process of disintegration.
But other speakers felt that we should be asking outselves if the capitalist world
were going to continue to keep the communist world going. We needed to analyze the
extent to which economic relations between East an West had different effects and
consequences. In this respect, Americans were critical of the Soviet gas pipeline to
Europe, while Europeans questioned U.S. grain sales to Russia. In any case, if we
were going to use the wealth weapon, it ought to be a matter of governmental policy
and not something decided by businessmen acting in concert.
Perhaps, a German suggested, we would begin putting some limitations on eco-
nomic relations with the East anyway, for economic rather than political reasons. We
were dealing with totally inefficient economic systems in the communist world. Would
our bankers go on granting them credit? If Poland had been declared in default, the
banking community would have had a serious problem on its hands, a problem that
now the Soviet Union and COMECON had to deal with.
An International speaker intervened to point out that the degree of freedom to use
the economic weapon was limited anyway. We had to recognize both the opportuni-
ties and the constraints in using economic policy. Our banks were facing enormously
enlarged country exposure, not just in the Soviet bloc, but in many LDC's. A policy
of coordination of economic policy had to be seen not just in a NATO-East Bloc
29
framework, but in the total context. It was a Frenchman's op1mon that to do
economic fine tuning to influence the Soviets would only be harmful to ourselves; the
economic weapon was one we could not use.
Public opinion in the U.S. and Europe. Popular attitudes in the U.S. had, in the
view of the American author, undergone a fundamental shift in recent years. The
traditional intellectual dominance of left-of-center ideas in the U.S. had given way to
the ascendancy of more conservative values: a strong national defense, the virtues of a
free economy, and less government regulation. There was a new sense of conviction
that democratic capitalism was the best system to produce and distribute wealth, the
system most conducive to the preservation and expansion of human liberty. Ameri-
cans were, in short, newly tough-minded.
Several participants saw opposite developments in Europe. Some worried that fear
was giving rise to neutralism and pacificism. Others saw a false sense of security,
engendered, perhaps, by the fact that we had not experienced a major conflict in a
generation. Indeed, no one could even imagine what such a conflict would be like with
nuclear weapons.
Parallel with a "go-it-alone-if-necessary" American attitude that tended toward
isolationism, there was a warning of growing anti-Americanism in Europe. It was not
to be confused with pro-Sovietism, according to an International participant, but was
rather a distancing from the U.S. In some ways, Europeans feared the U.S. more than
the Soviet Union. This was not by any means the majority view, but it had to be
reckoned with.
On the contrary, one German saw-in his country at least-little evidence of anti-
Americanism, pacifism or neutralism. The great majority of Germans-a greater
percentage than a decade ago-wanted to remain friends and allies with the U.S.
What was often confused with pacifism was the effort of the younger generation to
come to terms with nuclear weapons and the nuclear doctrine. And today, only a
small fraction of the German people thought of neutralism as a solution to their
country's problems, compared with a substantial majority 20 years ago. Europe's
faith in American ideological leadership had slipped, but this did not mean a rejection
of the alliance or of cooperation and friendship with the U.S.
An International participant was worried about the implications of the drift in
public opinion. The alliance depended on the endorsement of public opinion, without
which its nuclear backbone could not exist. Governments had the machinery to work
out divergences among themselves, but they had to pay more heed to changes in the
public mood. They had to reverse the drift of public opinion away from the alliance
and convince the public that its continued existence was vital to peace. Public opinion
was the linchpin of Atlantic unity.
Too great a divergence between public attitudes and government policy could be
dangerous. The public had to be aware of and support the reasons for policy
decisions. The leadership of the NATO countries had to rally public opinion behind
the alliance, to show courage instead of creating fear. It was crucial, a German
speaker argued, to make it clear to people that the aIJiance was one of values, and that
we only kept our values as Jong as we were prepared to defend them.
Changes in the NA TO structure. Had the time come to reconsider the structure of
the Atlantic alliance? A Dutch participant pointed out that it had been established 35
years ago on the basis of realities that no longer existed-notably the economic,
military, and technological hegemony of the U.S. As in a marriage, when realities
changed it became necessary to make changes to stay together. NATO was now a
group of 15 equal countries (though some were more equal than others.) The U.S. was
in the center, with the other countries arrayed around it, linked by bilateral ties to the
U.S. We needed to consider splitting NATO into a two-pillared structure.
30
The new realities that NATO faced, in the view of an Italian speaker, included the
decline in relative power of the U.S., military parity.with the Soviet Union, criticism
of independent nuclear forces and of the flexible response doctrine, and crises outside
the alliance area. All of these new realities had increased the importance of the role of
the European countries. As a result, they felt increasingly frustrated; they were too
powerful and independent to agree constantly with the U.S., but not powerful enough
to do everything they were called upon to do in the alliance. It was inevitable that
NATO should change from a community qf nations into a traditional kind of pre-
World War II aIJiance.
But others were opposed to structural changes in the alliance. They were convinced
there could be no independent European security. Only with the U.S. could the
security of Europe be maintained. A separate European body, said a German, was a
dream that would never come true.
The alliance could solve its problems with far less rash measures than altering its
structure. We could start, suggested an American speaker, by asking ourselves what
we were trying to accomplish, what were our goals. A Briton felt that we could easily
live with a certain degree of divergence, and that anyway, our divergences were not in
fact so wide.
In our dealings with the Russians, we should be careful not to find so much comfort
in their problems that we became complacent. We risked spending too much time
speculating on the crumbling of the Soviet empire and not enough time addressing the
possibility that NATO might crumble first. A Belgian said we should be more
concerned about "passive Atlanticism" than about neutralism and pacifism.
Instead of worrying so much about our adversaries, urged a French speaker, we
should be more concerned about ourselves, to become better acquainted as partners.
We should, above all, stop "hollering at each other across the Atlantic," said a
Briton. We tended, when things got difficult, to indulge in empty rhetoric. We needed
instead to update our machinery of consultation, improve our contingency planning,
and seek greater foreign policy synchronization. We could do much to end our
divergences by _giving more thought to where the Western interest lay.
31
II. WHAT CAN ARMS CONTROL ACHIEVE?
* * * *
Working Paper Prepared by Egon Bahr
Member of Parliament, Federal Republic of Germany
I.
The efforts for arms control undertaken over the decades have not prevented the
nuclear arsenals of the two alliances, that is NATO and the Warsaw Pact, from
growing to a point where, if used, they are sufficient to wipe out mankind. At the
same time, conventional arms are growing in number.
The increase in conventional weapons holds true for countries of the Third World
as well, where this trend has accelerated since the oil price rise of 1974. To a
remarkable extent, the recycling of oil dollars takes the form of arms purchases from
the major suppliers, namely the United States, the Soviet Union, France and the
United Kingdom.
Since 1945 over one hundred wars have been waged in countries of the Third
World. They remained local because in no instance was there a head-on clash between
the superpowers. The attempts at regional arms control agreements have remained
unsuccessful, with the exception of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, which made Latin
AmeriCa a non-nuclear-weapons zone. There is no arms control agreement in the
offing for Third World countries to reduce or eliminate the danger of further wars.
It can be assumed that the danger of a conflict in the South sparking off a crisis
elsewhere will remain minimal, but it will increase the nearer such a conflict is to the
region where the major destructive potentials are located; this applies particularly to
the Middle East and Southwest Asia.
II.
Arms control has nevertheless produced significant positive results in the form of
both agreements and negotiations without agreements. Negotiations, mainly between
the two superpowers, have served to provide each side with important information, to
clarify concepts and hence to permit the two sides to assess each other better. It is a
remarkable achievement that two competing superpowers and two opposed alliances
have learned to discuss security matters with each other, as they have done for many
years now. Before the nuclear age there was nothing like this.
Even at the MBFR talks in Vienna it has proved possible to achieve a comparison,
with which we are now largely familiar, of the two sides' conventional forces; the
discrepancy in the data of 150,000 troops is hardly significant any more from the
point of view of security.
The Test Ban Treaty has led to qualitative limitations, whilst the Outer Space and
Antarctic Treaties have set geographical or regional limitations to the arms race. The
ABM Treaty and the SALT process have played a major part in ensuring that
Washington and Moscow have achieved a degree of agreement and mutual knowl-
edge, which has a stabilizing effect even in the absence of a ratified international
agreement (SALT II): the number and capabilities of each side's intercontinental
weapons are known, and the political implications of certain weapon categories are
essentially no secret, albeit the subject of political controversy.
A dialogue on arms control is intrinsically conducive to political stabilization.
Surprisingly, this dialogue has not been interrupted in the wake of events in
32
Afghanistan or Poland. Given the highly dangerous potentials now in existence, it is
indeed in the mutual interest of both sides to continue the dialogue. It is the purpose
of arms control talks to enable both sides to feel each other's pulse, as it were. This is
no mean feat. But detecting a temperature does not in itself constitute a cure.
III.
The ABM and SALT Treaties are the two most important agreements to date.
The ABM Treaty is the outcome of the fact that it is much cheaper to manufacture
intercontinental missiles with nuclear warheads, in other words, missiles with a range
of over 5,000 km., than to produce defense systems against them. There is not likely
to be any technical breakthrough in the development of an adequate defense
capability against intercontinental missiles until well into the 1990's. The two super-
powers thus remain vulnerable and susceptible to fatal blows by the other side. An
anti-missile system on each side does not greatly alter this situation. Mutual security is
a balance of mutual vulnerability.
The SALT process seeks to neutralize the two intercontinental potentials at a higher
common level, in other words to achieve security by means of equilibrium.
It is in the interest of the two superpowers and indeed of all other countries that the
largest and most dangerous potentials should be checked so that there is a predictably
small, if not improbable, risk of their use. It is therefore in the universal interest that
the SALT process be continued, preferably leading to reductions.
One consequence of the SALT process was that the systems of less importance for
the two superpowers, namely missiles with a range of between 1,000 and 5,000 km.,
were not subjected to any restrictions, which in turn led to a new unchecked arms
race. The Soviet build-up of SS-20 missiles, which are a potential threat to regions
ranging from Alaska through Japan, China, India, Southwest Asia and the Middle
East to Europe, is being countered by corresponding U.S. systems, namely Pershing II
and Cruise missiles. Negotiations are in progress in Geneva on land-based missiles in
accordance with Western concepts, but there is the danger of a new grey area
emerging for missiles with a shorter range of between 150 and 1,000 km. The talks in
Geneva must seek to put an end to such an additional arms race, even before
agreement is ~reached on the intermediate-range missiles.
These experiences show that every sector must be covered by negotiations or
agreements, or else new qualitative arms developments will occur.
IV.
Arms control negotiations to date have produced the following results:
(a) an end to arms competition in new regions or sectors, which is in the mutual
interest,
(b) common ceilings at a higher level, and
(c) agreements in specific sectors, leaving other sectors and categories open to new
arms efforts.
Until now arms control has meant the cessation of arms production, but not
disarmament. It is understandable if an increasing number of people question the
success of a policy that produces, as a result of arms control, more arms but less
security.
In my country the question of resistance to such a policy is posed not only by the
so-called peace movement but also by the two principal Churches and by key members
of the Opposition parties, including eminent figures such as Professor Biedenkopf,
who has raised the basic question of the acceptance of nuclear defense which
.33
presupposes a willingness for self-extinction. This discussion will continue and not
remain confined to Europe. It raises the question of developing a new approach to
arms control in order to prevent the Western societies and hence NATO, the basis of
our security, from becoming destabilized as a result of increasingly expensive arma-
ments.
v.
In this age of mutual assured destruction, known as MAD for short, victory is not
possible any more. The fundamental desire of all nations for security can no longer be
attained through superiority because, in the event of a conflict, superiority can no
longer be taken advantage of without the danger of self-destruction. This means that,
unlike conditions in the past, security cannot be achieved in opposition to the
potential adversary but only together with him.
This is patently obvious in the heart of Europe. In the event of a conflict not only
the Federal Republic of Germany but also the GDR would be destroyed. Although
these two states are fully loyal to different political systems and different alliances, the
GDR's security also constitutes the Federal Republic's security, and vice versa. This
holds true for the whole of Europe. It also holds true for the United States and the
Soviet Union. One must recognize that the only form of security that now exists is
common security.
Common security calls for some rethinking-by the United States no less than by
the Soviet Union, whose military doctrines are in principle geared to superiority, to
deterrence, but if this fails to military victory. This is not only futile, but will become
less and less credible.
If both sides realize that they can organize their security only jointly on the basis of
the existing alliances and on the basis of the continuing widely varying philosophies,
arms control could lead in its initial phase to a discontinuation of qualitative arms
developments, thus preventing the introduction of new destabilizing weapon systems,
and in its second phase to genuine reductions. For it is also clear that common
security can be arranged at less cost than is the case at present.
* *
*
Working Paper Prepared by Christoph Bertram
Director, The International Institute for Strategic Studies
The main achievement of arms control in the 1980's will not lie in promoting
reductions in armaments. It will remain, more modestly, one of regulating the military
competition, not of changing it quantitatively. The effective and rational reduction of
military arsenals in East and West is only one, and, perhaps, the most difficult of the
conceivable achievements of arms control. Others are no less significant if less
spectacular: negotiations provide a needed permanent contact between the major
powers even if not crowned by a concrete outcome; they are probably essential if
deterrence by nuclear threat is to remain acceptable to public opinion in democratic
countries. And even purely regulatory agreements will provide two far from negligible
dividends: a basis for military planning, and a framework for curbing expenditures on
future programs and thus respond to the economic constraints experienced even by
the· major powers.
34
I. Arms Control as Reduction. Arms control, as defined since the early 1960's
when the term became accepted, implies the effective control of some aspects of
military competition through mutual agreement, between East and West in general
and the Soviet Union and the United States in particular. It suggests that such
agreement would allow both sides to do less than what they would otherwise be doing
to assure their military strength.
In practice, this has meant agreements on what should be permitted rather than on
what should be curtailed. With the notable exception of the ABM Treaty of 1972
which banned effective defense against .ballistic missiles, and the limitation, in the as
yet unratified SALT II-Treaty, of the number of nuclear warheads per launcher, arms
control has generally tended to ratify the existing arsenal and its near-term potential
for technological improvements, and even encouraged both sides to build up to the
permitted ceilings.
This is no mean achievement, as I shall argue further in the second part of this
paper. But it is doubtful if this is going to be enough in the future. The permissive
nature of existing nuclear arms control regimes has allowed nuclear arsenals on both
sides to rise to such dimensions that the call for more than mere arms regulations,
namely for arms reductions, has become increasingly louder-from both the left and
the right of the spectrum, from President Carter (nuclear weapons should disappear
from the face of the earth) and President Reagan (real arms control means deep
Feductions). The widespread and growing concern in Western societies over the danger
of nuclear war, however unjustified, will give further weight to impatience with the
size of existing arsenals. Reduction, not regulation, will be the task that arms control
in the 1980's and 1990's will be asked to perform by politicians and public opinion
alike in the West.
There can be little doubt that the size of existing nuclear forces-whether in the
strategic or in the theatre category-vastly exceeds rationally plausible requirements.
What can be the sense in over 4,000 launchers with roughly 20,000 nuclear warheads
that constitute the operational arsenal of both superpowers today, when total
destruction -can be waged with a fraction of this force? The refinement of nuclear
forces and emPJoyment options has assumed a similar refinement in the concepts of
nuclear war. But limited wars will, in all likelihood, not remain limited, and any
nuclear use remains therefore a last-resort option even for the nuclear giants.
Deterrence through the threat of nuclear destruction remains a rugged, basic concept,
and not even the greatest sophisticat;on in weapons technology is likely to change this.
Hence there should be ample room for major reductions.
The same applies for theatre nuclear forces. Here, too, the arsenal has acquired a
volume and a variety which exceeds by far rationally plausible requirements. What
can possibly be a rational task for the nuclear device carried on board the aging Soviet
Whisky-class submarine on a reconnaissance mission in Swedish waters last Novem-
ber? And how can the requirements of nuclear release procedures and the need for
protection be reconciled with the fact that over 50 per cent of NATO's tactical nuclear
weapons are linked to launchers with a range below 30 km.? Here, too, there should
be a wide safety margin for major cuts.
But arms reduction requires much more than this general.sense that today we have
more than enough. It requires clarity about how much is enough. But this precisely is
what is missing today. The doctrinal concepts for nuclear deterrence in the past
decade have essentially become open-ended. They lack in-built criteria for restraint,
and the size of the nuclear arsenal is thus today defined not by ratio:ial requirements
for deterrence but by the requirements for staying within the constraints of defense
budgets.
35
Before embarking on reductions, it will be necessary, therefore, to define first the
ceiling of what really is needed in nuclear forces. This is in sight neither in the strategic
nor in the theatre nuclear field. The Reagan Administration's notion of "deep
reductions" in strategic forces seems to be limited to the desire for drastic reduction in
Soviet heavy missiles; it has no concept of what strategic forces are essential for the
security of the United States and its allies and which are not. The same applies for
theatre nuclear forces. The "zero option" which President Reagan, after much urging
from embattled European politicians, has presented as the Western position in the
current Geneva negotiations, is unaffected by a clear sense of what theatre nuclear
forces the Alliance needs in Europe. This is a dangerous position.The Soviet Union is
unlikely to accept this proposal as it stands; but one conceivable outcome of the
negotiations in Geneva would be a deal which, while not eliminating the threat of
Soviet medium-range missiles, at least reduces it significantly, in exchange for the
total abandonment of NATO's 1979 program. The result would be that the Western
Alliance would not only be prevented from introducing theatre nuclear forces which
make sense for nuclear deterrence in Europe (particularly the ground-launched cruise
missiles), but also locked into an existing theatre nuclear posture which makes much
less such sense.
The Alliance has entered the Geneva negotiations without a prior notion of what
are its essential military requirements in theatre nuclear forces based in Europe. It is
incapable, therefore, of having any clear sense of what, militarily, it can give up in
exchange for Soviet concessions. Even if successful in diplomatic and political terms-
and this is still far from assured-the Geneva negotiations are unlikely to produce
rational, as opposed to arbitrary, arms control. The same, for the same reasons,
promises to result from the emerging U.S.-Soviet talks on reductions in strategic
forces (START).
Western governments are still conceptually unprepared for arms control as arms
reduction. What agreements are reached will therefore be as doubtful in their arms
control significance as in their long-term political acceptability. Unless the conceptual
groundwork to define again "how much is enough" is accomplished (and there are
few signs that it is even recognized by governments as the prior task), arms control in
terms of reducing the existing nuclear arsenals will scarcely be successful.
II. Arms Control as Regulation. This means that the most relevant arms control
of the decade is likely to follow the pattern established in the 1970's: the agreement on
maximum ceilings for certain weapon systems, between the major powers and in
Europe; the extension of "confidence-building measures"-restrictions that do not
affect the size of military forces but their operation and that can assist in the
verification of agreements-from conventional to nuclear forces and from the surface
of the earth to space, in addition to the confidence-building effect of the calculability
of military efforts inherent in any limitation agreement; and the discouragement of
certain military technologies that both sides deem as undesirable, too uncertain or too
costly.
It is unglamorous arms control, slow and with results that, while basically sound,
are far from spectacular. This may be important for Western politicians to keep in
mind when they are faced with the familiar temptation.of over-selling the promises as
well as the results of negotiations, and particularly for those in Western Europe who
seem to expect that the calendar of negotiations will oblige the timetable for the
deployment of NATO's longer-range theatre nuclear forces.
Two negative consequences follow from the painstaking character of arms control.
First, arms control has very little to do with detente. It is a functional exercise. There
is no evidence to suggest that the prospects of arms control are any better when
36
political detente between East and West flourishes, or that they are significantly worse
when the political relationship is depressed. One of the problems for arms control
since the second half of the 1970's has been that it was asked to serve as the most
tangible manifestation of detente. This is more than the process can carry. Arms
control cannot be the locomotive for improved East-West relations, because its
preoccupation with the means of military competition tends to consume, not produce,
politicaJ trust. Rather it has to be protected against strains in the general East-West
relationship, as far as this is possible in democratic societies. Linkage-the notion that
progress in arms control should deliberately be made dependent on overall improve-
ments in political relations-can serve neither arms control nor detente.
Second, arms control is no alternative to the implementation of necessary military
programs. The idea that somehow "good" arms control can avoid "bad" military
programs is politically tempting but unrealistic. Because the time required for
negotiations will often exceed that needed for the implementation of military pro-
grams, only unnecessary projects can be linked to the outcome of negotiations-and
they should not be undertaken anyway. Necessary arms programs, on the other hand,
should not be made dependent, except in their extent, on the outcome of negotiations:
otherwise, because of their conditional nature, they risk being neither convincing to
the domestic audience nor to the opponent in negotiations. That is the fundamental
difficulty of NATO'.s "double-track" decision of 1979 to both introduce new nuclear
weapons and negotiate away the need for their deployment. The conditionality of the
program deprives it both of domestic support and of credibility in the negotiations.
NATO governments now have to deploy against growing domestic opposition in order
to extract meaningful concession from the Soviet Union!
This is not an argument against making military programs explicitly dependent on
arms control results. There is real arms control value in making clear to the Soviet
Union before one undertakes a major program, that this will be affected by restraints
on her part. But it is an argument against the specific link established by the Alliance
in December 1979. What should then have been made dependent on the outcome of
arms control is not the fact of NATO's nuclear modernization but its extent; to
underline this the Alliance should have committed itself unconditionally to a mini-
mum deployment, and be prepared to negotiate everything beyond that level, rather
than, as it did,-7:cmditionally to.a maximum one which can be totally negotiated away.
There are positive lessons as well. Perhaps the most important is that arms control,
particularly on nuclear weapons, is, in democratic societies, an essential corollary to
nuclear deterrence. All Western societies are currently experiencing a mounting
uneasiness over the reliance on nuclear weapons for their security. That uneasiness has
grown not least because of the initial reluctance by the Reagan Administration to
embark seriously on the search for negotiated limits on nuclear weapons. It is true
that this Administration, earlier than many had expected, agreed to talks on theatre
nuclear force negotiations, and the President's November 18, 1981, speech set out a
range of proposals for arms control. But the Administration had for too long allowed
its image to be that of an opponent, not a supporter of regulating military competi-
tions, so that even its more serious initiatives were seen as tactical, not substantive,
moves. Unless Western governments can regain the credibility that they are serious
about the pursuit of arms control they will lose the domestic support for nuclear
weapons on which the credibility of deterrence continues to rest. Arms control is, for
democracies, no favor one does to the other side.
III. Tasks for the Future. Arms control is an essential companion of nuclear
deterrence. But how should it best be conducted? It would clearly be preferable if the
Soviet and the American governments were conceptually ready to engage in major
37
reductions of their nuclear arsenals. For the reasons suggested earlier I doubt if they
are. And it will take time and investment to get them there-not least by the analytical
community which has all too often conceptually followed but not preceded discus-
sions within government. The question is what should arms control seek to achieve in
the meantime.
I see no alternatives to the continued pursuit of the regulatory approach. But it will
encounter growing impatience, from politicians who hope that arms control can solve
their problems and from public opinion which has become skeptical about the
marginal impact of regulatory controls. While the regulatory effort should be
continued, it will not be enough.
Two other measures should accompany it. First, the slow speed of arms control
should not be an excuse for delaying necessary unilateral reforms in the Western
military structure, even if-on the face of it-it might imply giving up potential future
bargaining chips. The uncertain prospects for theatre nuclear arms control, for
instance, should not block a serious reassessment of the relationship between conven-
tional and battlefield nuclear forces in the defense of Europe. We will have to come in
Europe to a military posture which relies less on nuclear weapons than the one we
have today. Arms control or the lack of it will not solve this problem for us; we have
to confront it anyway. The same applies in the area of strategic forces: what makes
little sense in terms of a posture for deterrence cannot be legitimized by the possibility
of agreed arms reductions in some distant future.
Second, while the concern over nuclear weapons has the deepest emotional reso-
nance in our societies, the danger of nuclear war is not, in fact, the most imminent
among the security challenges faced by the world. Deterrence continues to work, and
the destructive capability of nuclear arms will assure its effect in the future. Nuclear
wars in the 1980's or 1990's will be no more winnable than they have been hitherto.
The more pressing threats to security are those against which nuclear deterrence does
not apply: the creeping crises which might suck the world into war. Eastern Europe
with its endemic brittleness of Soviet control is one, the festering crisis in the Middle
East is another.
Since we cannot solve these crises, we should at least have the machinery to manage
them, through appropriate procedures within the Western Alliance, and through a
close, permanent dialogue between the two major powers. Crisis management is
dangerously underdeveloped today. It will have to be developed again. The readiness
to engage in serious arms control is perhaps also a political precondition for
developing more effective methods of pre-crisis dialogue and crisis communication.
And regulatory arms agreements can make one important contribution to crisis
management by introducing a measure of transparency and predictability into the
military competition.
The arguments advanced in this paper may suggest a rather modest role for arms
control in the current decade. That would be misleading. The pressures for arms
control are likely to grow in comparison to the past decades. The first has been
mentioned: arms control is becoming essential to retain the respectability of deter-
rence by nuclear weapons in our democratic countries. The second is the pressure
from the economic costs of defense which will become a much greater burden for both
the industrialized East and West. Perhaps these pressures will combine to push
governments towards criteria· for military restraint which they have so far failed to
display and which arms control can help to codify.
.. *
*
38
"The United States and the Atlantic Alliance in the 1980's"
Working Paper Prepared by Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr.
Professor of International Politics,
The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University
President, Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis,
Cambridge, Mass. and Washington, D. C.
In democratic societies arms control has become a necessary adjunct to national
security policy. In Western Europe, a commitment to arms control seems the
indispensable prerequisite to the modernization of NATO forces. In the United States,
defense modernization programs are held to be the essential precondition for effective
arms control. The pursuit of arms control, while defense modernization proceeds,
appears to be a required ingredient in the preservation of a transatlantic security
consensus. Such an approach was embodied in a broader sense in the dual concept of
defense and detente of the Harmel Report of 1967 and subsequently in a more specific
fashion in the NATO Ministerial Council "two-track" decision on theater nuclear
modernization of December 12, 1979. Thus the question of arms control, both within
the United States and most of its allies, and therefore in the Atlantic Alliance itself, is
related to considerations encompassing the structure of the national political systems
of Alliance members, the values and outlooks of political elites and public opinion,
and the process of consensus formation on security issues within the Alliance itself.
The apparent gap on security issues between the United States and certain of its
allies has reflected a divergence on the roles respectively to be accorded defense
modernization and arms control policy in the management of relations with the Soviet
Union. Such differences, in turn, are based upon such factors as sharply contrasting
geopolitical positions; perceived gains and losses from the East-West diplomacy of the
last decade and especially the lessons to be derived from the conduct of strategic arms
limitation talks (SALT) between the United States and the Soviet Union in which West
European allies have not been direct participants. The result has been transatlantic
discord about the meaning of Atlanticism itself and hence even a questioning of the
relevance of the multilateral approach to security upon which the Atlantic Alliance
was founded. On the one hand, at one extreme, there has been a deepening concern,
manifest more in the United States than elsewhere, that an Atlanticist consensus may
no longer be possible because of differing transatlantic approaches, and the priority to
be attached, respectively to defense and detente. On the other hand, the opposite
position holds that the United States, in allegedly placing an excessive emphasis upon
the restoration of military power, is heightening tensions with the Soviet Union. To
the extent that the United States, in this view, is equated with the Soviet Union as a
cause for insecurity in Europe, the proponents of a unilateral approach to security in
the United States, advocating the replacement of a seemingly obsolescent Atlanticism
with a new nationalism, are strengthened. Arms control policy, and in particular, the
intermediate range nuclear force (INF) negotiations, has become the focal point and
an important, but not the exclusive, catalyst in such sentiment. What follows,
therefore, is an American approach to the question of what arms control can, and
cannot, achieve in the 1980's. This assessment is set forth as a potential contribution
to whatever transatlantic consensus may be possible on the relationship between
national security and arms control set in present context of the Atlantic Alliance and
the security problems confronting the United States and its West European allies.
39
1. Both the United States and its West European allies share as an objective the
achievement of arms reductions in Soviet counterforce-capable systems targeted
against their respective homelands. Nevertheless, the deployment of Soviet SS-20
launchers led to Chancellor Schmidt's celebrated speech in 1977 proposing NATO
long-range theater nuclear weapons modernization as a response to a Eurostrategic
imbalance which was not addressed in SALT II. Moreover, the buildup in Soviet
heavy systems (SS-18) targeted against the United States produced an asymmetry that
by the end of the last decade had contributed to the perception in the United States
that the fixed land-based portion of its strategic nuclear force was becoming vulnera-
ble. The failure of SALT to provide an acceptable framework for effective reductions
in such systems contributed to the growth of opposition to the Treaty in the United
States. Strategic force modernization has been seen in the United States as a necessary
prerequisite for reductions in Soviet counterforce-capable systems. Just as there is
broad agreement that Soviet nuclear systems targeted against Western Europe exceed
Soviet requirements (perceived from the West) for deterrence, a similar view exists in
the United States with respect to Soviet counterforce-capable systems targeted against
the U.S. homeland. In this regard, the SALT process has not only left untouched the
Soviet counterforce-capable systems targeted against Western Europe, it has proven
unable to provide a satisfactory basis for eliminating such capabilities against the
United States.
2. The Soviet Union has put forth proposals designed essentially to "freeze"
existing force levels or, at most, to produce reductions that would codify for Moscow
a margin of advantage in the categories of systems under negotiation. The history of
arms control provides no evidence that, in themselves, agreements resulting from such
negotiations can do more than reflect a prevailing military relationship. To place upon
arms control a greater burden is to cast into doubt the utility of the concept itself. To
invest arms control negotiations with excessive expectations is fraught with the
potential for eventual public disillusionment. In the shorter term such hopes are likely
to defer defense modernization programs which in themselves might have enhanced
the incentive of an adversary to reach an accord. One alternative to such a "freeze"
would lie in the limitation or the elimination of categories of weapons of greatest
strategic concern, respectively, to Western Europe and the United States: Soviet SS-
20's and SS-18's, in return for "equivalent" U.S. and NATO systems, which might
include the Pershing II and the MX, both of which, like the Soviet SS-18 and SS-20,
could reach targets within minutes with counterforce accuracy. (Although it possesses
potential accuracy at counterforce levels, the present generation cruise missile flies
within the atmopshere at subsonic speeds and therefore does not possess the rapid
reaction capability of ballistic missiles). Because of proposed deployment schedules
and political-technological uncertainties for the U.S.-NATO systems, the basis for
such an arms control agreement probably does not exist, especially if the Soviet Union
sees the prospect for Western nondeployment by unilateral decision or otherwise by
the failure to complete presently agreed deployment plans.
3. There is a Western consensus to the effect that arms control should enhance
deterrence based upon the following: the survivability of .deterrent forces as the
essential precondition for the preservation of deterrence itself; and the diminution in
the potential for surprise attack. Both elements have important implications for the
framework within which arms control negotiations can be evaluated for their effec-
tiveness as a contribution to the security of the United States and the Atlantic
Alliance. Judged by both criteria, they have had little effect upon the East-West
military relationship of the last decade. In the SALT process, the United States had
40
sought an agreement that would restrain the deployment by the Soviet Union of large
numbers of ICBM and SLBM launchers. The ABM Treaty placed legal restraints
upon the ability of the United States to defend its fixed land-based strategic forces,
while the other parts of SALT did not restrain effectively the ability of the Soviet
Union to deploy, both in qualitative and quantitative terms, capabilities perceived
increasingly to pose a threat to such forces. In NATO, moreover, a decade of MBFR
has coincided with a reduction in the minimum warning time thought to be available
in ai:Wance of a hypothesized Soviet-Warsaw ·Pact attack, although there has been a
continuing effort in various sets of arms control negotiations to reach agreement on
confidence-building measures intended to diminish· surprise. By the criteria of surviv-
ability and minimization of surprise as the basis for deterrence, the potential
contribution of arms control for the 1980's is dimmed by the legacy of the last decade.
In turn, this problem has been rendered less soluble by an apparent lack of consensus
between adversaries about the very meaning of stability and the perceived military
requirements for deterrence. To develop such accord would depend necessarily upon
compatible approaches to military doctrine and strategy, which has proven to be of
formidable dimensions even among allies, not to speak of states with hostile political
interests, geopolitical positions, and sharply contrasting approaches to military
affairs.
4. It is necessary to view arms control at the intermediate nuclear force level
within a broader global strategic context. This means that an agreement limited to
intermediate range systems would be insufficient in itself. Just as the SALT II Treaty
left unrestrained the deployment of intermediate range nuclear systems targeted from
the Soviet Union to Western Europe, an agreement confined to Soviet launchers such
as the SS-20 would leave intercontinental capable systems that could be retargeted to
intermediate targets such as Western Europe. To link intermediate range systems and
intercontinental launchers, however, is to increase the complexity of arms control
negotiations that already face formidable obstacles to the achievement of an accepta-
ble agreement. The greater the number of issues, systems and parties involved, the
more difficult the attainment of an arms control agreement and the more protracted
the negotiations are likely to be. The longer the negotiations, the greater the likelihood
that no agreement will be reached or that any accord that is concluded will be
peripheral to the security needs of one or more of the signatories. The longer the time
from the initiation of negotiations to the conclusion of an agreement, the greater the
likelihood that new weapons technologies will reduce its significance to national
security. It is likely that these propositions will hold ominous implications for arms
control in the years ahead. Of equal consequence are changes in the characteristics of
weapons systems themselves which raise questions about what is to be controlled, and
by what type of agreement. For example, if a launcher has a retrofire, or reload,
capability, it is essential to eliminate all, or most, such launchers if a system such as
the SS-20 or the SS-18 is to be effectively restricted. The greater the number of
launchers with retrofire capability not included in an agreement· for such reductions,
the less significant any such arms limitation accord is likely to be as a contribution to
strategic stability. In this respect, the "zero option" proposal for intermediate range
systems contains a certain logic that may be relevant to other systems with comparable
characteristics. Closely related is the difficulty of separating arms control in one
geographical context from adjacent zones. The dismantling of Soviet SS-20 launchers
in the Western Military Districts of the Soviet Union facing NATO, leaving intact
such systems behind the Urals, would place nearly all of Western Europe within the
range of such systems. Mobile launchers could be retargeted from central regions of
the Soviet Union against targets in Western Europe or China. Under such circum-
41
tances, a "nuclear free zone" even encompassing all of Europe from the Atlantic to
he Urals would have little relevance for the principal security problem facing Western
~urope from Soviet counterforce-capable systems.
5. A good arms control agreement should be based upon the limitation of what is
:ignificant and the verifiability of what is controlled. This means that there should be
1 coincidence between what is significant and what is controlled and that the Soviet
Jnion should not be able to violate the provisions of an agreement in ways that the
West could not detect by the means available either within or outside an arms control
:igreement. In the final analysis the verifiability of an arms control agreement
represents a judgment of the quality of the national intelligence community. For this
purpose, the United States has relied upon national technical means of verification,
the limits of which may have been reached. Such means have been most suitable to
verification of arms control provisions related to the quantity of objects such as silos
or other fixed installations. Qualitative improvements in weapons, including the
deployment of launchers with a retrofire capability; the increasing number of
warheads deployable on a missile; the greater accuracy and variable range of such
systems; and the emphasis upon mobile launchers, have introduced verification
problems that, given the technological characteristics of weapons systems in the
1980's, will pose problems which, taken together, are of unprecedented difficulty for
arms control. There is a further problem in that verification by national technical
means is less efficient if its object is a weapon already deployed rather than a system
still in its conceptual or R&D phase. But if verification by national technical means
cannot be utilized until the deployment phase, certain states, especially closed
societies, where armaments are not subjected, as in the West, to continuous and
systematic public scrutiny, will retain the potential for breakout from agreed limita-
tions on presently deployed systems either through the clandestine production of the
components of such capabilities or by a decision to press the deployment of a new
generation weapons system. Although the testing of such a system would probably
provide an opportunity for detection by national technical means, an adversary would
have gained a potential edge given the lead time of several years (at least a decade in
the United States) from the initiation of research to the deployment phase.
Conclusions
1. Arms control negotiations and agreements do not provide in themselves an
adequate basis for reduction in weapons systems. Instead, they may even coincide
with a substantial increase in armaments by one or more of the parties.
2. Arms control negotiations and agreements do not constitute a substitute for a
national security policy based on adequate defense capabilities. In the absence of the
possession of the means for defense, the incentives for arms control are likely to be
minimal, especially for the party possessing a greater military capability.
3. American arms control policy seeks overall reductions in major categories of
nuclear forces while attempting to increase Soviet incentives for such reductions by
undertaking necessary defense modernization programs.
* *
*
42
l DISCUSSION
Chairman: Andrew Knight
The remark by an International speaker that there was "no alternative to arms
control"-at least no attractive one-found univ.ersal acceptance among Bilderberg
participants. But the central question, "What can arms control achieve?", elicited a
diversity of views, which did not divide readily into U.S. and European camps, as in
the -preceding session. Divergences on this subject cut across national boundaries and
groups of nations.
The purpose of arms control negotiations. An American speaker, agreeing with the
current U.S. administration, stressed that arms control should curtail the growth of
nuclear weapons and reduce existing stockpiles. This was the dual aim of the INF
negotiations, the zero-option proposal, and the START talks. Prior agreements,
including SALT II, had not done this. They had not caused the Soviet Union to
abandon or curtail any weapons system. Arms control should seek to change Soviet
military doctrine which, in the words of the German author, was "geared to
superiority, to deterrence, but, if this failed, to military victory."
We did not enter arms control negotiations as a favor to the other side or to simply
avert the danger of nuclear war (a remote danger in the present decade), said an
International speaker. We negotiated because, if we were locked in an arms competi-
tion, it made sense to try at least to achieve levels on which we could plan. ~nd we
negotiated to show our people that we were willing to regulate the competition-
which was essential to retain popular support for the nuclear deterrent strategy.
Arms control, in another International participant's view, was required to establish
a world order with less hostility and more stability. Achievement of arms control
measures that put ceilings on types of weapons and numbers of warheads injected a
degree of predictability into military planning. With predictability came manageabil-
ity, and with manageability came stability.
U.S. arms control policy under the Reagan Administration. The American author
said that opposition in the U.S. to SALT II had arisen because of perceived gaps
favoring the Soviet Union in strategic forces. The Reagan Administration was not
prepared to _codify these gaps, although it had abided by the terms of the unratified
treaty. --
Arms control, with emphasis on arms reduction, was a central element of U.S.
foreign policy. It was linked to an effective defense and national security policy. The
objective of U.S. policy was to reduce the capability of the Soviets to threaten credibly
to launch a nuclear attack against the U.S. and its allies-a problem which had grown
as the result of the large number of counterforce-capable weapons deployed by the
Russians in the prior decade.
U.S. arms control policy insisted that Soviet systems targeted against Western
Europe and those targeted against the U.S. were not separable. Reductions at one
level which left the other unchanged were not acceptable. START called for the
reduction to 5,000 of the number of warheads deployed on no more than 850 sea or
land launchers.
U.S. policy also stressed that, parallel with negotiations, defense modernization
programs should be carried out. START should not be viewed as a substitute for
strategic force modernization. We must use arms control to address major security
problems-the Soviet counterforce weapons targeted against us. If arms control could
not address this issue, it had to be seen as peripheral to our military securitv ·_.:eds.
The zero option. This proposal had political utility as well as military liabilities.
Most viewed it as a valid U.S. effort to respond to European pressures and to build
43
;ome kind of consensus for the NATO two"track decision. It made political sense as a
means of marshalling public opinion. It was also, in the view of a Briton, a suitable
response to the Soviet freeze proposal. (We should not be too concerned, as neither
proposal was likely to get very far anyway, he felt.)
Many participants saw the zero option proposal as militarily unwise. It was an
outgrowth of NATO's lack of clear-cut concepts of what it could and could not do
without. Adoption of the zero option would deprive the alliance of the opportunity to
introduce new systems that made strategic and military sense and would lock it into a
highly vulnerable theatre nuclear posture.
An American warned that the zero option would amount to a unilateral nuclear
moratorium. It had been embraced both by those who wanted to deploy weapons and
by those who wanted to stop deploying; we could not have it both ways. There was a
danger that the zero option proposal would lead the Soviets to prolong and complicate
the INF negotiations and that meanwhile the West would not proceed with deploy-
ment of the long-range TNF's as mandated in the 1979 decision. There was also the
danger that the Russians might accept fl. version of the zero option postulating zero for
the U.S. and a Soviet balance with France and Britain; this would lead to the
decoupling of the defense of Western Europe from U.S. strategic forces.
Some participants doubted that the zero option proposal would result in such a
decoupling. They saw it enhancing European security through the removal of Soviet
SS-20's. And the Russians could not drag out the INF negotiations indefinitely
because they would come up against the December 1983 deadline for NATO
deployment of long-range TNF's.
There was considerable concern that that deadline might be allowed to slip by. A
German speaker, disputing a countryman's view that deployment of Cruise and
Pershing II missiles would have a destabilizing effect on the START talks, said NATO
should be prepared to do what is militarily necessary. An International participant
agreed, saying that it was important for the Soviets to see NATO united and
determined to go ahead and implement the 1979 decision to deploy unless there had
been a breakthrough at the negotiating table. Arms reduction could not be accom-
plished without the necessary incentive, which, for the Soviet Union, was a credible
Western defense program.
Conventional forces and no first use. In an International participant's opinion,
NATO's renunciation of the first use of nuclear weapons would reduce the deterrent
value of its nuclear forces. Clearly the Soviets were concerned that NATO might use
nuclear weapons first, so they had a strong interest in making that an unlikely
eventuality. It was the uncertainty that provided the deterrent.
A precondition for the change in NATO doctrine that the renunciation of first use
would imply was a significant strengthening of conventional forces. Did the political
will exist in Europe for such a build up? Were European publics and parliaments
willing to make the kind of sacrifices necessary for an adequate conventional defense
if the trade-off was to remove the nuclear issue from the international debate?
Many participants suggested the answer was "no." Where was the money to come
from? How could European governments, with their budgets already stretched,
commit the necessary funds to support a conventional force build-up in these difficult
economic times? We were deluding ourselves if we thought the money would be
available. And the prospect for a greater American contribution to conventional
forces in Europe was nil. The sensitive subject of burden-sharing, warned an
American, was never very far beneath the surface of foreign policy debate in the U.S.
A Norwegian worried that NATO might commit itself to renouncing first use on the
assumption that conventional forces would be increased, only to find that it could not
do so because its people were not willing to pay. This could lead to a situation where
44
i
!
we would not defend ourselves with nuclear weapons and could not defend ourselve
with conventional weapons.
A German agreed that raising conventional force levels to meet Soviet superiorit·
was a questionable proposition in the current economic climate. But there was anothe.
approach: to start serious negotiation on a lower conventional balance. In any event
he argued, the state of NATO's conventional defense was not really so bad. Wes
Germany, for example, had systematically increased its ability to counter a Sovie
c071Ventional attack by developing anti-tank weapons of the sort so successfully usec
by the Israeli army against Soviet-made Syrian tanks. Thus the Soviets were assurec
"no easy walk to the Rhine."
But a majority of views held that NATO had neglected its conventional defenses
An International speaker warned that because we had not fulfilled our commitment tc
conventional forces, we had "built ourselves a short war" in which we would have tc
decide very early on whether or not to escalate to nuclear weapons. Our only available
strategy was the "delayed tripwire." We had two alternatives: withdraw or escalate
We needed to raise the nuclear threshold by building up our conventional capability tc
the point where we were confident we would not have to resort to theatre nucleru
weapons.
Another German speaker supported this argument, saying that there was nc
alternative to the doctrine of flexible response. What was needed was a change ir
Europe's military posture, not its doctrine. It was necessary to restore the military
balance; because of Warsaw Pact superiority, the doctrine of flexible response was in
doubt. What we really had was a hidden strategy of massive nuclear retaliation. We
had neglected our conventional defenses at a time of strategic parity with the Warsaw
Pact and, worse, superiority of Warsaw Pact tactical nuclear forces. The result was a
severely lowered nuclear threshold; we would have to use nuclear weapons in a very
early stage of a conflict. While it would be difficult-and perhaps undesirable, from
the point of view of excessive militarization of our societies-to seek full conventional
parity, we should acquire modern weapons which clearly favored the defender-
weapons which gave us the ability to fight not only the first but also the second
echelon enemy forces by purely conventional means.
Such a scenario was viewed with skepticism by an Italian. From a strategic point of
view, he argHed, conventional forces were not enough to maintain NATO's forward
defense without transforming West Germany into a virtual battlefield: We would need
to station eight to ten additional divisions there.
The need for public support. There was a danger that NATO's nuclear doctrine
could be undermined by the loss of public support for it. Management of public
opinion presented a serious challenge to the alliance and its political leadership.
A Norwegian participant feared that the Soviet Union would get the impression that
there would be no new deployment of nuclear weapons in the West because of the
force of public opinion against it. The Soviets, therefore, would not feel compelled to
make the necessary concessions in negotiations. They could be expected to step up
their efforts to influence Western public opinion in this respect. The leaders of the
alliance countries had to explain forcefully to their people that the only way to achieve
meaningful arms reductions was to stand firm and exert maximum pressure on the
Soviets to reduce their nuclear forces.
Two participants, an American and a Dutchman, expressed concern that NATO's
strategy of nuclear deterrence, with its implication of limited nuclear war, was
becoming very hard for the public to accept. It was true, said the American, that the
increased horror of war made it less likely, but there was a danger that that feeling
could lead to total abdication. NATO's strategy involved a fundamental paradox,
observed the Dutch speaker. In order for it to functiv._ one had to imagine the
45
unimaginable. It was a strategy which evoked its own opposition, and opposition that
was necessary to keep the deterrent principle alive. But he feared we were reaching the
point where public opinion would no longer accept this strategy.
With respect to strengthening conventional forces, a British participant felt that
here, too, the public held the key. Europeans felt great anxiety about the possibility of
a battlefield nuclear exchange on the continent. We needed to link that fear to the
build-up of conventional forces, and to devote some attention to the creation of a
battlefield nuclear-free zone. This could help generate the public support for
strengthening conventional forces. A Norwegian agreed that the fear of a nuclear
exchange in general might overcome popular reluctance to pay for conventional
weapons.
We faced a grave situation if leaders failed to convince their publics of the need to
strengthen conventional forces and to deploy long-range TNF's by the end of 1983 if
negotiations had not been fruitful; we would, warned an American, be defenseless. A
German urged that political leaders be courageous enough to go ahead with deploy-
ment regardless of public opinion. This had been done in the Federal Republic twice
before: first when Adenauer decided to re-arm, and later when U.S. nuclear weapons
were introduced on German soil. Both actions were taken in the face of widespread
public opposition.
A major difficulty in rallying public support in Europe was NATO's reliance on
American nuclear weapons controlled by Americans. Was it easier to prevent war with
these weapons in Europe or without them? It might be better if the European nations
had some autonomy in their defense, as did the French. An International speaker
regretted that American missile installations in Europe did not have double keys.
Another obstacle in influencing public opinion, a Norwegian pointed out, was that
our leaders too often seemed unsure of what they needed to convey to the public. The
U.S. was especially suspect in this regard, with evaluations of the military balance
changing from one administration to the next. European policy was at least more
consistent. We needed greater continuity of American policy if we were to be
convincing to our publics.
Obstacles to negotiating effective arms control measures. Did NATO have a clear
idea of what it was trying to achieve in arms control negotiations? Some speakers felt
it did not. "Are we negotiating so that we can deploy weapons, or deploying weapons
so that we can negotiate?" asked an American. We were plagued by changing
fashions in arms control. Different leaders had different ideas about where the real
priorities lay. The problem with stressing reduction, according to an International
participant, was that we lacked a sense of how much was enough and what we could
do without. We should not expect too much of reduction when regulation was still the
best we could hope for. Until we figured out what our requirements really were, we
would have a hard time agreeing on reductions.
An American pointed out that arms control negotiations could arouse expectations
that could not always be satisfied. NATO's political handling of the INF negotiations
had given the public the idea that there was an alternative, that arms control could
obviate the program altogether. The result, an International speaker observed, was
that the onus was now on the West to show that it had done everything possible to
negotiate. It was going to be difficult to demonstrate before the end of 1983 that
negotiations had failed because of Soviet intransigence.
In the future, an American argued, any arms control policy put forth should be
accompanied by an associated military policy. We tended too often to adopt policies
as the result of domestic pressure on governments to get results, regardless of whether
they served the interests of Western security. The practical consequence of all the
emphasis on reduction could be to destroy any sense that we were willing to initiate
46
~
nuclear war. We had created in NATO a defense based on nuclear strategy, but we
had a populace with growing nuclear pacifism, arms control proposals that negated
our declared strategy, and no buildup of the forces that our arms control policies
implied. Sooner or later we had to put before the public the implications of what we
were doing. And sooner or later we would have to arrive at a political settlement with
the Soviet Union, to define what it was we meant by a peaceful world.
47
Ill. THE MIDDLE EAST: ISSUES AT STAKE
* * * *
"The Reagan Administration in the Middle East: Issues at Stake"
Working Paper Prepared by The Honorable Hermann Frederick Eilts
University Professor of International Relations, Boston University
Introduction. When assuming office in January 1981, the Reagan Administration
inherited a Middle East potpourri: (a) an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, but with final
Israeli withdrawal from Sinai still 16 months away; (b) West Bank/Gaza autonomy
talks that had languished for the previous two years; (c) a Soviet military invasion of
Afghanistan, whose seriousness the previous administration had underscored by
issuing the vaguely worded "Carter Doctrine" declaring the Persian/Arabian Gulf a
"vital" American interest to be defended with force should a "foreign" (read Soviet)
attempt be made to install itself militarily in that region; (d) a resolved hostage
problem with Iran, but continued seriously disrupted relations with the Islamic
Republican Government of that country; (e) an Iraqi-Iranian war, the outcome of
which remained uncertain, but which could adversely affect political stability in the
Gulf region; (f) disruptive efforts by Arab rejectionist states, especially Libya and
Syria, directed against the Camp David prescribed peace process; (g) a Lebanon
largely under Syrian military occupation and with serious confessional strife; and (h) a
growing petroleum supply glut with reduced American dependence on Middle East oil
imports and a breaking price situation. It was from this "mix," coupled with the new
president's overriding concern about the domestic economic situation in the United
States, that Middle East policy has been devised.
The Soviet Threat. Despite serious difficulties encountered by Soviet troops in
Afghanistan, the Reagan Administration considers the putative Soviet threat to the
Persian/Arabian Gulf to constitute the principal danger to the area. Secretary
Weinberger has warned that, should the Soviets succeed in Afghanistan, they may be
expected to follow the "historic routes" through Pakistan and Iran in the direction of
their long cherished objective, a position on the Gulf. This threat to the Gulf has by
all means to be contained.
Doing so makes it imperative to persuade Israel and moderate Arab states to
subordinate unresolved aspects of the Arab-Israeli dispute to the overriding need to
achieve "strategic consensus" among those states in order more effectively to face the
Soviet threat. Regrettably, whatever limited similarity of view exists between Israel
and moderate Arab states about Soviet objectives in the Middle East is insufficient to
cause the Arabs to accede to the American belief that Arab-Israeli issues be
subordinated. Rather, they continue to insist that a solution to the Arab-Israeli
problem, and especially its Palestinian component, is of greater importance than
meeting a somewhat amorphous Soviet threat. In the face of this position, the Reagan
Administration has found it necessary to lower its goals and, instead, to limit itself in
the first instance to seeking facilities for its own military forces in the area.
United States Military Facilities. The "Carter Doctrine" was announced in January
1980 with little military capability to back it. A Rapid Deployment Force for possible
use in the Middle East had first to be forged in order to make that policy
pronouncement credible. As part of its overall focus on strengthening American
defense, the Reagan Administration has given high priority .to making the RDF a
viable instrument.
48
.~
t
•f
'
~
If a Soviet threat to the Middle East is to be effectively met, American military
facilities in the area are needed, preferably in and in any case in close proximity to the
Gulf. Only with the existence of military bases or facilities in the Middle East can the
United States, in the event of need, rapidly and effectively project its armed forces
into the area in order to assist friends. Military facilities have therefore been sought in
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Oman. Results have been limited as these states continue to
demonstrate keen political sensitivity to the existence of American military facilities
on their soil.
An agreement for stockpiling American military equipment and for the use of
certain Omani military facilities for American forces has been concluded, along with
similar agreements for Somalia and Kenya. Egypt, while offering military facilities for
American use on an ad hoc, temporary basis, has thus far been unwilling to provide
permanent military facilities. It has nevertheless indicated a willingness to make
available air and port facilities at Ras Banas. Saudi Arabia, which would be ideally
suited for forward military facilities, continues to refuse to grant these.
Largely because of a threatened Soviet veto over redeployment of UNEF, after the
conclusion of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, some 2,000 American troops will now
participate in a multinational peacekeeping force in Sinai. They will join troops from
several European and Third World states to verify continued fulfillment by both
Egypt and Israel of their peace obligations. Assigned American units, and their use of
Israeli-constructed, Egyptian-owned facilities, are not to be used for military opera-
tions in the area unconnected with peacekeeping. The United States is currently
providing Egypt with massive military assistance and hopes that this will eventually
persuade the government of Egypt to agree to closer military cooperation, including
more permanent access to Egyptian facilities. The RDF has already conducted
successful maneuvers in the Western desert in conjunction with Egyptian forces.
Saudi Arabia. The Reagan Administration wishes to build upon the long standing
United States association with Saudi Arabia in the political and military spheres. In an
effort to bolster Saudi security in the face of a perceived threat from the Islamic
Republic of Iran, it has, at Saudi request, deployed to Riyadh four USAF AWACs to
fly surveillance-..missions in the Gulf and adjacent areas. While no formal, Congres-
sionally approved American security commitment to Saudi Arabia exists, the long
time presence of several American military missions, designed to train the Saudi
military and National Guard and to undertake certain military engineering programs,
constitutes a kind of "plate glass" window lending some credence to repeated
assurances of United States determination to assist Saudi Arabia if attacked. More-
over, in order to prevent any miscalculations by unfriendly elements, President
Reagan has publicly stated that the United States will not permit a replication of
Iranian developments to take place in Saudi Arabia. The United States is thus
committed not only to the territorial integrity and political independence of Saudi
Arabia, but also to the preservation of the House of Saud.
As further evidence of its interest in Saudi Arabia's defense, the Reagan Adminis-
tration has continued the sale of American military equipment to that country. Most
prominent in this regard is the approved sale of five AWACs to Saudi Arabia to be
delivered in 1985. Secretary Weinberger, during a visit to Saudi Arabia in February
1982, also concluded a military cooperation agreement with that country, although
the precise meaning of that agreement remains obscure. American efforts to obtain
greater Saudi cooperation in the military sphere remain bedeviled by unresolved Arab-
Israeli Issues (especially the Palestinian problem), by Saudi opposition to the Carter-
brokered Camp David agreements, and by Saudi Arabia's determination to support
Arab objectives. The Fahd peace plan was cautiously welcomed by the Reagan
49
Administration not as a substitute for the Camp David prescribed process, but
because it seemed to suggest a wider Arab interest in moving toward peace. The
Administration is awaiting whether art Arab summit can be persuaded by the Saudis
to endorse it before considering how it might fit into the ongoing Middle East peace
process.
The Arab-Israeli Problem. Important though it is, the Arab-Israeli problem should,
in the eyes of the Reagan Administration, be subordinated to the Soviet threat. The
Camp David agreements, it believes, represent the only viable way to proceed toward
peace. The conclusion of an Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty, while only a partial peace,
does to a considerable extent defuse the danger of resumption of major, area-wide
Arab-Israeli hostilities. As a longer term objective, the Reagan Administration wants
a comprehensive Middle East peace, but believes that the time is not right for active
pursuit of such an objective. Instead, in the immediate future, two elements of the
Arab-Israeli problem need be addressed: first, Egypt and Israel should be encouraged
to proceed with full implementation of their peace treaty of March 1979; second,
through the timely dispatch to the Middle East area of former Under-Secretary Philip
Habib, the precarious ceasefire in Lebanon between Syria and the Palestinians, on the
one hand, and Israel on the other, needs at all costs to be preserved. As a corollary, in
order to hamstring Libyan capability to disrupt the peace process through terrorism
and adventurism in Chad and the Sudan, the Reagan Administration also is adopting
a hard line toward the Qaddafi regime, including urging American oil companies to
leave Libya and seeking to impose an oil boycott on that country.
As the date for Israeli military withdrawal from Sinai approaches, the Reagan
Administration is keenly aware of the security misgivings that must inevitably arise in
Israeli society. It has sought to reassure Israel of continued American support by
providing additional sophisticateL military equipment to Israel and by taking the
unusual step of concluding an agret:nent for strategic cooperation with Israel. To its
regret, the Administration has encountered serious difficulties in restraining Israel
from resorting to unilateral military actions. Israeli actions in bombing an Iraqi
nuclear facility and PLO headquarters in Beirut with an attendant heavy loss of life
among innocent civilians, as ·well as extending Israeli law to Golan, have caused
embarrassment for the United States in its efforts to pursue an even-handed policy in
the Middle East. If American credibility in the Middle East and elsewhere is to be
maintained, it has had to react in a manner disapproving of these Israeli actions, yet
without permanently impairing ties with Israel. Thus, it voted for a UN resolution
condemning Israel for the attack on the Iraqi nuclear facility, suspended briefly the
delivery of certain sophisticated military equipment and, in the wake of the Golan
action, suspended implementation of the strategic cooperation agreement. Shortly
afterwards, however, it maneuvered in the UN to prevent a resolution which would
have re.quired mandatory sanctions against Israel for the latter's Golan action. The
Reagan Administration, like everyone else, encounters difficulty in dealing with a
prickly and unpredictable individual such as Prime Minister Begin, although its
commitment to the security and well-being of Israel is irrevocable.
West Bank/Gaza Autonomy. The Camp David prescribed West Bank/Gaza auton-
omy negotiations, aimed at creating a self-governing body for the Palestinians in
those regions, do not in the eyes of the Reagan Administration have any urgency
about them. Having already languished for over two years, largely due to sharp
Egyptian-Israeli differences over powers and responsibilities of the proposed self-
governing body, the Administration feels it has no alternative but to place them on a
back burner. To the extent that Egyptian and Israeli negotiators, after the late
50
President Sadat's visit to Washington in August 1981, were prepared to resume
pertinent discussions, the United States could simply play a low key, watching role.
The assassination of Sadat, whom the Reagan Administration had hoped could
eventually be persuaded to agree to a compromise between divergent Egyptian and
Israeli positions, was a blow to the Administration. His successor, Hosni Mubarak, is
viewed by Secretary Haig as more rigid in outlook and more desirous of improving
Egypt's relations with Arab states rather than developing a closer Egyptian-Israeli
ass9ciation.
.- 'In the hope of obtaining some kind of West Bank/Gaza autonomy agreement prior
to April 25, 1982, Secretary Haig in January of this year toyed with the idea of
shuttling between Egypt and Israel, but was required to relinquish any such design in
the face of the unwillingness of either side to make concessions on unresolved
autonomy issues. Nevertheless, in order to facilitate its continued interest in the
matter, a Haig aide, Rich'ard Fairbanks, has been designated to help the parties reach
agreement on autonomy issues. Granted, this downgrades the status that West Bank/
Gaza autonomy talks had under the previous administration, but it is consistent with
the current objective of the Reagan Administration to try to achieve a series of interim
agreements.
The PLO. The Reagan Administration is mindful of sharp Israeli opposition to the
PLO and has itself condemned PLO terrorist activities. Nevertheless, Secretary Haig
has publicly indicated a stance toward the PLO similar to that of the previous
administration. Should the PLO be willing publicly to recognize UN Resolution 242 as
the basis for peace negotiations and explicitly Israel's right to exist, the United ~tates
would be prepared to enter into a dialogue with the PLO. The Reagan Administration
is nonetheless content, at least for the time being, to have the PLO leadership reject
such terms.
The Iraqi-Iranian War. The Reagan Administration lacks the capability to play any
mediatory role in the Iraqi-Iranian conflict. Given the hostility of both Iraq and Iran
to United States interests in the Gulf and in the Middle East, it is content to see that
war played out to an inconclusive result.
Concerned about a Soviet threat to Iran once Ayatollah Khomeini dies, yet without
a physical _Qresence in Iran, the Reagan Administration has sought to assist the
disparate Iranian exile groups to reconcile their differences in order to present a united
front in the anticipated struggle for a successor in Iran when it materializes. Given the
serious differences between such Iranian emigre elements, this has been an extraordi-
narily difficult task.
European Initiatives. While recognizing that the European states have an interest in
Middle East peace, and the positive intentions behind a European initiative, the
Reagan Administration is dubious about any such initiative. It is skeptical that any
European initiative will further the Middle East peace process. Aware of Israeli
sensitivities, it also questions the avowed European interest in the creation of a
Palestinian state, does not believe that the Europeans individually or collectively have
any appreciable influence upon either Israel or the Arab states, and is concerned that
European efforts to give status to the PLO will only create a hardening of Israeli
positions and will thereby complicate still more the already difficult Middle East peace
process.
Some Questions. The Reagan Administration's Middle East policy raises a number
of questions, viz:
51
(1) Does it in fact have a strategy for the Middle East or is it simply devising ad
~oc, Band-Aid type solutions to Middle East issues?
(2) Assuming that the Reagan Administration has a coherent Middle East stragegy,
:iespite the discordant statements of Secretaries Haig and Weinberger, is it giving
:i.dequately high priority to Middle East issues in contrast to domestic policy and other
areas of foreign policy concerns?
(3) Is the Reagan Administration's apparent obsession with a putative Soviet
military threat to the Persian Gulf credible to the governments of the area and to
America's European and Japanese allies? If not, what is needed to make it so? Or is
the whole idea simply a meaningless delusion which distracts attention from the real
problems of the area?
(4) Although Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Israel share concerns over possible Soviet
activities in the Middle East, is the Haig concept of a "strategic consensus" feasible in
the absence of significant steps to resolve area-wide political problems?
(5) Is the Reagan Administration's relative indifference to Palestinian issues war-
ranted? Is the Palestinian problem indeed central to any comprehensive Middle East
peace? Related to this, is it possible for the United States to obtain meaningful
military cooperation from friendly Arab states if some real progress is not made on
the Palestinian issue? Should the Reagan Administration more actively seek dialogue
with the Palestine Liberation Organization in the context of its avowed desire to move
toward a comprehensive peace?
(6) After April 25, 1982, will the Camp David peace framework still be a viable way
to proceed? Or are the Europeans and friendly and unfriendly Arabs correct when
they insist it is for all practical purposes dead, especially with respect to resolving the
Palestinian issues, and that some other, more promising forum needs be sought? If so,
are there alternative approaches to move toward a comprehensive peace?
(7) Is the current American obsession with obtaining permanent military facilities
in Egypt, Saudi Arabia and elsewhere in the Middle East likely to destabilize moderate
Arab regimes?
(8) Is the United States wise in placing so many of its eggs in the Egyptian, Israeli
and Saudi Arabian baskets? Are there alternatives to such an approach?
(9) Should the Reagan Administration attempt to do more at this point in time in
order to improve relations with Iran and to bolster Iran's capability to meet likely
Soviet pressure in the wake of Khomeini's expected demise? If so, what can it do
without alienating Saudi Arabia and other friendly Arab states?
(10) Are American actions against Qaddafi likely to weaken him or will they rally
Libyan and Arab support behind him?
* *
*
Working Paper Prepared by Professor Elie Kedourie
London School of Economics
It is generally, not to say universally, believed that the Arab-Israeli conflict is the
most important issue at stake in the Middle East today. It is certainly so for Israel and
for some, at any rate, of the states in the region. Whether it is so for outside powers is
another question. But what is beyond doubt is that this particular issue caused a great
deal of tension in European-American relations during the October 1973 war and its
aftermath. It continues to do so today.
52
Peace between Israel and the Arabs is obviously desirable for its own sake. It is also
desirable from a Western point of view in that it would deprive the Soviet Union of a
lever and a weapon, and remove a cause of anti-Western feeling in the Arab world. So
much is agreed on both sides of the Atlantic. Divergence, however, becomes apparent
regarding the manner in which settlement of the conflict is to be tackled.
The divergence appears clearly in the contrast between the principles underlying the
Israeli-Egyptian Peace Treaty of March 1979 and the document entitled, "The
Framework for Peace in the Middle East" which Begin and Sadat signed at Camp
David the following September, on the one hand, and the Venice Declaration issued
by the EEC heads of state in June 1980, on the other. Both the Treaty and "The
Framework" involved the U.S. as a go-between, as in an important sense a guarantor
of the peace between Egypt and Israel which the Treaty was to establish, and as a
party to the negotiations about the autonomy of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
which "The Framework" envisaged. These documents did not mean that Egypt was
abandoning its concern for a solution of the Palestine problem. What they do signify,
however, is that Egypt was removing itself from the Arab coalition which, for over 30
years, had maintained belligerency against Israel. With Egypt removed from this
coalition, the risk of a general Arab-Israeli war, with all its dangers of escalation and
superpower confrontations, would become small and remote. From a U.S., and more
generally Western, point of view, this was a great boon. If this analysis was correct,
then it followed that both Egypt and Israel should be encouraged, should be offered,
the greatest possible encouragement to persevere in the course which President Sadat's
visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 had inaugurated, and the greatest possible
discouragement to abandon this path.
The Venice Declaration clearly showed that the EEC powers clearly dissent in great
measure from this anr'.ysis. These powers clearly believe that the Palestine problem is
pivotal, that tranqL.Jity would not be restored to the Middle East until the Palesti-
nians-and the PLO-are brought into the negotiation and joined to the other parties
with whom Israel would have to deal. In contrast to what might be called the Camp
David approach, which would tackle the conflict in Palestine indirectly, through
negotiation between Isr~ and Egypt with U.S. assistance, the EEC approach would
insist on a direct and comprehensive negotiation in which all the different parties
would be represented. The difficulties and risks of such a strategy are not negligible.
In the first place the very number of the parties involved in such a negotiation would
make for its probable failure. One important reason why the Palestine conflict
erupted into a general Arab-Israeli war in 1948, and thereafter proved rebellious to a
settlement, was precisely the large number of parties involved. Each of these parties,
on the Arab side, had their own particular concerns and interests which were not
easily reconcilable with one another. The Palestine conflict was the cockpit where the
ambitions and enmities of various Arab countries confronted one another. To seek a
comprehensive negotiation might excite anew fears and ambitions perhaps better left
dormant. Tension not only between Israel and its neighbors might rise, but also
tensions between those neighbors themselves. The very desire to achieve peace might
then itself lead to an outbreak of hostilities. Saudi Arabia, which is now much more
prominent in general Arab affairs than it was in the past, might find itself involved.
Involvement might lead to a set-back or discomfiture, with unpredictable conse-
quences for the stability of the regime.
A comprehensive negotiation might also entail introducing the Soviet Union into
the negotiation, recognizing its locus standi, and perhaps also making it, jointly with
the United States, the guarantor of a settlement. The consequences of such a
development none can foresee, but they are unlikely to be favorable to Western
interests.
53
Is there then a case for treating the Arab-Israeli conflict with benign neglect?
Neither Europeans nor Americans believe that this is a real option. The Americans
have been very active in mediating. They have tried to assist the autonomy negotia-
tions within the framework of Camp David, and they may even see attractions in the
Venice Declaration approach. They have also interposed themselves in disputes
between Syria and Israel, and have exerted influence, and brought pressure to bear in
Jerusalem and Riyadh. These initiatives are not without their cost, and the question
must always arise whether the price paid in further entanglements and more compli-
cated commitments is worth paying, whether a sphinx-like or sibylline stance would
not be more appropriate to the status of a super-power. If such a status had reality
and meaning, it is the local, the regional powers who ought to be seeking the favours
of Washington, and to be concerned at its disfavor, not the other way round. But this
of course requires a far-reaching change of style in U.S. foreign policy, and a re-
assessment of political and military priorities.
A reassessment is indeed necessary. For assume that the Arab-Israeli conflict is
settled either through a compromise peace, or through Israeli capitulation, where
would this leave Western interests? The answer has to be that such a settlement will
have only marginal, and perhaps negligible, effects. There are many actual or
potential areas of disagreement and conflict among Arab states, which may become
even more acute when the Arab-Israeli conflict is settled; conflict between Syria and
Iraq; between those who have, and those who do not have, oil; conflict within states
ruled by narrowly-based governments devoid of legitimacy-conflict which is likely to
have international repercussions; conflict about control or influence over a new
Palestinian state between Syria and Jordan, and in which the Soviet Union may find it
easy to intervene; conflict between the Popular Democratic Republic of the Yemen
and its neighbors, be they Oman or the Yemen Arab Republic, or Saudi Arabia.
Over and above these problems in the Arab world, there is the overriding problem
posed by the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. When this country was invaded at the
end of 1979, there seemed to be a forceful response on the part of the U.S.
administration. But forceful as it seemed to be, U.S. action did not deter the Soviets
from implanting themselves in Afghanistan. Whatever effectiveness U.S. action might
have had was considerably weakened by the visible reluctance of its European allies to
support a robust stance, and by the openly critical attitude some of them adopted
towards not so much U.S. action-which anyway amounted to very little-as U.S.
rhetoric. It cannot, however, be denied that Afghanistan is much more central to
Western interests than the Arab-Israeli conflict. Afghanistan is for the Soviets a base
and a jumping-ground from which to exert military power and political influence over
Pakistan, and the oil-rich countries of the Arabian Peninsµla. From Afghanistan, too,
subversive activities can be mounted, if need be, to destabilize Pakistan and further to
destabilize Iran. The consequences of Soviet success here on the supply of oil and on
the strategic position in the Indian Ocean would be extremely serious. A prudent
appreciation would have to consider the worst case from a Western point of view.
This worst case envisages Soviet activism in the vicinity of Afghanistan, together with
the existence of a pro-Soviet regime in Teheran. Against such a combination, there is
little, as things stand, that the U.S. and its allies can do. The likely dangers cannot
possibly be averted by arming local friendly powers. The defects of this policy were
clearly seen at the time of Khomeini's triumph in Iran, where the downfall of the Shah
has inflicted a most damaging blow to Western interests.
Another, most important, issue at stake in the Middle East concerns the price of oil.
It is now widely recognized that the successive and exhorbitant rises in the price of oil
since 1973 have been a main contributor to inflation, recession and unemployment in
Europe and the U.S. It is also recognized that if the price of oil remains at this high
54
level, not only will this mean a continuing drain of wealth from the oil consumers to
the producers, but also a continuation of unemployment and recession. The repercus-
sions of this enormous transfer of wealth on the international financial system are also
very serious. The accumulation of large and increasing balances by oil-wealthy states
puts at ris~ the stability of the international financial system, and the solvency of
banking institutions who find themselves in the position of borrowing short (from the
oil producers) and lending long (to Third-World and East European countries).
Together with the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, the OPEC cartel constitutes the
most pressing issue at stake in the Middle East for the Western world. It is clear that
the breaking of the cartel can be brought about either through economic forces or
through political action. To break the cartel through the working of economic forces
imposes a great cost in unemployment and foregone production. It is this which has at
last brought down the price of oil. But this process is very slow in showing results, and
requires a steadfast determination on the part of the oil consumers to pursue in
concert fiscal and economic policies which may prove to be very unpopular. Since the
cartel is composed of governments, it can also be checkmated by bringing to bear
political pressure on the producer states. Political action also requires to be taken in
concert, and to be so used as to reinforce the pressure exerted by the working of the
market. Whether the Western powers are willing or able to agree on, and to pursue,
the necessary policies remains to be seen. The record so far warrants no great
confidence.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
Chairman: Winston Lord
A central cause of transatlantic tension was the divergence in attitudes about how to
tackle settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The author of the British working paper
had asked whether there was not a case of treating that conflict with ''benign
neglect," and whether "a sphinx-like or sibylline stance" was not more appropriate to
the status of a mediating superpower like the U.S. In the discussion, he reiterated the
suggestion that the conflict would eventually have to be resolved by the parties
immediately involved. The main interest of the outside world was to prevent the
outbreak of generalized hostilities in the area-a danger which had been greatly
reduced by Egypt's withdrawal from the Arab coalition. Was time really running out,
he asked, or was that an outworn cliche?
Several participants felt that the time for a peaceful settlement was indeed running
out, and that "benign neglect" would not lead to a workable solution. Nevertheless,
said one American speaker, that was the policy of the present U.S. administration,
which in her view was reactive and disinclined to spend the political capital necessary
to achieve something on the issue of Palestinian autonomy. A compatriot agreed that
there was no evidence of any constructive strategy.
The charge of "benign neglect" was refuted by another American, in light of the
amount of time the U.S. administration had devoted to Middle Eastern problems
during the preceding 16 months. Reviewing the Reagan administration's approach to
dealing with the Middle East, he said that there were no illusions in Washington about
finding a quick comprehensive solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict. It would have to
55
be settled gradually over a long period of time, and its place would no doubt be taken
by a succession of other disputes in that complex area. In addition to dealing with the
Mideast peace process, the U.S. had wanted to pay attention to the security problems
of its friends in the area-with regard not only to the threat of Soviet invasion (which
was probably the least likely) but also of internal insurrection and of the spill-over of
regional problems, such as the Iraqi-Iranian war. The U.S. recognized that people
who were secure were able to take risks for peace, and that peace enhanced security.
The fact that the new government had addressed the Mideast security issue may have
misled people into thinking that it had overlooked the peace process, but in fact both
issues had been addressed simultaneously.
The Camp David accord was being pursued as "the only game in town," and one to
which Israel was firmly committed. Although Camp David was not dead-as some
other participants claimed-it was at its most difficult stage. It had not been easy to
follow an administration which had enjoyed the early benefits of Camp David, and to
be faced with the details of implementation.
The author of the American working paper intervened to point out that one
problem with Camp David was that two totally different kinds of agreement had
flowed from it. One had been intended to serve as a fairly precise framework for
Egyptian-Israeli talks. The other was a vague, amorphous guide to the "half way
house" of autonomy, unaccompanied by any real effort to determine what would
follow. (One could argue that the subject of autonomy should never have been
brought in, but it had been.) Although Camp David might not be dead, the author did
not see how much could be made of it in its present form. Indeed, nothing significant
had happened on the autonomy talks for the past two years. It might be said that they
had been hostage to the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai, but that argument was
gone, and it was necessary now to "put up or shut up." It had been a mistake, the
speaker said, to bring the talks down to the level of a representative of the Secretary
of State instead of maintaining them at a special Presidential level.
We were doing a disservice to the resolution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, an
American argued, by continuously putting the Palestinian issues on page one of the
media. It was just one of countless cases of irredentism around the world, and did not
merit this "media hype" year after year. A Frenchman alluded to "the American
disease" of addressing Middle East problems, not on their merits but on the basis of
the domestic political equation. He feared that this tendency might be spreading to
Europe, with the result that the West would be more hamstrung than ever in dealing
with the Mideast. A Greek participant complained that dogmatic U.S. views about the
Middle East kept the West from coming to grips with the real problems. Successive
American administrations had called for time to imple:\}1ent complex solutions, but
could the years that had elapsed be considered a "short time"? The speaker warned
that Arabs could not cooperate in the long run with an alliance which refused to find a
solution to the central Palestinian issue.
But an American observed that public opinion and political leadership in his
country were rapidly moving away from intellectual support of the Israeli cause
because of the "appalling" way in which it was being represented. Another American,
however, said that in the last analysis the U.S. was bound to come down on the side of
its friends. Surveying the Middle East, he saw a violently anti-American Iran, a
Lebanon wrecked by its internal problems (not by Israel), and a Saudi regime which
bore a large responsibility for current economic dislocations because of the 1973 and
'79 oil price rises. In contrast, Israel was the one state with a reasonably democratic
government and a free labor union movement. The sharing of common values was at
the bottom of American support for Israel, he said.
56
Several participants expressed concern, nonetheless, about the effect of Israel's
current course of conduct. A Greek speaker said that "creeping annexation" was
putting dynamite at the legal basis of the state itself, which depended on a UN
Resolution making it clear that the West bank was not a part of Israel. An American
wondered, too, how the integrity of the Jewish state could be maintained in the face
of thre,e, unacceptable alternatives: (1) to try to continue the occupation, which was
becoming increasingly difficult to maintain after 15 years; (2) to accompany annexa-
tion with a kind of apartheid policy aimed at keeping Palestinians in a second-class
status, which would be unacceptable to the Western world as well as to the Arabs; or
(3) to drive out enough Palestinians to make a manageable situation; but another such
Palestinian Diaspora would be more than the Arab world could take. The increased
settlements amounted to a de facto annexation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
but the demographics of that meant that a third of the population of Israel would
soon be Arab. The higher Arab birth rate would take that to 50 per cent, which would
undermine the whole concept of the state of Israel. All this presented a dangerous
prospect, but the speaker saw no way of reversing it so long as the Reagan
administration persevered with the Camp David process-which he said meant doing
nothing at all.
An International participant hoped that we were really less dismissive of Camp
David than the discussion suggested. It would be particularly disastrous to throw
away the second half of the accord, dealing with Palestinian autonomy, as there
appeared no other way to get at that issue. He went on to say that, unless it soon
appeared that the U.S. was ready to assert new leadership, the Europeans would be
likely to take an initiative that the Americans would not like.
French, Italian and American speakers advocated a more important role in the
Middle East peace process for the Europeans, who could not remain spectators in a
conflict which threatened world stability. One Frenchman cited the importance of
President Mitterrand's recent visit to Jerusalem, which had shown that France, like
other states, was now able to talk to both sides. This development was of greater
significance than the Venice Declaration, which so far had produced few results. A
compatriot regretted, though, that the Europeans could not yet speak with one voice
as they were alfso dependent on Mideast oil. He called for a conference of the U.S.
and its major European partners in view of their common vulnerability to develop-
ments in the Gulf. In the political world, as in the business world, he said,
commitments had to change with circumstances.
Closer European-American collaboration was also advocated by an American who
said that we had to reach a consensus about how to approach the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). Whichever approach was the best, we could not productively
pursue two at once. The U.S. might be able to exercise a helpful influence in finding
an interim solution, but until a negotiating position had been stated, the autonomy
talks could not move ahead.
In response to British questions, the author of the American working paper said
that autonomy talks would not make progress without Palestinian participation. That
had been the chronic trouble with the talks. President Sadat had not approved, but he
had been persuaded by the U.S., under Israeli pressure, to go along. Moreover, there
seemed to be no likely alternative to the PLO as the representative of the Palestinians.
Over the years, the U.S., Israel and Egypt had tried unsuccessfully to find other
spokesmen of sufficient stature. At a minimum, one would need a PLO "green light"
to ensure the participation of the Palestinians in the West Bank.
This led one logically, even if reluctantly, to the conclusion that we ought to be
prepared to talk to the PLO. There was a moderate element in the PLO leadership,
including Yasir Arafat, who were at least willing to try to discipline the more radical
57
elements. For example, during preparations in 1977 for a possible reconvening of the
Geneva Conference, Arafat had yielded to Saudi and Egyptian urging and had
approved a formulation which accepted UN Resolution 242, recognizing Israel's right
to exist (although he had expressed reservations about the adequacy of the
Resolution's language concerning refugees). But Arafat had been overruled by the
PLO executive committee by a vote of 12-4, at Syria's behest. This raised the question
whether the moderates were capable of controlling the left wing. While one could not
expect Israel to engage in a dialogue with the PLO until it had accepted 242, the U.S.
might be able to talk with the organization to test some of these elements.
The American author went on to describe an eventual Palestinian state as he
envisaged it. It would be a narrow West Bank-Gaza state, possibly with a connection
between the two. It would be demilitarized and contractually monitored by its two
neighbors, Israel and Jordan, who would have an interest in its remaining well
disciplined. Economic assistance would have to come from.other Arab states, and it
would not be a Soviet bastion. Nor would it be a place to which all the Diaspora
Palestinians could return-although the concept of a flag and passport would
facilitate the task of settling elsewhere for those who could not return. In short, "it
would not be a serious danger to anybody." Having said all that, the speaker had to
recognize that the fractured nature of the Palestinians offered no guarantee of how
they would handle their autonomy once they got it. But this ought to be tested.
An American participant emphasized that the U.S. commitment not to meet with
the PLO was not conditioned on Israel's conduct or good faith behavior in fulfilling
the Camp David agreements, but was based on the PLO's rejection of Resolution 242.
But there were many strands to U.S.-Israeli relations, and it was a mistake to suppose
that the behavior of Prime Minister Begin, as head of a sovereign government,
depended in any significant way on U.S. non-recognition of the PLO.
Speakers from Belgium, Switzerland and the U.S. argued that it was important to
give some encouragement to moderates such as Arafat, even if the degree of his
control over the PLO were uncertain. Diplomatic history showed the necessity of
talking with one's adversaries-even extremists-and Algeria and Rhodesia were
recent cases. The U.S. should decide on its own whether in all the circumstances talks
with the PLO were warranted, and not simply accede unconditionally and eternally to
Israel's wishes. An Austrian pointed out that pressure from PLO extremists might
constrain Arafat from making conciliatory remarks about 242. Everything had to be
done, he said, to keep Camp David alive, even though the autonomy approach might
not be far reaching. A Norwegian participant suggested that Jordan might in fact
present an obstacle to a broader Palestinian state, and he found it hard to envisage
total demilitarization. With Egypt out of the coalition, he wondered too if Syria
would not, out of frustration, be tempted to wage a limited war against Israel for
political gains.
The author of the British working paper was more skeptical about the notion of
"testing the PLO." He could not help thinking of the analogous process in industry,
in which materials were "tested to destruction." The quest for peace, like the
launching of war, was undertaken without knowing where it would lead. If we
embarked on a comprehensive peace plan, our situation at the end might be no better
than at the beginning. Was it not wiser to "trust the devil we know rather than one we
don't know"? The territory of Palestine, ever since the mandate of 1938 and
especially since 1967, had been a cockpit for diverse ambitions, attracting all sorts of
intrigues, combinations and attempts at subversion. A new Palestinian state, if
demilitarized, might not be a threat to the Israelis, but that would be for them to
judge. · .
58
The reason there had been no settlement in the Middle East, after all, was that there
were incompatible interests-among Arabs as well as between Arabs and the Israelis.
The people involved had been hard put to see how those conflicting interests could be
compromised, or how they could impose their own interests. The question for us had
to be one o_f priorities, and in the author's opinion the top priority in the Middle East
for the U.S. and Western Europe should be to prevent the encroachment of the
USSR. That could not be achieved by settlement of the Palestinian issue, no matter
how it was resolved. It was widely argued that the unpacified PLO posed a threat to
the existence and stability of moderate regimes in the area, but no regimes had yet
been unsettled by the Palestinians, except perhaps indirectly that of the Lebanese,
who were not masters of their own fate in any case. (A Frenchman intervened to take
exception to this last point. Lebanon had offered a model of diverse societies trying to
live together in the Middle East, and the disintegration there could be a portent of the
future in that region.)
Instability in the Middle East ran very deep, and was not amenable to political
resolution. There was little evidence of a link between the Palestinian question and the
dangers of the spread of Islamic fundamentalism, which was a bigger issue in the
Moslem and Arab world. It was not a political issue, though, in the sense that one
could devise a political strategy to deal with it. It had to do with the legitimacy of
existing regimes which the fundamentalists deemed were ungodly and deserved to be
overthrown. This was often related to contact with the West and the corrupting effect
of the recent oil revenues. The movement was inherently radical in that it was inclined
toward collectivism and egalitarianism. This might understandably deter some people
from wanting to do business with the fundamentalists, but there was absolutely no
reason to link that with the Palestinian issue.
A French participant came to a very different conclusion. Although the Palestinian
problem and the religious issue were distinguishable now, there was a danger that they
might converge at some point and explode. Fundamentalism was to be found not only
in the Middle East, but throughout Islam. We might be witnessing the end of regimes
inspired by Ataturk and the birth of a new balance in the Arab world. The speaker
was not comfortable with the characterization of the Palestinian problem as essen-
tially a local one. As long as it remained unsolved, a general instability would persist
that was almost as dangerous as a general war, so a major effort was needed to settle
it.
That vision of converging, rather than parallel, lines in Islamic developments was
shared by a Greek participant. There were exceptions in the more secularized Near
Eastern countries, but in the Gulf and as far afield as Indonesia one could sense a
groundswell of fundamentalism. It was especially strong among students, so that its
full effects would not be felt for a decade. The movement subjected the Western
model of society to a more scathing criticism than had Marxism. Two particularly
dangerous areas were Shi'ite majority countries, like Iraq and Bahrain, and countries
with growing active left-wing fundamentalist movements. Many professional radicals
were donning the mantle of Islam.
The speaker thought that Israel was seeking to take short-term advantage of this
situation by cooperating with Iran and aiding Palestinian fundamentalists. But in the
long-run it was laying up for itself a much more dangerous enemy.
The West should seek to help the fundamentally secular regimes, whether of the
right or left, in order to get the Arab-Israeli problem off the top of Middle Eastern
agendas. That issue was interpreted by the Islamic movement as a Moslem-Israeli
problem, and it brought together all the Islamic passions against the West, seen as the
supporter of Israel. If we wanted to maintain a relationship with the emerging Islamic
power, it was important that justice be seen to be done and that the West demonstrate
59
an equal concern for Palestinian rights. This might incidentally result in fundamental-
ists coming into office in fewer countries than might otherwise be the case.
Another Greek participant referred to the destabilizing effects in traditional Arab
societies of industrialization and sudden new wealth. As political life was suppressed,
the religious movements were the focus of energy. The main wish of the Arabs, she
said, was to be rid of the refugee problem, a burden which they had borne for years.
An Austrian speaker wondered whether Western pragmatists really understood
enough about Islamic fundamentalism-not only about the Shi'ites in Iran, Lebanon
and Syria, but also about the religious criticism of Saudi modernization.
On the subject of the Saudis, an American observed that their ambivalence about
the PLO could not easily be discerned in their public statements; one had to probe
beneath the surface. Another U.S. participant remarked that Saudi Arabia had been
one of the few centers of stability in the Middle East. What did the drop in oil prices
imply for the massive Saudi development plans for industry and agriculture? A
German replied that the Saudis would manage comfortably, but that Libya, the
Emirates and other oil producers would be hurt by the sharp drop in revenues. An
American foresaw a potential for great disequilibrium within OPEC if the overhang in
the oil market was indeed substantial. A Frenchman, who predicted a highly unstable
oil market in any event, advocated closer Western coordination of energy supply and
conservation policies.
Several interventions alluded to Saudi concern about the outcome of the Iraqi-
Iranian war. Those two countries had effectively neutralized each other before, but
the worry now was that Iran, after achieving victory, would seek to assert itself in the
Gulf. The perception in Saudi Arabia, Abu Dhabi, Kuwait and Bahrain was that the
Iranian successes-especially in using U.S. equipment effectively and in being able to
mobilize masses of troops-must indicate American intervention. (Many of the same
people had believed that the original Iraqi offensive betokened a U.S. "green light."
These perceptions were important, even if they were untrue.)
Two American participants suggested that the war would likely serve to weaken the
power of the mullahs, and that a dialogue might be restored between the West and
rehabilitated Iranian army officers, many of whom had been trained abroad. Other
speakers evoked less favorable possibilities for Iran, such as a communist takeover or
mullah adventurism across the Gulf to keep the army occupied away from home.
Although Iraq was Germany's main trading partner in the Mideast, it was difficult for
the Germans to intervene as peacemakers. An Islamic negotiation, with UN help,
might bring the war to an end, but even if Saddam Hussain survived he would no
longer be an influential figure in the Gulf. Baghdad might not remain the permanent
capital, according to the American author, and Iraq itself, which was an artificial
entity, could break up again. '
A Briton remarked that the Soviet Union would be standing by, as always, to profit
if it could from this and other Middle East crises. There was no point trying to
disentangle the East-West aspect from the local conflict, or to decide which was
paramount. The two were intertwined. If the Soviets were brought into Middle East
negotiations, though, a Greek participant warned that the Arab rejectionists would
not only sign agreements with them, but would invite them into the area. But the
fundamentalist movement was as hostile to communism as it was to Western society,
which gave reason for hope in spite of Soviet willingness to increase its supply of arms
to the Arabs.
The disruptive role played by terrorism was described in an American intervention.
According to U.S. intelligence sources, Libya had spent over $100 million training
some 10,000 assassins in recent years, with the help of instructor-s from the German
.Democratic Republic and collaboration with Syria. Terrorist organizations from those
60
countries had aimed to set afoot groups to kill not only the American president but
thousands of officials from the U.S. and other nations. These communist-backed
agents, whose origins could be traced to the Arab-Israeli dispute, were active in
France and elsewhere. Counter-intelligence efforts were underway to combat them,
but it was a ·difficult task.
Participants from Turkey and other countries spoke of the role that country could
play as an intermediary in Middle Eastern diplomatic efforts. Its position-culturally,
geographically, strategically-gave it a unique competence. On the military side,
though, it was clear that Turkey's NATO bases could be used only for NATO
purposes, and not to support unilateral action in the Middle East by the U.S. or
others. The "NATO confines" might one day be extended to include the Middle East,
but that would have to be done by amending the NATO treaty.
Finally, two speakers referred to some very special problems encountered in the
search for peace in the Middle East. One, mentioned by an International participant,
was that the changes sweeping across the region had drastically narrowed the room for
domestic maneuver available to most regimes. It was therefore increasingly difficult
for leaders to make the kind of gesture which Sadat had made to Israel.
The other complication, discussed by an American, was stylistic and semantic. The
Israeli message was being presented so outrageously that it sounded more unreason-
able than it actually was. We should not lose sight of the fact that a country with a
narrow margin of security, totally dependent on another country for its survival, felt
that it had to give the impression that it was very difficult for it to make any
concessions. But their negotiating style was keeping the Israelis from facing the
objective realities of their own position. They negotiated in a Talmudic manner, while
the Arabs proceeded by epic poetry, and it was not always easy to tell where
pragmatism ended and poetry began. It was as wrong to take Israeli statements at face
value as to interpret the Arabs literally.
Beyond these nuances of "atmosphere," we in the West were bound to be troubled
by the elusiveness of our expectation that there could be achieved in the Middle East a
condition called "peace.'' with Israel, after which all other tensions would disappear,
leaving everyone to live in harmony. Most wars in history had been started between
nations at peace; the peculiarity of the Middle East was that its wars seemed to break
out between countries already at war.
61
IV. ECONOMIC ISSUES: DOGMAS AND REALITIES
* * * *
"The United States and Europe: Coping with Change"
Working Paper Prepared by Sylvia Ostry
Head, Department of Economics and Statistics, OECD, Paris
Introduction. Perhaps the central lesson for industrial economies from the experi-
ence of the 1970's-from the "school of hard shocks"-is the clear reminder that
sustained economic growth requires not only a continuing adaption to .a changing
environment but also, on occasion, the flexibility to adjust to sudden shocks. I say
reminder because the longer historical record of economic development leaves little
doubt on this score, though in the postwar decades of the 50's and 60's we were lulled
into ignoring it. In part this is because there were, atypically, few major adverse
shocks during this period; in part, the unprecedentedly protracted surge in real growth
made the process of structural adaptation appear almost effortless, much of the re-
allocation of resources coming out of the growth margin rather than out of someone
else's hide.
The 70's, however, reminded us that change is difficult. Our economies have still
not made anywhere near a full adjustment to the shocks of that decade. This by itself
suggests that the early 80's will not be easy even if nature deals a favorable deck of
cards and the players succeed in avoiding both shooting themselves and each other in
the foot.
There is also broad agreement that a part of the difficulties we now face are due to
government actions over several decades which have impaired the capacity of our
economies to adjust; there is also, I believe, agreement that on both sides of the
Atlantic actions to improve this capacity are essential now if our economies are to get
into smoother waters.
Despite such shared perceptions, it is nevertheless clear that things appear different
in the United States and Europe. Let me say at the outset that I have used the
designation United States rather than America only because I am Canadian and
therefore acutely aware of how misleading the continental terminology can be. Were I
European I should have had even greater difficulty writing this paper!
In broad terms, when one looks hard at the United States-beneath the daily
hyperbole of the financial markets and the internal macro-economic policy conflicts,
one still discerns in the basic attitudes of most businessmen the bullishness that has
long characterised this frontier economy. At least initially, the Reagan administra-
tion's mission of "unleashing" the dynamism of the private sector struck a responsive
chord, because there is a widespread belief that this dynamism truly is there to be
unleashed. On the other side of the Pond, one does not even have to scratch the
surface very hard to find more pessimistic attitudes. Others will no doubt fill in
various dimensions of this dichotomy; what I propose to do is to look at some of the
economic and institutional factors which contribute to it.
To sharpen the differences, let me start by making the case in terms of polar
paradigms. These, like all paradigms, are perforce overdrawn and subject to a host of
qualifications, but I hope they capture something of the essence.
The United States Paradigm. The U.S. paradigm might be called the Pluralistic
Market Economy. Not, to be sure, the atomistic economy of Adam Smith, but one in
which the role of markets is a dominant feature not just in the text book examples
62
of pricing apples versus pears, but also in the fundamental processes of allocating and
re-allocating the basic human and capital resources of the economy.
The powerful role of markets in promoting adaptation is visible, first, in the
geographical mobility of production and population-the early, slow decline of New
England as textiles migrated south; the rise of the "New South;" the progressive
weakening of the industrial Middle West to the profit of the booming Sun Belt; the
creation of new growth industries and centres like Silicon Valley, and the surprising
beginnings of a renaissance in New England with the arrival of high-technology firms.
It is visible, also, in the vigor of "the entrepreneurial spirit" and the variety of
channels through which it leaves its mark on the growth (and death) of firms-one
thinks of companies like DRI, from its beginnings as an academic sideline to its
"maturation" as a division of McGraw Hill; or the reverse pattern-the numerous
computer hardware or software companies that saw their origins when a few bright
employees of a larger company "had a better idea" and split off with their share of
know-how and a few "pirated" clients to emerge-in a few years-as major
competitors. One detects not only the "pull" of market opportunities, but also the
"push" of unemployment-it has been argued, for instance, that the greatest
"spillover effect" from the U.S. space program arose when the program was cut
back, thereby "releasing" onto the markets a flood of skilled but unemployed talent
in search of new livelihoods.
Perhaps the most dramatic evidence of the vigorous adaptability of the U.S.
economy lies in the response to the enormous surge of youth and married women in
the labor market over the I970's. Employment increased by about one.quarter-in the
four largest European economies it increased by less than two per cent. In authentic
text-book fashion the price of labor fell relative to other factors and business men
dutifully substituted labor for capital, like true neo-classical entrepreneurs. This
meant, of course, some decline in productivity. But as the new crop of workers
matures and the growth of the labor force slows over the 80's, it would not be
unreasonable to expect something of the opposite to happen.
There are many other signs of labour market flexibility. Decentralized bargaining
and a lesser degree of unionization result in much more sensitivity of both real wage
levels and wage dispersion to cyclical conditions than is the case for Europe. Every
measure of mobility-geographic, inter-job, inter-occupation and inter-industrial-is
relatively high.
Not only is the North American bargaining system the most decentralized in the
industrialized world, but coverage of agreements is only about one-third that of most
European countries and apparently shrinking. Nevertheless, it is premature to talk
about the de-unionization of America. In contrast to the more ideologically-inclined
European movement, the U.S. system is characterized by pragmatic professionalism
at the bargaining table and the recent Ford-U.A.W. contract suggests a potential for
adaptiveness which is positively Japanese! Such adaptiveness has obvious survival
value.
In highlighting flexibility and adaptiveness I am not, of course, suggesting that the
U.S. is without rigidities. Indeed, there are some elements in the U.S. way of doing
things that give rise to rigidities that are quite specifically American: a labor
economist could not fail to mention the pattern of negotiated three-year, overlapping
wage contracts which impart a degree of nominal wage momentum to the U.S.
economy that inflation fighters have full cause to rue. More broadly, one is struck by
the excessive legalism or "hyperlexia" of U.S: economic relations. In this regard, the
most striking innovation of the UAW-Ford negotiations may not be its "wages for
job-security" trade-off, but the fact that the management side was represented-an
almost unprecedented event-by personnel officers instead of lawyers!
63
The importance of legal process, and its effect on limiting flexibility, is even more
apparent in the torrent of regulatory activity that developed during the 60's and early
70's, the associated hypertrophy of regulatory agencies, and the massive resulting
opportunities for litigation. This development is not, I think, entirely unrelated to the
paradigm. If pluralism in political affairs is the counterpart to economic decentraliza-
tion, the rise of consumer and environmental advocates and other, more narrowly-
focused interest groups-each spawning its own support structure-is also part of the
process. In this view, "regulatory reform" may find itself up against some quite
fundamental constraints.
Even so, the overall point I would make is that rigidities in the U.S. are largely of
the sort captured in Art Okun's felicitous phrase-the invisible handshake; they arise
essentially from contracts and agreements thrown up by the market system. For most
of U.S. history, when economic pressures built up requiring adaptation, this took
place in an essentially market-conforming manner; if circumstances made contracts
unsustainable, they were bought out (with a handsome slice for the middleman) and
new contracts devised.
To put it even more abstractly, this paradigm rests on a clear distinction between
economic rights (backed up by the legal machinery of contracts) and political rights
(expressed by the policy commitments of the State), and indeed leaves relatively little
scope for the latter in determining the economic conditions that individuals face.
What the market hath given, the largely invisible hand of the market may erode. What
the State hath given, the visible hand of the State must revoke.
It is tempting to go a bit further in trying to define why the U.S. economy is the
way it is. I speculate that the specific character of the American service and small-
scale manufacturing sectors is an important element in the story. There is here a great
deal of "taking in one another's laundry", of creating and capitalizing on fads, and
more generally catering to the consumerist society. Non-Americans, and indeed a
good many Americans, might question the social value of this kind of activity
compared with more traditional "productive" pursuits. That, however, is not my
point. What such a sector does do is to give rise to a reservoir of people with generic,
"money making" skills rather than the more task-specific "human capital" embodied
in industrial employment-generic skills being easier to redeploy from one line of
work to another as market opportunities change. Perhaps the educational system-in
particular its emphasis on providing opportunities for a rather superficial "higher"
education to large numbers of people through the junior colleges-goes in the same
direction, in contrast to the greater emphasis on selection, quality and specialization
in Europe.
The burden of this speculation might be taken one step further. Such "flexibility"
as this resource pool of redeployable opportunists generates obviously does not come
free. One might argue that the U.S. pays a price in terms of lower aggregate
productivity growth than abroad, where specialization, learning-by-doing, and more
focused lifetime employment patterns provide greater scope for productivity gains in
established channels. The gain, of course, arises when the premium on being able to
disengage from established lines and to forge new channels for growth rises.
The European Paradigm. Let me turn now explicitly to the counterpart-the
European paradigm-recognizing full well the even greater risk of distortion involved
in subsuming in a single paradigm the vast cross-country differences within Europe. If
this paradigm captures some aspects of Europe it is clearly Northern Europe rather
than the Mediterranean countries that one would look to, with France, perhaps,
"situated" between the two.
64
The European paradigm-and here I am not talking about Europe as an emerging
single economic unit, which may or may not be the wave of the future, but of an
archetypal European country which may only "more or less" capture the essence of
any particular European state-the European paradigm might be labelled the Social
Market Economy. Such an economy works "through" markets, to be sure, but the
operation of markets is heavily conditioned by a politically guaranteed expansion of
"property rights in the status quo." As a general statement, the State takes on the
obligation to provide both a comprehensive social insurance guarantee and a steadily
rising standard of living, to which the population has become accustomed. The lines
between what the State provides as a matter of political rights and what the private
sector provides via the interplay of market forces is, to some extent, blurred.
The social insurance elements are apparent: socially guaranteed "property rights"
in adequate health care; an educational system that may discriminate on the basis of
ability, but provides rights in education to those who meet the tests; property rights in
housing ... I use the word paradoxically here, for it is not the right of a property
owner to dispose of his property as he see fit that is alluded to-rather, the rights of
tenants to maintain themselves in established circumstances and, more broadly, the
state's obligation to assure the provision of adequate housing. Perhaps more funda-
mentally, the social market paradigm provides a degree of State-supported job
"tenure" across broad areas of the economy that is equalled in the U.S. only in the
civil service.
Let me clarify. I am not debating whether the European worker has greater
economic privileges than his American counterpart or not. Rather, the point is that
whereas the foundation of American "property rights" is by and large the decentra-
lized contract, in Europe it is to a much larger extent the centralized State.
During the 50's and 60's and into the 70's, when the European support and
protective systems developed, there seemed litle cause to be concerned. To be sure, as
the direct support expanded, the redistributive burden grew. But equity or redistribu-
tive considerations were, and are, at the core of the paradigm, whereas the American
version of the welfare state was most often defended in terms of generalized values of
fairness or equality ofopportunity. Redistribution there was largely a consequence,
rather than an explicit objective.
Less noticed, during the development phase of the European welfare state, was the
rigidification of labor markets that ensued from the rise in non-wage labor costs-the
indirect taxes that at first seemed costless, and which largely funded the social
expenditures. But, in fairness, there was little reason to notice: high rates of
investment and correspondingly rapid growth in productivity-spurred further by the
dividends of European integration, a rapid growth of world trade and substantial
possibilities for technological "catch-up"-tended to validate and "fund" the expan-
sion of social property rights. The undermining of the flexible response mechanisms
of markets did not become apparent so long as the extension of social guarantees did
not go beyond the capacity of the smooth expansion of the economy to sustain them.
But, to coin an image, increasing constraints were being laid down all around the
economy-constraints which were non-binding only so long as the economy surged
out ahead of them.
Once the capacity to adapt was seriously put to the test-as in the past decade-the
constraints revealed themselves: given the difficulties of altering arrangements that
had become viewed not just as economic but as political rights, tax burdens and
deficits both began to rise as growth slowed. Labor markets did not function
adequ8.tely to re-allocate workers from declining to growing sectors; employment
gro.wth practically ceased; pressures to subsidize existing jobs and sectors mounted.
65
One might summarize that Europe has constructed a set of institutions that work
markedly less well when growth slows down, but rapid growth is increasingly elusive.
This is surely one source of Europessimism. The difficulties of altering arrangements
that have gone deeper than the contractual commitments of the American paradigm,
to become essentially political guarantees, are clearly evident. There are, of course,
other elements: energy dependence, for instance. Though in the simple calculus of
macro-economic impacts, the rise in oil prices hit the U.S. as hard, or harder, than
most European countries-the perception that energy dependence is an inescapable
reality is, apparently, more clearly recognized in Europe than in the resource-rich U.S.
where, to boot, past energy prqfligacy provides a vast margin for relatively low-cost
further conservation.
A Closer Look. I suspect that I have pushed the pardigms as far as, or perhaps
further than, they can legitimately be taken. Before abandoning them to "the real
world," however, and before establishing the indeiible impression that I am engaged
in a prescriptive rather than descriptive exercise, I want to point out that each of the
paradigms has its obverse side.
The American paradigm, as I have drawn it, is one that elevates the virtues of
efficiency-to an increasing extent at the expense of equity and non-economic goals.
The "dark side" of the efficiency paradigm is that in a world of, inevitably, partial
mobility at best, persistent regional, sectoral and interpersonal disparities (while
providing the right "incentives,") also impose large human social costs over a
protracted transition.
Perhaps even more fundamentally, the combination of a relatively mobile-hence
"rootless"-population and a decentralized provision of social services is likely to
lead to a systematic under-provision of social investment relative to private invest-
ment. The "twinned" phenomena of urban decay and suburban sprawl provide a
certain kind of direct evidence for this imbalance. Somewhat more generally, it can be
argued even on pure efficiency grounds that a very mobile, "get rich quick"
orientation in the economy generates excessive obsolescence and unduly myopic
horizons for business planning-as the Japanese have often pointed out forcefully to
their American counterparts.
Finally, and perhaps most severely, the American paradigm promotes the simulta-
neous development of an underclass-a class of those who cannot, or don't wish to,
"buy into" the system. The "have nots," in this schema, are alienated not only from
the economic system, but also from the broader political processes which validate it.
More importantly, as Daniel Bell and others have suggested, the political party in the
U.S. may be in a ''state of decay;'' a condition Bell attributes to the decline of civitas:
"the spontaneous willingness to obey the law, to respect the rights of others, to forego
the temptations of private enrichment at the expense of the public weal." The
prototypical mobile opportunist is a market asset, but is he likely to become a political
liability?
The European paradigm also has its obvers(( side. Most visibly, perhaps, the social
market paradigm does generate a stream of social goods: public transport ·systems
tend to work; social infrastructure is more richly provided; cities are, in general, more
agreeable places to live in in Europe than in America.
More important perhaps, the social market paradigm, as it operates in at least some
European countries, has avoided the emergence of a large underclass of citizens with
no stake in the existing social order. As Bell might say, there is more "civitas," a
greater commitment to getting political institutions to work right. One might speculate
that this pattern is one born of necessity; the heritage of class distinctions and
ideological conflict that is so much more a part of European than of American history
56
may, paradoxically, have sharpened the perception of the need to strengthen political
processes as a way of promoting the grand compromises on which social stability
rests. In the. United States, where class conflicts are less marked, and the great
majority ofeven the relatively poor are adherents of the market system as the road to
opportunity, there is a contrary mistrust of political process and of politicians.
Some Policy Questions. I think I have said enough about paradigms. Let me finish
by making a few points about policy. Policy based on oversimplified models would be
perilous indeed. Nonetheless, there are some relevant policy insights to be gleaned.
First, for the United States, the dynamic potential is clearly there, but the near-term
constraints to expansion are also severe. It is not easy to see how the marked
differences in the thrust of monetary and fiscal policies are going to work themselves
out. There is evidence of a new kind of cycle developing, linked to the sharp
fluctuations in interest rates; but it can be argued that such a cycle is itself unstable as
borrowers and lenders begin to anticipate it. Whether the end result is one of
increasing "attentisme" and hence more prolonged weakness, or a gradual smoothing
of growth towards rates consistent with slowing inflation and the Fed's chosen
monetary targets is, I think, still very much in doubt. At the same time, the high
average level of real interest appears to be having major, but very unevenly distrib-
uted, impacts across regions and sectors. If the net impact is to accelerate restruc-
turing towards those sectors where prospective rates of return make current borrowing
costs non-constraining this might be seen as the appropriate working of the market
system. But resources are not perfectly mobile, so that adjustment costs rise sharply as
the speed of adjustment accelerates and a good deal of structural damage is likely to
be incurred in the process. Finally, both macro-economic instability and structural
pressures seem to be keeping risk premiums in financial markets at unprecedented
levels. If the gloom of the financial markets spreads out across the economy, with
resulting loss of confidence, the bullishness of the American economy with which I
began this speech, may get harder and harder to find.
Just as all is not roses in the United States, so one also has to recognize that not all
is gloom in Europe. To be sure, in almost all the European countries the difficult task
of making markets work better has to be faced. But distinctions can, and should, be
made. At one extreme, where labor and capital resources are "locked in" by social
guarantees to existing jobs and, at the same time, real wages and other costs are
frozen by indexation, difficulties have to be expected: markets in which both prices
and quantities are constrained are unlikely to work well. But one need not conclude
that strengthening the capacity to adapt requires wholesale dismantling of the
paradigm. If societies choose to constrain markets to be somewhat sticky in terms of
moving resources from sector to sector, this choice can probably be effectively
maintained if greater flexibility on the price and wage side can be secured. In this
regard it seems to me that the centralized institutions of a number of European
countries, if they are supported by a reasonably solid social consensus, provide a good
deal of scope for action. Obviously, this requires a perception of common interest
among the social partners, but this exists in many European countries, however
threatened it may be at the present time.
Conclusion. To conclude, I am suggesting that, first, the pluralist paradigm is a
priori more flexible and therefore more viable in a period requiring major structural
adjustment. The test of this hypothesis is likely to be political-the erosion of civitas:
a fine balance is required between the centrifugal forces which are so appropriate to
economic adaptability but so threatening to political cohesion if carried too far.
Secondly, consensus mechanisms may provide a viable alternative to decentralized
market forces as a means of coping with change. The test is likely also to be political:
the will and ability to deal with the nexus of property rights in the status quo without
major ideological confrontation. Thirdly and most clearly, a society which has neither
consensus nor effective markets is in serious trouble and perhaps has no choice but to
initiate a difficult, step-by-step movement towards greater market discipline and the
painful transition costs such a movement entails. Finally, the transatlantic clash of
ambience-the American "we can do anything," the European "we can't do any-
thing"-is both misleading and potentially dangerous. The point is that neither
paradigm is necessarily superior to the other: they are simply different.
Issues For Discussion.
I. Paradigms and Policies
There are a range of policy issues creating tension in European-American relations.
The currently most obvious example lies in the area of monetary policy and exchange
rates where, in contrast to the rigorous American commitment to monetary aggregates
and non-intervention, the European view is more pragmatic on domestic policy
implementation and does not eschew exchange market intervention as a policy
instrument under appropriate circumstances. Other examples relate to "industrial
policy," where again, the United States stand is far more rigorously non-
interventionist in principle, whereas the European view is either pragmatic (interven-
tion if necessary) or polar (intervention is necessary).
To what extent do these differing views stem from fundamentally divergent "world
outlooks" (i.e., as related to the different paradigms)?
Or, to put it another way, what is the scope and prospects for compromise in
policies and direction?
II. Signs of Convergence?
A. Industrial Relations.There are some indications that, in Europe, wage negotia-
tions are becoming more decentralized as, under the pressure of rising unemployment
and diverging financial situations of enterprises, sectoral and regional considerations
are impinging on wage agreements and working arrangements at the plant or
enterprise level. Conversely, in the United States, some recent settlements suggest that
the traditional notion of collective bargaining as essentially an adversarial process
between labor and management is being modified in the direction of a more
cooperative notion of social partnership-with the joint interests of workers and the
enterprises for which they work playing a larger role.
Can such developments be taken as suggesting thaf beneath the diversity of
perceptions, as embodied in the paradigms, economic structures may be evolving
towards greater homogeneity?
B. Regulation. It is probably that, by the mid-1970's, the overall degree of
government regulation of economic activity may not have been markedly different in
the United States and Europe. To be sure, the instruments used have been different-
most notably in the extent of direct government ownership and production-and the
prime focus may have differed as well, with heavier emphasis on economic regulation
in Europe, and on "horizontal" regulation in such areas as environment and health in
the United States. More recently, government attention and efforts in the United
States have turned sharply in the direction of trying to reduce the scope of government
regulation. A similar shift in attitudes about regulation has not thus far become
clearly visible in Europe.
Are pressures building in Europe to move in the direction taken in the United
States, of reducing the extent and weight of regulatory control?
68
If not, is there a prospect of increased conflict between the United States and
Europe in such areas as aviation, direct investment, and a range of service and
financial sectors where deregulated, competition-minded American firms encounter
their regulated European counterparts? Is there likewise a danger that active use of
regulation as a chosen instrument, as for instance in the development of high
technoiogy industries, may give rise to increased intra-European conflict?
III. Labor Markets, Unemployment and Policy Objectives
It has been argued that the remarkable flexibility of the American labor market,
stemming from both attitudinal and institutional factors, is a powerful sourc~ of
underlying strength when major adjustments are required. This flexibility is also
reflected in the startling contrast between the lesser duration of unemployment in the
United States as compared to the more highly structured and rigid European labor
markets. (For example, long duration unemployment-six months and over-
represents 10 to 15 per cent of United States current unemployment, but 40 to 50 per
cent of the unemployment of many European countries.)
Given these factors, and the unprecedentedly high levels of unemployment in
Europe today, is the "public tolerance" for any given overall level of unemployment
in Europe likely to be less than in the United States?
If the unemployment situation fails to improve for some time, will the pressure for
policy change be greater in Europe than in the United States?
Is this likely to increase tension in European-American relations? Make interna-
tional policy coordination more difficult? Exacerbate trade frictions?
* *
*
"U.S. Economic Performance and Prospects"
Working Paper Prepared by The Honorable William E. Simon
Former Secretary of the Treasury
Although the United States is currently reporting huge budget deficits that are
expected to become even larger, there is still one large surplus-a deluge of economic
rhetoric and simplistic slogans. The media provide a daily barrage of detailed
descriptions, largely misleading, of rival economic policies: Reaganomics, supply-side
initiatives, pure monetarism, neo-Keynsianism, government planning and controls
ranging from arbitrary wage and price regulations to centralized command bureaucra-
cies, and even revived versions of the discredited gradualism from the past. These
efforts have created confusion and fear about the performance and prospects of the
U.S. economy. The American people and other nations have become at best uneasy
and at worst cynical about our repeated economic failures. The overwhelming
evidence of this breakdown is the continued pattern of extraordinarily high nominal
and real interest rates in the United States despite the major reduction of reported
inflation rates and the severity of the current economic recession. There is widespread
recognition that we have badly disrupted our economic performance and that
conditions will rapidly deteriorate even more if fundamental economic policy reforms
are not completed quickly. Americans have learned that stagflation, credit crunches,
exhorbitant interest rates, major bankruptcies, declining productivity, huge trade
deficits, and a volatile national currency are not problems that only afflict other
people.
69
The devastating stagflation results of the last 20 years have an obvious explanation.
Politicians have all too often manipulated economic policies to control their own
election prospects. The perpetuation of near-term political power has overwhelmed
long-term economic goals as politicians have responded to the intense pressures of
powerful interest groups able to deliver election financing support and large blocs of
votes. The general public now understands that occasional attempts to stabilize the
economy have been replaced by new rounds of inflationary policies whenever signs of
economic adjustment pains appear. A vicious circle of economic failures has been the
inevitable result as too much government fiscal and monetary stimulus creates an
overheated economy leading to inflation; inflation pressures pushed up nominal
interest rates that then disrupted housing, personal consumption, and capital invest-
ment; the serious erosion of economic activity quickly raised the politically sensitive
unemployment rate, triggering yet another surge of fiscal and monetary stimulus that
began the destructive cycle once again. As this dreary sequence is repeated, the levels
of both inflation and unemployment continued to ratchet upward.
The repetition of this vicious circle in response to short-term political pressures has
led inevitably to too much government spending concentrated on immediate consump-
tion. Taxes have been rapidly increased to record levels in a futile attempt to match
the uncontrolled growth of government budgets and an array of "off-budget" and
government credit programs. Chronic government budget deficits of unprecedented
size have resulted, creating a huge overhang of debt throughout the economic system
as everyone adapts to the inflationary environment. Excessive amounts of money and
credit have been created at double-digit rates to accommodate the large government
deficits and the surge of consumption. Government regulations have rapidly prolifera-
ted in response to the demands of powerful interest groups and massive government
bureaucracies intent on expanding their authority over the private economy. In the
most desperate circumstances our political leaders have turned to authoritarian wage
and price controls, senseless energy regulations, and dangerous credit allocation
schemes to delay the economic pressures created by their unwise economic policies.
These vain efforts to demonstrate the symbols rather than the substance of leadership
have seriously threatened the future of our economic system and the fundamental
political and social stability that ultimately must depend upon the creativity and
productivity of the private competitive market economy.
Background ofEconomic Problems. Our current economic difficulties began in the
mid-1960's when the unfortunate convergence of powerful political pressures created
an extended stop-and-go pattern of erratic economic output consistently below the
underlying capacity of the economic system, rising levels of both inflation and
unemployment, eroding productivity gains, emerging trade deficits, and a vulnerable
dollar subject to volatile swings in the international financial markets. It is easy to
identify the causal variables. Government spending exploded in the mid-1960's and
continued to grow at a double-digit rate at the federal and state and local government
levels throughout the 1970's. Since the total economy was capable of growing only
three to four per cent each year in real terms, the inevitable result has been a growing
role for government spending as a share of the gross national product and chronic
federal budget deficits that have now been reported in 20 of the last 21 years.
Monetary policies basically accommodated these chronic government deficits and
private credit demands to avoid crowding out major sectors of the economy. As
private investment languished and government regulation increased, the long-term
erosion of productivity accelerated. Chronic trade deficits, partially caused by the
extraordinary costs of oil imports following the price changes throughout the 1970's,
added to our economic problems, and the deterioration of the dollar's exchange rate
disrupted our international position and added to domestic inflation.
70
In 1969 a new administration arrived in Washington, D.C. and initiated a four-
point economic program designed to stabilize the economy. The four points were: (1)
reduction of double-digit growth of government spending; (2) reduction of tax rates,
with special emphasis on individual rates, to encourage savings and investment; (3)
blunting the proliferation of government regulations; and (4) moderating the excessive
growth of money and credit. Those economic policies were temporarily successful in
restoring growth, reducing inflation and unemployment, restoring productivity, and
stabilizing trade and international monetary conditions. But the policies did not
represent a strong enough break with the recent past and, most importantly, they were
not maintained. The realities of the approaching national elections in 1972 reversed
those policies leading to surging inflation by 1973 and a severe economic recession by
1974. After the elections, the administration attempted again to slow down the
uncontrolled pace of government spending; tax rates were reduced in early 1975, with
special emphasis on individual rates to encourage savings and investment; an attack
on unnecessary government regulations was initiated; and, the Federal Reserve
attempted to slow down the accommodative growth of money and credit. This
pragmatic approach worked once again as real growth resumed in early 1975,
inflation dropped from double-digit levels to less than five per cent in 1976,
employment increased and unemployment declined, and the U.S. international eco-
nomic position was strengthened. But once again political decisions by a new
administration arriving in 1977 destroyed the long-term economic prospects by
returning to the expedient policies of the past. During the rest of the 1970's, the
United States experienced chronic stagflation-extended periods of sluggish or nega-
tive economic output and high levels of unemployment combined with sustained
double-digit inflation rates. In the international economy large trade deficits accumu-
lated, as oil import costs increased rapidly and competition in our traditional export
markets escalated, and the dollar exchange rate deteriorated steadily. Federal budget
outlays continued to grow at double-digit annual rates. Monetary policies accommo-
dated the inflationary pressures created by public and private consumption, massive
increases in business and personal debts, and the enormous government borrowing
required to finance deficits.
During the 1970's,~--many different programs were announced with the intent of
correcting the fiscal, monetary and regulatory problems that were distorting the
proper functioning of the U.S. economy. Some of these reform initiatives created
temporary progress, but the political will to sustain the efforts for several years, rather
than only several months, was never adequate to really break the inflationary
psychology or to restore investment and technological development incentives. ln the
1980's, a fundamental reorientation of economic politics is necessary to restore the
vitality of the domestic U.S. economy and stabilize our role in the international
economy. Gradualist economic programs will not work in our political environment.
We are far beyond the point where merely gradual adjustments can be tolerated. An
across-the-board program of much greater force and scope must be used. Our actions
must be decisive and irreversible. The adjustment pains must be accepted as the
necessary price of restoring long-term economic vitality. To delay this difficult
transition will only increase the ultimate costs in political and social terms as well as
economic results. We can no longer simply fine-tune the system. We need a massive
shift in policies to sharply decrease government spending, large tax reductions and
reforms to restore private incentives, the elimination of existing legislative and
bureaucratic regulations that restrict the economy, sustained enforcement of responsi-
ble monetary policies, and an aggressive trade and investment position based on the
current realities of international competition. In short, the futile policies of the past
must be replaced with much stronger actions to revitalize the American economy. This
71
is not the time to compromise by following the advice of timid politicians and
doctrinaire technocrats. A clear choice must be made between a continuation of stop-
and-go stagflation results, and a comprehensive set of fundamental changes that will
properly focus on long-term goals.
Necessary Economic Policy Adjustments. I am not here as an apologist for Reagan
economics, but rather as a firm believer in the free market principles which I have
outlined above and on which Reagan based his campaign. Yes, President Reagan
came into office recognizing in principle the course of action which should be
followed. The l'J.uestion now is whether his administration can exert the continuing
leadership to bring the U.S. government actually to take the necessary steps.
Specifically, unless the projected deficits can be dramatically reduced, the economic
recovery that economists have been predicting will suffer a serious setback. The
sluggish economic recovery that economists now claim will begin some time during the
last six months of 1982 will be quickly destroyed by fiscal and monetary problems
linked to deficits that are now expected to exceed $100 billion this year and rise to
$200 billion, or even higher levels, during the next few fiscal years unless major
economic reforms are enforced.
The first stop is to regain control of government spending using current priorities
rather than historical promises. This is obviously difficult because the budget has been
used as a political tool for many years to buy off various constituencies. Following 15
years of double-digit growth of federal budget outlays, an even more rapid expansion
of "backdoor financing" of government activities through a maze of off-budget and
federal lending and loan-guarantee programs. It is obvious that the momentum of
existing commitments has eroded spending controls and created unprecedented budget
deficits. The rapid growth of spending has shifted a growing share of the total
economy into government activities and the huge deficits have warped monetary
policies and diverted savings into deficit financing of government consumption and
away from needed private investment. This pattern explains many of our basic
inflation, productivity and sluggish growth problems. For example, in fiscal year
1966, the federal budget totaled $135 billion; one year later it had jumped to $366
billion and then to almost one-half of a trillion dollars in just three more years. From
fiscal year 1979 to 1981 the budget outlays then rose to $657 billion, a gain of 34
percent in just two years. Off-budget outlays and total government lending and loan
guarantee programs grew even more rapidly.
After ignoring the growing momentum for many years, Congress finally agreed to
cooperate with the new Reagan administration by reducing the anticipated growth of
federal spending for fiscal year 1982. The approved target of $695 billion was $44
billion lower than the original goal. This reorientation was'achieved by challenging the
variety of social programs that have expanded automatically. The initial euphoria
following the early "budget victories" has been dissipated, however, by the follow-up
announcements that federal spending in fiscal year 1982 is now expected to be at least
$725 billion, even if a large number of non-defense and non-income security programs
are further slashed. It is increasingly apparent that much stronger budget-reduction
·efforts will be required immediately to slow down the upward momentum of spending
for national security, the proliferation of income transfer payments on an entitlements
basis, health care outlays, and the ·required interest payments on the national debt that
is now well over $1 trillion, compared to a total of $367 billion in 1969. In fact, by
fiscal year 1985 the current forecast of revenues of $797 billion, which is based on an
exceptionally rapid and steady projection of economic growth, will barely cover the
outlays for just three existing federal programs-defense, income security (largely
social security and government pension payments), and health care-plus the required
72
interest on the national debt (a cumulative total of $795 billion). Outlays for
everything else are projected to be only $73 billion by then, but the entire amount will
become a deficit since all of the anticipated revenues will be required for the three
high-priority programs: defense, income security and health care.
I should add that I do not hold any of these programs sacrosanct, not even defense.
National security is, of course, critically important and we must spend whatever is
required to maintain our national security. But our dollars must be spent with
maximum cost effectiveness at all levels and in all departments of government; the
Pent!igon is no exception. Every expenditure must be scrutinized and defended in
order to cap the natural tendency of government to runaway spending.
Although it is obvious that the budget has been out of control for many years and
that huge deficits will persist far into the future unless revolutionary changes are
initiated, Congress and the powerful special interest groups continue to reject specific
spending adjustments even though they have joined in the pious rhetoric about the
need for overall restraint. Even the current budget deficit forecasts of $100 to $200
billion in fiscal years 1982 and 1983 have so far failed to motivate a Congressional
response on individual appropriation bills. The ongoing decimation of long-term
capital markets and severe short-term monetary distortions have been a heavy price to
pay for the largely unrestrained budget policies of the last 15 years based on
unrealistic political promises.
The second step is to continue the reversal of growing economic disincentives
created by record-levels of taxation. Last August, the Reagan administration and
Congress acted to provide meaningful tax relief by granting a three-year program of
individual tax-rate reductions and more realistic rules for taxing business profits. The
anticipated tax relief from fiscal year 1981 through 1986 totals $749 billion-or three
quarters of a trillion dollars-with 79 per cent of the amount committed to individuals
and 21 percent to business firms. The dollar figures are large, but in reality the
individual benefits in the early years, prior to the indexation of the system beginning
in 1985, are barely enough to keep pace with the insidious effects of continued
"bracket creep" w_hich occurs when inflation pushes people into higher marginal
income brackets effecrtvely increasing their real tax rates. Similarly, inflation has
consistently distorted business accounting practices leading to higher nominal profits
and increased cash tax payments even though actual cash flows needed for capital
investment and the development of new technology have been severely restricted. The
thrust of the Reagan administration program to cut tax rates is intended to restore
major incentives to increase savings and investment as a means of improving
economic output, particularly the pace of productivity gains required for real growth.
These benefits will be lost, however, unless major progress is made soon in really
controlling the continued double-digit growth of government spending and the
associated off-budget and federal credit programs that have combined to create a
massive drain on the potential total national savings available for private investment
after the huge government deficit requirements are satisfied. The need for further tax
relief and major structural reforms should not become a hostage of the anticipated
federal deficit financing needs resulting from spending and credit excesses.
The third major economic reform measure initiated by the Reagan administration
attempts to improve productivity and lower costs by reducing unnecessary government
regulations which have increased the scope and detail of government planning and
control. The basic effort will focus on cost/benefit analyses of existing and proposed
government regulations to evaluate their net effects. This common-sense approach has
been missing as new legislation and bureaucratic rulings have proliferated during the
last 50 years.
73
Finally, monetary policies have adopted the goal of slowly moderating the growth
of money and credit to constrain the inflationary pressures accumulated over the last
15 years. in the past the Federal Reserve Board has often announced admirable plans
to fight inflation and stabilize the growth of the monetary aggregates to minimize
cyclical distortions. These good intentions have been repeatedly overwhelmed by
pressures to become more accommodative to prevent prospective credit crun.ches and
rising interest rates. The unfortunate results have been the stop-and-go economic
performance of the last 15 years with rising levels of both inflation and unemploy-
ment. The current situation would be more promising if the Reagan administration
and Congress actually fulfill their promises to provide fiscal discipline so that the Fed
is not left alone to fight inflation, creating the risks of a monetary overkill. As the
combined package of government spending, tax and regulatory policies unfolds, it will
be crucial that the Fed carefully match its goals of moderating money and credit
against the emerging pattern of economic recovery expected to begin in 1982. If
monetary policy is too tight, the economic recovery will be unnecessarily restricted by
high interest rates. But if the Fed prematurely abandons its efforts, the skeptical
financial markets will quickly react to the prospects of renewed inflation, rising
interest rates, falling stock and bond prices, continued financial disintermediation,
and eventual economic distress. The extremely high level of nominal and real interest
rates in the U.S. credit markets indicates the continued skepticism of lenders and
investors. The complexity of this transition clearly demonstrates why all four eco-
nomic policy initiatives-spending, tax, regulatory and monetary-must be carefully
coordinated to gain balanced progress.
While it is crucial that we sharply reverse the repeated fiscal, monetary and
regulatory policy blunders of the last 20 years, it is equally important to avoid any
repetition of the disastrous wage and price controls and credit allocation programs
used by political leaders to divert attention away from fundamental policy errors. The
empirical evidence is clear: such controls quickly become ineffective and eventually
wind up causing serious problems. In the 1970's such controls severely damaged
capital investment and private economic planning while failing to prevent the
acceleration of inflation to double-digit levels and unemployment rates to the highest
level since the great depression of the 1930's. In fact, the anticipation of future
controls frequently motivates business and labor leaders to favor inflationary price
and wage actions. There is widespread agreement that such arbitrary controls are
counter-productive, but political expediency still leads to their use as a symbol of
aggressive leadership as a poor substitute for more difficult efforts to correct
fundamental fiscal, monetary and regulatory problems. The unfortunate application
of energy regulations and trade protectionism in recent years are additional examples
of policy errors resulting from short-term political responses.
The United States must also avoid the dangerous suggestions that centralized
government planning and controls should be used to correct the current economic
problems. This approach typically involves widespread public ownership of economic
assets and detailed plans for allocating human, material and capital resources along
with rigid targets for production and consumption. The command economy approach
is not an effective means to direct a modern economy as complex as the American
system. Even more important, a command economy destroys personal incentives and
directly threatens individual freedoms. We now have 60 years of reality to analyze,
including 35 postwar years and the current deterioration of many command econo-
mies into near-bankruptcy, while much of the world continues to move forward. We
now have a mass of statistics to compare on economic growth, per capita consump-
tion of foods, durable goods, services and housing, the pace of investment, and the
social indicators of the overall quality of life and the social infrastructure. We also
74
have abundant evidence concerning social mobility, political participation and basic
personal freedoms. Despite the efforts of governments to conceal and confuse these
growing disparities, people throughout the world are more and more inclined to
compare the performance of each type of economy. The average person is not so
uninformed and so naive as politicians would like to believe.
There are those who charge that Reaganomics is anti-poor. On the contrary, the
genius of the free market is that by pursuing self-interest, an outpouring of wealth and
inventiveness raises the standard of living for all citizens. It is in the principles that
Ronald Reagan enunciated during his campaign that the hope of the poor is to be
found; and in collectivist economics that it may be lost.
Conclusion. Although the media have unfortunately focussed attention on the daily
details of the current economic recession and prospects for recovery later in 1982, two
fundamental questions of far greater significance require immediate answers. Will
economic policy changes be substantial enough to cause a real turnaround after so
many years of erosion and a, decade of stagflation? Will the necessary policy change
be sustained against growing pressures to revert to the discredited gradualist policies
of previous political leaders that have brought the premier economy of the world to
the liberal brink of disaster? The American response to these two basic questions will
shape the future course of our economy long after the current recession and
prospective cyclical recovery are forgotten. If the crucial policy reforms are pervasive
and forceful enough to really reverse the negative fiscal, monetary and regulatory
trends that have brought us to the economic precipice, then America will begin a long
and difficult transition. But, if a politics-as-usual approach dominates, there must be
real concern about continued domestic stagflation and America's role in future
international political, military and economic relations. Both the problems and
solutions are clearly policital issues. Recurring economic cycles will still continue,
individual governments will experiment with various forms of controls, protectionist
problems will persist, and future cartels will try to manipulate the price and supply of
raw materials. But if correct political leadership is provided, powerful market forces
will move the world economy toward a more integrated, open and competitive system
with increased benefits for all nations willing to participate.
I have a strong preference for the competitive market economy approach for
achieving the~.e goals. I favor an economic system that diffuses and decentralizes
decisions and direl:tly rewards individual creativity and productivity; a political system
that responds to the personal priorities and aspirations of its people rather than to the
collectivist goals of the existing government; and, a social system that provides
institutions and services that really help people to fulfill their personal potential. In
summary, I advocate a society focussed on the individual rather than the state, and
one which draws its inner strength from the enthusiastic commitment of its free people
rather than from brutal military power. Political, social and economic freedoms are
each necessary but they only become completely adequate when they are combined.
* *
*
75
DISCUSSION
Chairman: Thierry de Montbrial
The clarity and philosophical penetration of the working papers were praised by a
number of participants, but a British speaker found that, in some respects, they were
uncertain and unreliable guides to policy. The International paper erred, he thought,
in painting the laissez-faire/dirigiste distinction as an American/European one. He
alluded to the time-honored U.S. tradition of seeking local and special advantage, and
to the penchant for government regulation, which he contrasted with the new trend in
Europe toward more freedom and deregulation. He compared the SEC bureaucracy
with the self-regulation in the City of London, for example, and said that the
countries which had best withstood the oil price shock had been those, like Germany
and Austria, which had been able to adjust incomes rapidly-for whatever cultural or
institutional reason. Certainly if the International author were right, then the
American author had to be wrong in his depiction of a highly dirigiste U.S. society.
The International author reiterated her belief in a fundamental difference between
the U.S. and Europe. If Americans were calling for structural change, it was not
because they needed it more than the Europeans, but because the free market
paradigm was so powerful in the U.S. The welfare state had not been introduced there
with ideological overtones, as it had in other parts of the world. Ideology had come in
"by the back door."
A Greek speaker wondered into which model one would fit the Japanese. They had
the greatest sense of property rights in employment, were extremely interventionist in
their industrial planning, had a large and flexible small company sector, an extraordi-
nary stress on productivity, and a high savings rate. Moreover, they had enjoyed rapid
growth despite a period of high inflation.
Several speakers connected our present economic difficulties to the fact that we had
departed from our models in recent years. A Briton said that the Western system had
been based on free markets working within a framework of financial discipline. One
or both of those elements had unfortunately been reversed in many countries. The
U.K. was now trying to get back on the right track, and gradualism was really the only
choice open. He implied that large tax cuts, as advocated by the "supply siders,"
could not be afforded at this stage. (The American author intervened to remark that
there was nothing intrinsically bad about gradualism; it simply did not work.)
A Norwegian denied the implication that social democracy necessarily entailed a
lack of discipline; it was a question of the strength of the government in office. He
went on to dispute the dogma that high tax rates had been a decisive factor against
expansion in the U.S. The supply siders would have been better advised to take the tax
system instead of tax rates as their point of departure. That was very important for
the level of interest rates. A Swedish speaker seemed to lend support to this view when
he asked whether the public sector was indeed too big in the U.S. It came to only
about 32 per cent of GNP, compared with more than 50 per cent in countries like
Sweden and the Netherlands.
A Dutchman had to agree as a practical matter with the American author's
prescription, even if he did not go along with his philosophy. We had to reduce the
public sector share of the economy. In the Netherlands, for instance, more people
were now dependent on income produced by the public sector than were employed in
the market sector. But during the high-growth years of the fifties and sixties we had
built the infrastructure of the welfare state and the speaker said that the expenses for
it would have to be borne. He predicted that economic growth would slowly be
restored, but he was not convinced that it would absorb the 30 million unemployed in
76
the OECD countries. And if annual economic growth lingered around two per cent,
and social welfare spending had to be cut, it was hard to imagine our voters agreeing
to the four per cent increase in defense expenditures which we Were told would be
needed to build up our conventional forces.
A German referred to the three classic functions of an economic system-
allocation, production and distribution-and said that our postwar prosperity, includ-
ing the "German miracle," had been achieved by emphasis on the first two. We were
now all preoccupied with the third function, and a return to economic health
depended on our restoring the balance. A Danish participant agreed that the greatly
enhanced bargaining power of labor was often left out of the analysis, but he was
pessimistic about chances of restoring full employment and satisfactory growth
through the market system, as the working papers had suggested. A certain policy mix
was now embedded in our societies, and it was idle to think we could change it to deal
with the recession. A German was not so sure. He implied that expectations of lower
inflation would blunt the bargaining power of unions and lead to restrained wage
demands.
An International participant argued that four central principles, or dogmas, of our
system had been overridden by the realities: (1) Monetary aggregates should not
increase by more than the amount needed to accommodate sustainable non-
inflationary growth. Monetary policies had in fact been much too expansionary
during the 1970's, resulting in a surge of inflation. Countries like the Federal Republic
of Germany and Japan, which had applied prudent and realistic policies, had enjoyed
the lowest rates of inflation and the lowest nominal interest rates. Tighter policies
were now helping to bring down inflation, but recent gains were precarious and could
be reversed by premature relaxation.
(2) Fiscal policy should contribute to the fight against inflation. This principle had
been largely ignored in recent years, contributing to stagflation, high interest rates and
the crowding out of productive investment. Foreign financing had helped alleviate
some pressures, but it was only a temporary stop-gap.
(3) Wage increases should be kept within the bounds set by productivity growth and
changes in the terms of trade. In fact, real wages had risen much faster than
productivity, while the terms of trade had shifted adversely. This had encouraged
capital-intensive investment, which aggravated unemployment. To restore the profit
margins needed -for-growth, we would have to keep real wages below productivity
growth for some time to come. Governments could help by restraining public sector
wages and removing obstacles to competitive labor markets.
(4) The liberal and open international trading system must be preserved. Govern-
ments had so far resisted pressures for across-the-board trade restrictions, but
protectionist trends and the tendency to subsidize "lame ducks" were cause for
concern. Such policies were bound to invite retaliation and retard international
adjustment.
Another International speaker supplied an overview of important aspects of the
current economic evolution. He said that both European and North American
analysts foresaw a sluggish economic recovery, lasting well into 1983. Inflation would
decline, but unemployment would remain high. The political and social implications
were serious, which explained the demands for a policy change to accelerate recovery.
But there seemed to be broad agreement among our governments that there was no
prudent alternative to a non-accommodating policy combined with supply-side mea-
sures. During the next two years, it would be vital to create conditions favorable to
private investment as the major engine for recovery.
There was little transatlantic disagreement, he concluded, about the threats posed
by inflation, budgetary deficits and eroding business profits. But there were chronic
77
European-American differences in other areas: trade, including agriculture; the
philosophy of North-South economic relations; and policies in the energy field. On
the interest rate issue, ·the U.S. had an especially important responsibility-because of
the size and influence of its economy-to reestablish an "appropriate" level 'of
interest rates. This concern was reflected in a number of European and Canadian
interventions.
An American participant found the repeated reference to high "U.S. interest rates"
disconcerting. He pointed out that the level of real rates was, in reality, the same
around the world. Nominal rates might be different, but the forward foreign exchange
markets brought them into equality. There was no denying that the large and growing
U.S. budget deficits contributed to the high level of interest rates worldwide, but
European deficits had been so high themselves in recent years that the percentage of
GNP available for industrial investment there had in fact been lower than in the U.S.
Concern had been expressed about U.S. companies borrowing in Europe, but there
continued to be a net capital outflow from the U.S. The speaker believed that
governmental intervention in the exchange markets was not the answer to our
problems. We had instead to address the fundamental domestic political problem of
bringing expenditures into line with tax revenues and the general interest.
A German thought the U.S. position on this subject was too dogmatic. Fundamen-
tals were of course essential in determining exchange rates, but intervention should
not be overlooked as a useful tool to influence the market. A Norwegian pointed out
that the U.S. could more easily accommodate foreign exchange rate volatility because
the relative volume of its external trade was small. So the Americans were bound to
intervene less than the Europeans and Canadians in the exchange markets. A Swiss
participant complained that, not just the level, but the volatility of U.S. interest rates
over the past two and a half years had had a most disturbing effect on European
capital movements and interest rate levels.
An American predicted a high U.S. dollar exchange rate for the foreseeable future
as a result of the Reagan administration's economic program, which he analyzed in
some detail. The fundamental assumption had been that the U.S. economy needed
structural change to break the pattern of high consumption and low savings; and that
this could best be brought about by lowering the level of corporate and personal taxes,
which would not only enhance incentives to produce but would also increase the
supply o·f savings available for fresh investment. The problem was how to achieve this
without introducing disruptive forces which threatened the objective. As it turned out,
though, the expectations of higher savings and investment had been offset by a second
pattern of change: reduced spending for social programs accompanied by a rapid and
massive boost in military spending, leading to a large budget deficit. That deficit
should be evaluated, not in terms of its relation to GNP, but as a percentage of funds
available in the market. This might be as much as 50 per cent, which was extraordi-
narily high. A way had to be found to reduce the deficit, with its crowding-out effect,
until the enhanced revenues from the lower supply-side tax rates began to flow. The
incidental rise in interest rates had unfortunately set off expectations contrary to the
ones intended by the program, and had contributed to dislocations abroad. The
Reagan administration had to confront that dilemma as it tried to reconcile the
commendable aim of long-term American structural change with the immediate
implications for the international markets. In the meantime, the speaker was grateful
for the steadfastness of the Federal Reserve Board. He was supported by a compatriot
who stressed that high interest rates were the fault, not of the Federal Reserve, but of
inflationary expectations.
A Belgian participant, who was seconded by others, said that Europeans felt
awkward about criticizing the U.S. when they had not done everything possible to put
78
their own houses in order. Nonetheless, the impact of U.S. policy was so far-reaching
that Europeans felt bound to speak out. A Briton, for one., reckoned that the U.S.
deficit could be trimmed by as much as $50 billion a year by increasing gasoline taxes
to the levels that Europeans were accustomed to. A German participant asked how
long the world could endure the unprecedented high level of interest rates without
severe repercussions on investment, employment, and our social and political struc-
tures. Expectations about the structure of U.S. budgetary revenues and expenditures
were as unsettling as the size of the projected deficit. It could be instructive to look at
the experience of the Federal Republic of Germany, where interest rates had been
bro_ug.ht down over recent months from a peak of 11.7 per cent to 8Yi per cent. This
had been due to an improvement in the country's current account and a dampening of
inflationary expectations, which had induced the unions to accept lower nominal wage
increases-although higher real wage increases were still feasible. As the economic
environment changed, the bargaining position of unions was getting weaker, which
had important political implications.
An American participant said that he shared the aims of the author of the U.S.
working paper, but could not agree with the implied disparagement of the achieve-
ments of the last 40 years. Jobs and per capita incomes were growing, and the
proportion of people living below the poverty line had dropped. The job-training and
food stamp programs had strengthened American society. Compared to those com-
passionate measures, he said, the effects of Reaganomics had been "disastrous."
America's economic troubles were traceable to the inadequate financing of the
Vietnam war, the oil price rise, the archaic U.S. health care industry, and the Federal
Reserve policy on interest rates, which had stifled construction. The present
administration's program would put the burden of fighting inflation on those who
could least afford it. This was ideology, not economics.
The author of the American paper intervened here to point out this parauox: The
people most hurt by inflation were the poor and unemployed whom the politicians
aimed to help by the spending which led to the inflationary deficits. Until we got those
frightening deficits under control, we were skating on thin ice and there would be little
hope for a revival of growth and stability.
Another American was more hopeful about prospects for his country's economy.
Viewed in relation to GNP, the debt burden was "not cataclysmic." It was true that
savings were inadequate, and this issue should be addressed within the framework of
tax reform~ It_was in the interest of the government not to tax personal savings, so
that they would flow into the investment pool. For like reasons, companies should be
allowed to deduct dividends paid on preferred stock, which were analogous to interest
charges. By 1985, the Federal government ought to be moving toward a responsible
system. of dual budgeting, which would distinguish capital investment from current
expenditure. The U.S. General Accounting Office and two commissions had recom-
mended that, but the two previous administrations had been opposed to it, as was the
Office of Management and Budget at present. This reform would produce better
control of the government's commitments and cash flow and would facilitate the
setting of priorities. We ought to focus on reasonable hopes as well as our fiscal fears,
which could be immobilizing.
A Canadian participant quoted a friend's observation that what was happening in
their country "may well work in practice, but will never work in theory." Canada was
experiencing high unemployment, high interest rates, high inflation and slow
growth-a combination for which the textbooks had no remedy. As the International
author had pointed out, countries where neither the market mechanisms nor the
consultative mechanisms were working well were in serious trouble. How much
divergence in the economic policies of industrialized nations was compatible with the
79
maintenance of international economic order? The answer to that was hard to
quantify, but we were certainly close to the edge. The speaker saw no evidence yet of
the convergence of the two models described in the working papers, and he was
dubious about the claim that the U.S. model, being more market driven, was
necessarily more adaptable to change. At the national level we had to get the right
macroeconomic mix to insure recovery, and internationally we ought to make better
use of existing multilateral institutions rather than seek to resolve economic issues
bilaterally. Above all, we should stop blaming other countries for problems that were
of our own making.
A Frenchman said that we all shared a collective responsibility for the working of
the international economic system. The task was complicated by the fact that the
European economies were, in varying degrees, mixed systems. If some measure of
international order were not restored, we would be confronted with permanent
instability. The eighties would not be a decade for resting on our laurels. Even if we
had a technical recovery, it was unclear how much unemployment and interest rates
would decline from their present high levels. France had taken a positive approach to
the problem of bringing down both inflation and interest rates, he said, and the results
had not been without beneficial effects at home and abroad. Our relationships with
countries of the Third World were vitally important. We had to make a greater effort
to understand their situation; many of them faced the prospect of becoming even
poorer.
A Greek participant expressed strong opposition to limiting the flow of funds
through the World Bank and the IMF to the developing world. We should, on the
contrary, encourage the accumulation of investment in those countries through both
public and private channels.
A speaker from Portugal, on the other hand, said that the developed world was
being "attacked, almost in a military way" by a wave of products from the newly
industrialized nations. Scientific technology had taken root around the globe at the
same time as the revolution in transport and communication, permitting exports at
competitive prices. The first waves had brought automobiles and optical and audio
equipment from Asia, and succeeding waves would bring such disparate products as
aircraft from Brazil and light bulbs from Hungary. There was no doubt that
manufacturers and their workers in the Atlantic countries would suffer, but the effect
went beyond that. We had seen in France, for example, how a stimulation in
consumer demand, instead of helping domestic industry, had simply enlarged the
trade deficit by bringing in more imports. The speaker called for a kind of "industrial
NATO" to coordinate and defend our interests on the economic front.
A British intervention refuted the notion that "OPEC must be crushed." That
organization had proved itself weak in the face of market forces, and was no longer a
danger to the Western economy. It now accounted for less than half of the free
world's oil production, and its member nations would be in net financial deficit this
year. OPEC amounted in effect to a Saudi exercise in smoothing out short-term price
fluctuations and stabilizing the market in enlightened self-interest, in the manner of
buffer stock management.
Looking back over the discussion, an American participant concluded that he
would be inclined to emphasize the similarities rather than the differences between
European and U.S. economic problems. The quarter century following World War II
had been an era of stability and economic growth in all directions, but it had carried
the seeds of its own destruction. We had acquired expectations and attitudes that were
proving unsustainable, and some of the bills were coming due, as it were. Foreign
lending had managed to ease some of the shocks of the oil price rise, but in the end
there was a limit to the lending capacity of banks and the credit of borrowers, even if
80
their trade was growing. In the same way, we had seen the limits to leveraging in our
domestic economies. In the perspective of U.S. history; there had never been an
inflation as long and intense as the one we had endured since the late 1960's. In the
fight against inflation, it would be useful to have stronger fiscal measures to
complement monetary policy, but that posed difficulties of acceptance, timing and
technique in the political context. Beyond that, we were up against structural
pr<;>blems in industry and the labor markets. There was an illusion that marginal
·economic tinkering might be effective, but that would not restore international
confidence and stability. Our problems grew out of domestic instability, and that was
where' the priority lay. The major question was how fast nominal wages could be
brought down to accord with the inflation rate, to eventually produce higher real
wages. There was some evidence that an economic revival would be accompanied by
significant productivity gains. The U.S. had already made good progress on the
inflation front, although'business was still experiencing an intense profit squeeze from
accumulated cost increases. With continued gains against inflation, it was hard to
imagine that interest rates would remain so high indefinitely, and therein lay some
hope for a resumption of sustained growth. For the moment, Americans were "failing
the course in budgetary arithmetic," which meant they were not likely to take the
clear, decisive action the situation required. Did we have enough time to do what was
needed? No one could say for sure, but the speaker was "not totally pessimistic."
81
V. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
* * * *
THE FALKLAND ISLANDS CRISIS
The British perspective. A British participant was invited ',o eJ.plain his country's
motives and objectives in the ongoing hostilities in the South Atlantic.
For at least 15 years, no British government had had a major interest in retaining
sovereignty over the Falklands. No government had felt that there was a vital military
or economic interest in holding onto the islands, and Britain would have welcomed an
accommodation with Argentina as long as it had been satisfactory to the Falkland
Islanders.
But Argentina had committed a naked act of aggression. Having negotiated
apparently in good faith only a few months before, Argentina had invaded the islands
without warning. The initial British response had been to appeal to the United
Nations, which passed Resolution 502, calling for a ceasefire, the withdrawal of
Argentine troops, and a negotiated settlement.
Why had Britain not just shrugged its shoulders, said it was a matter of 1,800
people 8,000 miles away, and forgotten lhe whole episode? If it had done so, it would
have been a clear-cut invitation for countries in any part of the world to use military
force to settle disputes. Argentina had no valid claim to the Falklands. The British
insisted that it was a matter of principle that the Argentines withdraw. This response
had come from the British people, and had not been generated by Parliament nor by
ministers. The British people were not about to put up with tr c Argentine action and
they did not want their government to do so, either.
The British objectives, then, were to remove the Argentine invaders and to restore
British administration. This was to be achieved by exerting diplomatic, economic and
military pressure on Argentina. Given the workings of the U.N. and the record of the
Argentine junta, it was not realistic to think that any sort of settlement could be
achieved without all three forms of pressure.
Britain had shown flexibility in its negot;ating position and was now insisting on a
bare minimum of conditions. It had scaled back the demand for an immediate
withdrawal in favor of a phased withdrawal, in which the British fleet would also
withdraw some distance from the islands. Instead of insisting on a return to British
administration, it had agreed to an internn administration that might include third
parties. And it had agreed to negotiate sovereignty, with the one caveat that it could
not agree in advance that Argentina would ultimately gain sovereignty.
Britain was grateful for the economic action taken by the Commonwealth and the
E.C. countries. And it understood that the U.S. had had to remain neutral during the
time it was playing an active diplomatic role. The NATO countries should certainly
urge continued flexibility in the British negotiating position, but they should also keep
in force economic sanctions against Argentina.
Britain knew that it was risking its national prestige, but it was fully prepared to
make the sacrifice. It had taken gradual military measures-first, 2 maritime block-
ade, then the retaking of South Georgia, then the establishment of the exclusion zone.
Ultimately it might have to invade part of the islands. Finally, Britain was well aware
that there were wider implications of the crisis. Jt was not blind to the danger of a
Peronist regime corning to power in Argentina, or of Soviet interference. It knew that
the U.S. had genuine regional interests in Latin America and had gravely damaged
those relations by corning down on the British side. Britain realized the situation couid
get out of control, with considerable repercussions. But backing down could have
82
equally serious repercussions. The global implications of allowing a nation to take up
arms, ignore a U.N. resolution and get away with it, were grave.
The American dilemma. An American participant described the conflicting consid-
erations which afflicted American policy on the Falklands issue. The initial American
_reaction had been similar to Britain's: if Argentina's use of force were allowed to
· succeed, it would set a dangerous precedent. Americans, too, were mindful of the fact
that Britain was their most dependable ally. It was certainly not in American interests
for Britain to be "intimidated by third world radicalism."
But the inter-American system was one of the oldest American foreign policy
relationships, and for the U.S. to compromise it would be akin to asking Britain to
risk Commonwealth ties. No matter how just the cause, deep emotional connotations
were involved.
The U.S. was concerned, too, that the overthrow of the Argentine military
structure, which would be the likely result of a total collapse of their effort in the
Falklands, would have consequences in Argentina far beyond the immediate issue. It
was not just a danger of Peronists coming to power, but of the removal of one of the
balancing elements in Argentine politics. If the Argentine military were discredited, it
was likely that a third-world, anti-Western, anti-market, pro-Cuba type of regime
would come in. (To such a regime Britain might hand over the Falklands, having
proved they could not be taken by force.) Such develoments in Argentina could have
consequences for Brazil and other countries in the area, and for the future evolution
of Latin America as a whole. This was a matter of the profoundest concern for U.S.
foreign policy and indeed for all of Western foreign policy.
Beyond Argentina and Latin America, there were global implications. A combina-
tion of radicalism and nationalism sweeping through Latin America could have
particularly unsettling effects in parts of the developed areas of the third world, which
we would all pay for in the years to come. In light of all these considerations, it was
understandable that serious Americans could hesitate before making an all-out
commitment to Britain.
Brhain, though, could not have taken another course, and her standing up to the
arbitrary me of force was in the interest of the West. But retaining the Falkland
Islands was not as important as defeating the use of force. It would be against
Western interests for Britain to fail, but the U.S. hoped for a settlement in which both
sides' objectives could to some extent be achieved.
While the U.S. recognized that Britain could not relinquish sovereignty under
military pressure, it might lend strong support to the British demand for Argentine
withdrawal, but leave open its position on the sovereignty issue. It might have been
helpful for the British if the U.S. had defined the terms of the negotiations earlier and
separated the political from the military issue. Strong U.S. support for Britain on the
basic principle of use of force, combined with a willingness to see the Argentine point
of view on the political issue, might have provided the bridge whereby the generals
could get off the islands. Surely they had taken a position they had come to regret and
did not know how to escape.
In short, the chief U.S. concern was to get Argentina off the Falklands and to begin
a political process that would not wreck the inter-American system. We needed some
means of getting the issue settled diplomatically, removing the Argentines in a manner
that would not foster radicalism in Latin America. It was the role of Britain's friends
to help it on the issue of use of force, but also to seek to provide an exit-not one on
which Britain had to commit itself immediately, but one which gave the Argentines
some hope of an ultimate outcome compatible with their views. It was a challenge
which required very creative diplomacy on the part of the U.S. and Europe.
83
Negative views of Britain's response. While virtually every speaker condemned
Argentina's invasion as an act of aggression, many took a dim view of Britain's
response. One American said that while he sympathized with the British position, he,
too, was deeply concerned about the implications of the Falklands crisis for American
and Western interests in Latin America. The U.S.-Latin America relationship was an
important and delicate one with a mixed history. It could be characterized as a love-
hate relationship. The U.S. had not always handled itself well in the region, and the
recent declaration of support for Britain had been met with universal hostility in Latin
America. This had serious implications, especially for U.S. financial relationships.
An Austrian suggested that America's inability to negotiate a peaceful settlement of
the crisis was indicative of declining U.S. prestige in Latin America. If things
continued as they were going, warned an International speaker, the U.S. would no
longer have to worry so much about Cuba and EI Salvador, because Argentina would
become a Soviet base in Latin America. And a Frenchman feared that the Falklands
crisis might cause Argentina to become a nuclear power sooner than expected.
Another International speaker felt strongly that the British response to the Argen-
tine invasion was inappropriate. The ends did not justify the means. It was a game in
which everyone was going to lose. The Falklands were militarily indefensible, and in a
few years the British would have to hand them over to a Peronist regime. The U.S.
relationship with Latin America would suffer bitterly; the North-South issue would be
sharpened; the present British government would fall; and the English Channel would
widen. The speaker felt a sense of disappointment in Britain, a country from which he
expected wisdom and moderation. What we were seeing was a "colonial hiccup."
Several participants were surprised that Britain had not dealt with such a potentially
explosive problem earlier and more seriously. Why had such a dangerous situation not
been given more attention? And now that it had erupted, was the British reaction,
after such neglect, not disproportional? A Dutchman accused the British of having
ignored clear warning signs that trouble was brewing. A Spaniard agreed, saying he
doubted Britain had made a serious effort in years past to negotiate a settlement.
A Portugese speaker felt that Britain had jeopardized international support by
starting the killing in the Falklands. A Dutch participant agreed, saying that once the
shooting and the loss of lives had begun, one encountered in Europe a ''feeling of
disgust." People were disgusted that a colonial problem could lead to a bloody crisis,
that Western diplomacy should break down, that an obviously w&J.1-planned invasion
could catch the West unaware, and that the U.S., with its influence in Latin America,
could not stop it.
Continued European support in the form of economic sanctions could not be taken
for granted, a German warned. They were up for renewal in a few days, and he
expected a lively debate. Given Europe's current economic problems, the British
attitude was not appreciated by everyone.
Positive views of the British response. A British speaker said that his country
appreciated the difficulties the crisis presented to the U.S. Britain had been in full
accord with the neutral U.S. stance during the Haig negotiations, which Britain had
hoped would succeed. But when it had become clear that the Haig mission would not
succeed, there would have been widespread anti-U.S. feeling in the U.K. and a serious
rift between the two countries if the U.S. had not come down on Britain's side.
Suggestions that the ends sought by the British did not justify their means
amounted to "a cop-out,'' the speaker went on to say. There were no other means
available to demonstrate that aggression did not pay. Britain was using military force
in a way carefully calculated to give maximum backing to the diplomatic effort and to
result in minimum loss of life. There was room for a peaceful settlement, but no
84
chance of one without the naval task force because the Argentine junta did not
understand the language of sanctions and of diplomacy.
Another Briton disagreed with those who felt nothing good would come out· of the
Falklands crisis. Assuming there would not be a British defeat, he saw a restoration of
confidence in the alliance, especially on the European side. The effective use of
sanctio'ns was a shot in the arm of the E.C., representing the first time the political
objective of the E.C. had been given some reality.
The Latin American result .did not have to be entirely negative either. If the crisis
ended in a reasonable outcome, there would be respect for the U.S. and its allies for
standing up and demanding a correct solution. The worst result would be for Britain
to do badly and for the U.S. to be seen to have allowed it to.
An American argued that an Argentine failure in the Falklands would not
necessarily result in a Peronist or pro-communist regime. The invasion had been
clearly the act of a reprehensible government trying futilely to stave off economic
collapse. Its failure could be an opportunity. The fall of the generals might, with some
subtle outside assistance, be a turn for the better and even a strengthening of U.S.
interests in Latin America. A more moderate general might take over, or there might
be a meaningful move toward democracy.
Indeed, the U.S. ought to review its attitudes and policies in Latin America,
suggested a Briton. Many in Europe and elsewhere condemned America's support of
dictatorship in Argentina and its policies in countries like EI Savador and Guatemala.
Several speakers saw positive implications for NATO arising from the Falklands
situation and Britain's actions. Europe had acquired the image, in the view of a
Frenchman, of a group of nations that "just never react, who are totally hamstrung
by their colonial past.'' As a result, Europe felt itself to be a continent living under the
protection of the U.S.-a situation not good for Europe or for U.S.-European
relations. Britain's action in the show of solidarity had bolstered morale within
NATO. It was a good thing, especially in the Middle East and Africa and other areas
where Europe had interests, to be seen as a group of countries capable of military
action when necessary.
A Greek speaker agreed, saying that rather than criticize Britain for its reaction,
one ought to condemn the European countries for not reacting often enough, and for
allowing incidents to go unchallenged, which Argentina surely had not failed to
notice. It now required sacrifice and effort to reassert the principle that Europe would
not stand by and see the rule of law violated. That was a sacred principle, and for
violating it, Argentina should be given nothing more than a trusteeship over the
Falklands.
The current criticism of Britain's reaction reflected, in the view of an International
speaker, the prevalent mood in Europe that no issue could justify action that entailed
loss of life. This was a major concern for NATO. It could lead to a situation where we
would not defend ourselves in an attack for fear of loss of life. To put pressure on
Britain not to land troops on the Falklands because of the potential loss of life was to
forget who had started the military action. A Briton responded to expressions of
outrage over the sinking of the General Belgrano by saying that Argentina had been
warned that any movement that appeared threatening would be acted upon. Once
forces were committed, it was unrealistic to expect that no one would be killed.
As for the danger of greater Soviet interference in South America, we could assume
the Soviets were closely watching the British reaction and its implications. Surely they
had realized that the ·west was in earnest and had decided to stay out of the crisis.
They now ~ad a clear sigl'l:al that the NATO partners were capable of reacting.
(Indeed, as one speaker pointed out, failure of the British to act might have led the
85
Russians no longer to take very seriously the alliance guarantees of the status quo in
Berlin.)
With respect to concern about Argentina going nuclear sooner because of the
Falklands crisis, a Briton said that it did not much matter because Argentina was
going nuclear anyway. In any event, it was high time the West considered the
possibilities of a major nuclear confrontation if regimes like the one in Argentina got
their hands on nuclear weapons. The conflict, the speaker continued, had heightened
the importance of conventional weapons. It had shown how vulnerable surface ships
were and what a powerful weapon the nuclear submarine was. NATO should be
building more of them.
As to the charges that Britain had not dealt with the problem of the Falklands
sooner, the British speaker admitted that perhaps it should have done so. But it had
been seriously negotiating earlier this year. Indeed, the present government had gone
further than any previous one by offering a proposal to grant Argentina sovereignty
and to lease back the islands. Summing up his country's position, the British speaker
agreed that sovereignty ought not to be the main issue, nor should self-determination
for the Falklanders. Britain needed to show it meant to defend vigorously the
principle that aggression did not pay. The longer Argentina saw divided counsel in
Europe and uncertainty in the U.S., the longer it would hold on. Ultimately there
would be some sort of accommodation. Britain was not going to keep a garrison on
islands far out in the South Atlantic with no strategic objective. Britain knew that a
glorious conclusion was not in the cards; it too was prepared to pay a price.
* *
*
EAST-WEST RELATIONS: POLAND, TRADE AND FINANCE
A European view of East-West relations. A Norwegian member of the panel felt
that the Soviet threat would remain the main political and security problem confront-
ing the West and the dominant factor in most conflicts within the NATO alliance.
Yet the Soviet threat fulfilled the Norwegian proverb that "nothing is so bad it isn't
good for something." Without that threat, cooperation among the democratic nations
of Europe and North America probably would not exist. The threat of communism
had helped us achieve a better understanding of the valm:s of our own societies and
had promoted the development of freedom, human rights and social justice.
But the nature of the threat had changed. Communism had lost its ideological and
political appeal; there remained only the military threat. The common man no longer
had any illusions about the communist system. Indeed, some communist leaders were
beginning to make adjustments in traditional communist policies, especially in the
economic sphere.
The remaining military threat was substantial, however, and we should not be lulled
into a false sense of security by the problems in the East. The aims of the Soviets
remained unclear; we could not know how they would act in the future. We did know
that they did not hesitate to use force to pursue their interests. They held their own
people and those of the Warsaw Pact countries in a firm grip. We might well ask
ourselves, if they treated their friends like this, how would they treat their enemies?
The military capacity of the Soviet Union was enormous, and a major East-West
conflict would be catastrophic. Our aim therefore should be simple: to prevent the
spread of Soviet dominance and preserve world peace. To achieve these ends, we
86
needed in our dealings with the Soviets strength, firmness, solidarity, patience and
moderation.
Strength: We could not allow the Soviets to hold military superiority. A military
balance was essential for world peace. We could achieve such a balance by obtaining
_.m\ltual arms reductions, and we should always be ready to negotiate to that end.
Firmness: We had to make clear the limits beyond which the Soviets could not go
and we would not be pushed. Our failure in this respect had led to the breakdown of
the detente policies of the 1970's. We could not afford to give the Soviets something
for nothing.
Solidarity: The Soviet Union was doing its best to split the West and to play upon
the conflict betw1~en Europe and the U.S. Close and frequent consultation among the
NATO allies was the best remedy for this.
Patience: We could not expect quick results in our negotiations with the Soviets.
Delay was one of their tactics and an outgrowth of their distrust of us.
Moderation: We had to make clear that it was not our aim to break up the Soviet
security system or unravel what they saw as their empire.
Our aims, rather, were to maintain security for ourselves and respect for our
interests. At the same time we sought a movement in the East toward greater respect
for human rights, tolerance of dissenting opinions, and freer flow of information. But
we could not force these things on the Soviets with sanctions and coercion. The
communist attitude toward personal freedom and human rights could only be
ameliorated if the leaders of the communist world realized it was in their interests to
do so. We had to make them understand that change was a precondition to developing
friendly relations with the West. It would be a long process, and we had a long way to
go. But, in spite of our misgivings and frustrations, we had already '.iade progress.
An American perspective. The first assumption of U.S. policy toward the Soviet
Union, an American panelist said, was that it was in a serious and worsening crisis
whose implications were not clear. The crisis had several aspects:
Ideological: Communism had Jost its appeal both internally and externally. The
Soviet regime could no longer evoke the enthusiasm among its people needed for the
system to -work. There remained only an appeal to nationalism.
Political: The Soviets had overexpanded their empire. They had assumed responsi-
bilities they could not meet.
Demographic: The growth rate of Russian and other Slavic populations was steadily
declining, while that of the colonial minorities was rising. By the end of the century,
the majority of Red Army recruits would be non-Russian. There would also be a
negative impact on the labor force.
Economic: This was the most serious crisis. The Soviets were paying the penalty for
taking control of the national economy, which was steadily declining. There was a
lack of incentives, the economy was overcentra!ized, poor investment decisions were
made, and vast subsidies were laid out for non-productive purposes. The military
sector used up a grc>wing proportion of national resources. To keep its empire
together, the Soviet Union had to expend large sums: $3 billion to Cuba, $1 billion to
Vietnam, $1 billion for the war in Afghanistan. The economic crisis was also wreaking
internal havoc in areas like health care and food. To make matters worse, the export
markets on which the Soviet Union relied for hard currency-gold, oil, and dia-
monds-had softened, resulting in a severe liquidity crisis.
The Soviet Union had weathered crises before, but this time they lacked the human
resources to recover. They were entering a period of revolutionary crisis. Their
political superstructure was no longer in accord with their economic infrastructure.
Something had to give, and it was more likely to be the political structure. The Soviet
leadership could be expected to go one of two routes. They could adopt economic
87
reform along the lines of Hungary. Or they might take the aggressive route, with an
appeal to nationalism. Which way they went depended largely on internal factors, but
the West could have some influence.
The American view was that the West ought not to help the Soviets out of their
predicament by transferring capital and technology without demanding a quid pro
quo. By withholding these things, the U.S. government was seeking to force the
Soviets to face the consequences of their system and take the route of reform.
Poland and the use ofsanctions. In determining what NATO's reaction to events in
Poland should be, a German panelist warned that although we felt a sense of outrage
at the imposition of martial law, our outrage had to remain impotent in the nuclear
age. NATO had not been founded to defend the allies of the Soviet Union against the
Soviet Union. The line across Europe had to be respected. A military response, an
American agreed, was out of the question. We could only consider economic
measures. The question was how and to what extent to apply them. Their use
presented both opportunities and problems. A member of the panel gave a European
banker's perspective on the use of economic measures. In deciding whether or not to
grant credit to countries that did not behave as we wanted them to, we had to ask
whether politics or economics came first. There was no clear-cut answer.
On the one hand, it could be argued that finance followed trade, in a cause-and-
effect relationship. In that case, a banker had to worry mainly about the creditworthi-
ness of his borrower. When a government placed an embargo or trade restraint on a
country, the resulting financial questions were the banks' problem. While it was
fashionable to criticize banks for their policies toward different countries, few people
realized that banks were as highly dependent as trade and business upon establishing
good, stable customer relations.
On the other hand, it could also be said that, in the modern world, trade followed
finance. Providing finance determined whether or not a trader or manufacturer could
survive in the international marketplace. In this case, financial institutions had to
worry about the whole range of economic, social and political conditions in their own
countries, as well as in those with which they were doing business-employment
levels, utilization of capacities, current accounts, growth, exchange rates, even
inflation. But the responsibility for these things rested with the politicians, who set up
the framework within which banks had to act. All banks could do was press the
politicians to maintain as favorable a business environment as possible. This was not
to say that banks did not on occasion have to make decisions with political
implications.
Responding to criticisms that banks had gone on doing business as usual in Poland,
the speaker pointed out that business in Poland had been anything but usual. Banks
and financial institutions were functioning there under very adverse conditions, with
no assurance they would be paid back. A Dutch participant, however, had little
sympathy; banks, he said, should not have been lending to countries they knew could
. not repay their borrowings.
There was a need, several speakers felt, for some kind of restriction on credit.
Perhaps this was already happening, suggested a Briton; governments were becoming
less willing to back credit and, given the huge size of the Soviet debt, banks might
soon be less permissive about extending credit to the East bloc. An American
recommended that all NATO governments agree to eliminate both guarantees and
subsidies for credit extended to the Soviet Union. The banking system would take care
of the rest through the market system and assessment of risk. The U.S. government
had been withholding subsidies and guarantees in recent years, and American banks
had not been extending new credit to the Soviet Union.
88
A Dutch speaker agreed that the West had been overlending. We should stop
subsidizing these loans and we should coordinate our economic policies with regard to
the East. A Frenchman added that the Western countries should not compete for
Eastern business on the basis of terms and conditions to the extent that there were
t_erms and conditions which should be the same for everyone.
· The question of coordinating economic policy was a crucial one. Many participants
felt we had not done this sufficiently in the past, with the result that we sometimes
used measures that hurt ourselves more than our adversaries and that imposed
unequal burdens on the NATO countries. Trade restraint, for example, tended to be
more painful for Europe than for the U.S. because external trade represented a far
higher proportion of GNP in Europe.
Coordination of economic measures also offered an opportunity to show cohesion
and solidarity in a crisis. We needed to examine together and agree as a group, in
advance of a crisis, what conditions should trigger sanctions, what kind of sanctions
should be used, and when they should be lifted. Such agreement in NATO, an
American argued, could be a powerful weapon in influencing behavior before a crisis
became extreme. Without such consultation and agreement, sanctions were an empty
gesture, "a demonstration of intent without impact."
A British speaker agreed, saying we needed to decide on gradations of sanctions. It
was impossible to gauge the effect of sanctions before they were applied, but we ought
at least to discuss them in advance.
But was such consultation and agreement beforehand feasible, asked an American.
The Allies had tried in 1980 to decide what sanctions should be imposed if the Soviets
invaded Poland. The prevailing opinion was that, because it was impossible to know
the severity of what might happen, it was futile to create an agenda of sanctions; we
had to await the occasion before deciding. Sanctions, the speaker felt, could only be
applied in the heat of the upheaval.
The effectiveness ofsanctions. Numerous participants questioned the usefulness of
sanctions. It was a German's view that many of the sanctions imposed as the result of
the Polish situation amounted to nothing more than "helpless posturing." Two
speakers cit1<i:l. the cause of Rhodesia as an example of the ineffectiveness of embargos.
Just as Rhodesia had had little difficulty getting cars, computers, and other Western
goods, so the Russians would always get whatever they wanted. By not trading with
them, warned a French speaker, we lost the ability to control the end use of the
equipment they were getting.
The effect of sanctions upon the Soviet leadership was unclear. Applying sanctions
on them was, said one participant, "like shooting in the dark." Furthermore, added a
German, a large proportion of the credits to the East bloc went to countries that even
the U.S. government wanted to gain more independence from the Soviet Union.
Putting credits under total international control, continued the German, would be
another step toward central planning, toward government control over capital
movements. We could not use Marxist weapons to fight communism.
An International speaker felt we knew far too little about the functioning of
sanctions. We tended to make ideological rather than political determinations of their
applicability. We had no idea of what kinds of sanctions worked and what kinds did
not, and under what circumstances. Our economic system of the free market was
better geared to incentives than to sanctions. How could we make the use of incentives
and sanctions as political instruments compatible with our system? Until we had some
answers, we were perhaps not justified in calling for sanctions in a crisis and
criticizing those who did not go along.
In using sanctions we ran the danger of being the ones to start another cold war, a
German warned. We had to keep the prospects for long-term cooperation open.
89
Furnishing credits and technology, not withholding them, would make reform
possible in Eastern Europe.
But another German took issue with this view. The theory of cooperation leading to
long-range reform was oversimplified and wrong. Perhaps trade produced changes in
the humanitarian and social areas, but not in the economic system, nor in the power
structure of communist countries. We had to try to influence with sanctions the
behavior and policies of the power elite. We should neither deny the East all trade,
credit, and technology nor provide these things to them regardless of their behavior.
We should use economic measures as a moderate weapon to influence intergovern-
mental behavior.
An American agreed that there was leverage in financial credits, but he feared that,
with the huge number of outstanding loans, the leverage was moving to the other side.
Nonetheless, we should always make clear in our dealings with the East bloc that
sanctions were a possibility. Those who opposed them were advocating that we be
allowed to sell to the East the rope to hang us. And those who argued that sanctions
hurt us more than our adversaries were wrong. The Olympic boycott was a case in
point. It had deprived the Soviets of the stage on which to show off their system in a
controlled way and it had had deep financial costs in terms of lost television revenues
and hard currency from foreign exchange.
Another American speaker pointed out that the transfer of U.S. technology to the
Soviet Union had helped build up the Russian military machine. This was a matter of
grave concern to the current U.S. administration.
Detente. We should take care that sanctions did not derail the process of detente,
said a German speaker. There was a difference in perception between most Europeans
and many Americans about detente. It had been a reality for Europeans, especially
Germans, and had yielded palpable gains. It had defused the Berlin situation,
provided more contact between East and West Germany, and improved the relations
of the East European countries with the Soviet Union and of the East European
people with their governments. Without detente, the speaker ventured, repression in
Poland would have come sooner and been harsher.
But another German felt that, while there had been some benefits from detente, we
had also paid a price for it. It was a policy that was supported by some realists, but
also by many who had lost touch with realism, who had lost sight of what the Soviet
Union stood for. The political consequence of detente was that our will for the
defense of freedom and our conviction in our moral values had suffered.
The harshest view of detente came from an International participant who felt that
none of its expected advantages had materialized. The Soviet Union had not changed
its international behavior, there had been few steps toward greater liberty and human
rights in the Warsaw Pact countries, and the Soviets had not abandoned their
expansionist goals and policies. The West had derived only "fringe benefits" from
detente, and most of those had gone to the Federal Republic of Germany.
Yet, in the view of many speakers, there was no alternative to detente. It was the
best-if not the only-instrument we had to effect change over the Jong run. We had
had detente for only 10 years, and the kind of change we were seeking occurred very
slowly. As Jong as we took care of our defense and security, we could afford to pursue
detente. It had not worked in Poland, but it might work the next time somewhere
else. At some point the Soviets would feel the need for reform themselves; or they
would tolerate reforms in their satellites that they would not allow in the Soviet
Union; or they would be too weak to prevent such reforms.
Unity in the NA TO alliance. A British speaker agreed with the Norwegian panelist's
view that the Soviet threat had brought the NATO allies together, but he felt we had
90
not taken sufficient advantage of that. We tended to allow difficulties arising from
confrontation with the Russians to promote disunity instead of unity.
A Dutchman remarked that those in the future who read the history of the 1980's
would be astonished to see how events in Poland which were disastrous for the Soviet
Union had been turned into such a divisive issue for NATO.
~Our disunity plagued us especially with respect to crises outside the alliance area.
When the Russians had marched into Afghanistan, we had simply argued about what
to do. We needed to update our planning machinery for areas outside the alliance, a
Briton argued. Our first responsibility was to safeguard our own boundaries, but we
had to discuss among ourselves how to react to events in other parts of the world. If
we refused to do so, we would only harm ourselves. Judging from our response to the
Afghanistan crisis, the Russians might think they could get away with even greater
risks.
But, responding to a Turkish speaker's question about whether NATO should plan
a contingent reaction to a Soviet move into Iran, a Norwegian recommended that we
leave them in maximum doubt about what we would do. Smaller countries like
Norway were reluctant to see NATO commit itself to a strategy for areas outside the
alliance. It was fine to discuss and make plans, but the commitment should remain
unstructured.
A Frenchman wondered if we were not making too much of our supposed disunity.
Discussion and division among us were not a sign of weakness; it was the way we did
things. There always came a time in events when we united behind a common goal.
Call it the Pearl Harbor complex, or the Falklands complex; the fact was that it
transformed us into a formidable people. This presented a permanent danger for
those who would be our adversaries, and they should be reminded of it.
The Western alliance was the target of psychological attack from the Russians, a
German participant stated. They were trying to derail the double-track decision, to
break the Federal Republic out of the system, to spread fear, and to defame the U.S.
Despite these attacks, the speaker was optimistic. Poland had taught us that the moral
power of free nations was stronger today than ever before. And the Soviet Union,
morally, intellectually, and ideologically, had never been weaker. We in the West were
wrong to·thiuk we were lost. We would prevail as long as our leaders possessed moral
conviction and courage.
* *
*
CLOSING REMARKS
At the closing session, the Chairman referred to Mark Twain's characterization of
Wagner's music as being "not as bad as it sounds." This was, in a way, his feeling
about the present state of European-American relations after listening to three days of
wide-ranging discussion. He went on to express his thanks to all those who had
contributed to the success of the conference: to the Prime Minister, Mr. Willoch, and
his government; to the Norwegian hosts, especially Mr. Werring; to the authors of the
working papers and the discussion chairmen; and to the interpreters, the secretariat,
and the hotel staff.
91
