i
, I
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
PRINCETON
CONFERENCE
21-23 April 1978
NOT FOR QUOTATION
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
PRINCETON
CONFERENCE
21-23 April 1978
i
j
, I
!
.I
'l
:i
i I
,I
I
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS . .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. 5
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
I. WESTERN DEFENSE WITH ITS POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS
American Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . 11
International Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
An Overview of the Alliance Today . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
The General Evolution of East-West Relations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Crises Outside the Alliance Area .·. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
The Current Military Balance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Theater Nuclear Systems and the Neutron Bomb . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Consultation and Mutual Understanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Political and Economic Strains Within the Alliance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Detente and Arms Control ......................... : . . . . . . . . . . . 47
II. THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF PRODUCTION AND TRADE:
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE WESTERN
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
American Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
International Working Paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
The Role of the State in Structural Adaptation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Structural Change and Economic Growth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
Implications for Employment, and the Role of Labor............ 73
Trade Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
The Need for Monetary Stability.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
III. CURRENT PROBLEMS IN EUROPEAN-AMERICAN
RELATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
CLOSING REMARKS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
LORD HOME OF THE HIRSEL, K.T.
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR EUROPE:
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL
HONORARY SECRETARY GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
WILLIAM P. BUNDY
HONORARY TREASURER:
C. FRITS KARSTEN
AGNELLI, GIOVANNI
ANDERSEN, K. B.
ANDREATTA, NINO
ANGERMEYER, JOACHIM
BALL, GEORGE w.
BARTLEY, ROBERT L.
BATENBURG, ANDRE
BELL, GEORGE G.
BENNETT, SIR FREDERIC
BENNETT, JACK
BERTRAM, CHRISTOPH
BEYAZIT, SELAHATTIN
BREKKE, ToR
BRZEZINSKI, ZBIGNIEW
BULOW, ANDREAS VON
CARRINGTON, LORD
CARY, FRANK T.
CITTADINI CESI, IL MARCHESE
CLOSE, ROBERT-CHARLES
COLLADO, EMILIO G.
CoNABLE, BARBER B., JR.
CONSTANCIO, VITOR M.R.
CONTOGEORGIS, GEORGE
DAVIDSON, RALPH P.
DAVIGNON, VICOMTE
DELL, EDMUND
DIEBOLD, WILLIAM, JR.
ITALY
DENMARK
ITALY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
THE NETHERLANDS
CANADA
UNITED. KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
TURKEY
NORWAY
UNITED STATES
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
ITALY
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
PORTUGAL
GREECE
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
5
Ducc1, RoBERTO
DUISENBERG, WILLEM F.
EEKELEN, WILLEM F. VAN
ESAMBERT, BERNARD
FALLDIN' THORBJORN
FINLAY, MURRAY H.
FURGLER, KURT
GASTEYGER, CURT
GEDDES, SIR REA y
GEORGE-BROWN, LORD
GREENFIELD, MEG
GRIFFIN, ANTHONY G.S.
HAGGERTY, PATRICK E.
HAIG, ALEXANDER, JR.
HALBERSTADT, VICTOR
HALLGRIMSSON, GEIR
HANSEN, ROLF
HARVEY-JONES, JOHN H.
HAUGE, GABRIEL
HEINZ, HENRY J., II
HEINZ, H. JOHN., III
HERRHAUSEN, ALFRED
HouTHUYs, JEF
!GLER, HANS
JoHNsoN, JosEPH E.
KARBER, PHILLIP A.
KERSTEN, OTTO
KISSINGER, HENRY A.
KNIGHT, ANDREW
LAMBERT, BARON
LENNEP, JHR. EMILE VAN
LORD, WINSTON
LUNDVALL, BJORN
LUNS, JOSEPH M.A.H.
MoNTBRIAL, THIERRY DE
NEWHOUSE, JOHN
N0RLUND, NIELS
NusSBAUMER, ADOLF
0STRY, SYLVIA
0TTONE, PIERO
PETERSON, PETER G.
PITTI-FERRANDI, ROBERT
ROCKEFELLER, DAVID
6
ITALY
THE NETHERLANDS
THE NETHERLANDS
FRANCE
SWEDEN
UNITED STATES
SWITZERLAND
SWITZERLAND
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
CANADA
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
THE NETHERLANDS
ICELAND
NORWAY
UNITED KINGDOM
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
BELGIUM
AUSTRIA
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
BELGIUM
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED STATES
SWEDEN
!NTERNATIONAL
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
AUSTRIA
CANADA'
ITALY
UNITED STATES
FRANCE
UNITED STATES
LORD RoLL, oF IPSDEN
RosE FAAN~Ois DE
Rovr~A, DoN JuAN JosE
SAVONA, PAOLO
SILVESTRI, STEFANO
SNoY ET D'OPPUERs, BARON
SoLOMON, ANTHONY M.
SoMMER, THEO
SoNNENFELDT' HELMUT
S0RENSEN, SvEND 0.
STINSON, GEORGE A.
TATU, MICHEL
THORN, GASTON
TIDEMAND, OTTO GRIEG
TIIVOLA, MIKA
TREICHL, HEINRICH
UMBRICHT, VICTOR
WALLENBERG, MARCUS
WEIZSACKER, RICHARD VON
WHARTON, CLIFTON R., JR.
WHITMAN, MARINA v.N.
WILL, GEORGE
WILLIAMS, LYNN R.
WISCHNEWSKI, HA.l'\rs~Jti'RGEN
WOLFF VON AMERONGEN, OTTO
ZAIMIS, ANDREAS F.
ZYSMAN, JOHN
OBSERVERS:
BJARNASON, BJ~RN
ZIMMER-LEHMANN, GEORG
IN ATTENDANCE:
CoRDT, HERBERT
GETCHELL, CHARLES
HEINE-GELDERN' THOMAS
MuLLER, CHARLES W.
WINTHROP, GRANT F.
UNITED KINGDOM
FRANCE
SPAIN
ITALY
ITALY
BELGIUM
UNITED STATES
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED STATES
DENMARK
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
LUXEMBOURG
NoRWAY
FINLAND
AusTRIA
SWITZERLAND
SWEDEN
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
FED. REP. OF GERMANY
GREECE
UNITED STATES
ICELAND
AUSTRIA
AUSTRIA
UNITED STATES
AusTRIA
UNITED STATES
UNITED STATES
7
INTRODUCTION
The twenty-sixth Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Henry Chauncey
Conference Center, Princeton, New Jersey, U.S.A., on 21, 22 and 23 April
1978, under the chairmanship of Lord Home of the Hirsel, K.T.
There were 101 participants, drawn from a variety of fields: Government and
politics, diplomacy, industry, trade unions, banking, the armed forces,
journalism, education and specialized research institutes. They came from 18
Western European countries, the United States, Canada and various
international organizations.
In accordance with the rules a"dopted at each Meeting, all participants spoke
in a purely personal capacity, without in any way committing the government
or organization to which they belonged. To enable participants to speak
frankly, the discussions were confidential with no reporters being admitted.
The Agenda was as follows:
I. Western defense with its political implications.
II. The changing structure of production and trade:
consequences for the Western industrialized countries.
In addition to the above formal agenda, a half day's discussion was devoted
to current problems in European-American relations.
In opening the meeting, the Chairman, Lord Home, read the text of a
teiegram of good wishes which he had sent to the President of the United
States on behalf of all the Bilderberg participants.
9
l. WESTERN DEFENSE WITH ITS POLITICAL IMPLICATIONS
Two working papers, one by an American participant, the other by an
International participant, provided the basis for discussion of this topic.
Abbreviated texts of the two papers, as well as introductory remarks by their
authors, follow.
American Working Paper:
"SOME POLITICIAL ASPECTS OF WESTERN DEFENSE"
I.
The Western defense alliance has now existed for almost 30 years, a
remarkable record. In an age in which change is rapid and profound, it is
extraordinary that a group of nations should not only stay linked together for
so long, but should repeatedly se~rch for ways to make their alliance more
effective and enduring. For all their differences, the members of the alliance
have continued to see their fundamental interests served by its continued
existence.
Those interests vary in character among the several members. Broadly
speaking, however, the allies were drawn into the alliance, and have stayed in
it, because they see it as the most effective means of protecting themselves
from Soviet attack or from inhibitions on their freedom of action by the weight
of Soviet power. " ,-
Less than 40 years ago, it was possible for a single European power -
Germany - to pose a severe challenge to the survival of the USSR. Since the
end of World War II, though, no Western country has seriously harbored
aggressive or "revanchist" ambitions against the Soviet Union..On the
contrary, virtually all nations adjacent to the USSR have felt it necessary to
look to collective arrangements, but above all to the U.S. to buttress their
security.
It was not inevitable that the U.S. should have proved responsive to this
need. At least the history of the U.S. until World War II did not make the
American response clearly predictable. But having been drawn twice in a
generation into major conflicts originating in central Europe, the second of
which also evolved into a severe threat in the Pacific; and having seen its
hopes for an emerging world order under the aegis of great power cooperation
in the UN frustrated, the U.S. came to see its own security interests best
safeguarded by the maintenance of substantial and far-flung military forces
augmented by foreign alliances, thus breaking with a tradition of over 150
years.
ll
Recognizing that the USSR had survived from the war as the one other
militarily powerful state, the U.S. took only a short time to perceive that both
its strategic interests and its politicial values made it essential that Soviet
power should be contained at the lines it had reached in the late forties -for a
time some Americans talked of rolling it back and that the effects of that
power beyond those lines should be held to a minimum.
For Americans, this perception applied especially to Western Europe - the
nations of the North Altantic region with whom the U.S. had cultural and other
bonds and who seemed most threatened. And this indeed is where America's
first peacetime alliance since the early days of the Republic was formed and in
time took its most elaborate and intensive form.
The issue in the late forties and early fifties was not only that the danger of
expanding Soviet power made it essential for a group of European and North
American states to establish formal security relations. It was clear that that
portion of Germany not occupied by the Red Army had to be part of the area
protected and to be an active participant in the endeavor.
A majority of West Germans in time took a similar view. The European
alliance with America provided the institutional framework for incorporating
West Germany in the structure of the Atlantic world, thereby minimizing fears
of a militant German resurgence and enhancing prospects for eventual
European unity.
In sum, the emerging Western alliance reflected (l) the interest of Europeans
in an American commitment to their security, (2) an American perception that
the freedom of Western E-urope from Soviet attack or coercion was vital to the
well-being of the U.S., and (3) the recognition of all concerned that West
Germany should be protected by, and be a participant in, the common effort.
Despite many crosscurrents, debates about whose interests predominate,
arguments about strategy as well as the appropriate division of the burdens of
defense, differing views about the proper functions of the alliance beyond
defense in Europe, and numerous other issues, these fundamental interests and
perceptions have persisted and served to keep the alliance in being.
It was perhaps not the only instrumentality b:y which these interests could
have been satisfied, but so far it has proved to be the most satisfactory. No
significant democratic political elements within the member countries have
preferred any specific alternative with any serious appeal. (Western Communist
parties have grudgingly come to tolerate the alliance and the need for Western
defense efforts; the Italian party has even enunciated a positive rationale for
them. But there is of course serious reason to question whether the professed
acceptance of the alliance would in fact be reflected in the actions of these
parties were they to share governmental power in a member country.)
In America, where the commitment of military forces to Europe was
originally thought of as temporary, it has long since come to be viewed as
lasting into the indefinite future, although there have been debates about a
12
reductioncirr the size. The presumed inclination of Americans since Vietnam to
avoid foreign military involvements has not applied to ~urope, at least as f~r as
the stationing and improvement of U.S. forces there IS concerned. Amencan
debates about the efficacy of aspects of NATO equipment and strategy do not
concern the basic American interest in Europe's security.
France's withdrawal from the integrated command of NATO in the sixties
did not represent a repudiation of the basic premises of the alli~nce. There
were indeed many in France who believed that the French public. would b.e .
more likely to support the burdens of a sizeable defense establishment .1f
France were outside the formal military NATO structure. In any event, there IS
little reason to suppose that France's interest in safeguarding its security
vis-a-vis the USSR through an alliance including the U.S. has changed, even
though French spokesmen at times have questioned whet~er the Ameri~an
commitment can still be relied on in a situation of U.S.-Sov1et nuclear panty.
The "all-azimuth" defense doctrine never obscured the fact that the bulk of
French military efforts was concerned with the contingencies of attack from the
East.
There is likewise little reason to doubt that either Greece or Turkey still
prefers to see its security interests served through participation in the collective
defense effort of the Western alliance. But politically and emotionally charged
disputes have clouded· the security concerns that originally led them into
military association with the U.S. and then with the alliance. Greec~ has left
the integrated command but remained in the alliance, as .well as s~eking closer
ties with the European Community. In Turkey there 1s a genume sense of
grievance especi~llY vis-a-vis the _U.S. which, more than in any-other:-~llied
country, has given rise to questions-abouwb~.£Ontinu.ed wisdom ~nd utihty ~f
Turkey's Western security ties. But any substantial change m Tu~key s
orientation would hardly meet the requirements that have kept Turkey m the
alliance; and they would do substantial damage to the security interests of
Turkey's allies. So, interests may yet prevail over politics and emotion. (See
below Section III) .
Thus the conjunction of basic interests that led to the cr~at10n by the W~st
of the instrumentalities of collective defense in the late fort1es and early fift1es
has not fundamentally changed, and the geopolitical realitites suggest that they
are unlikely to change for the indefinite future. This does not, howev~r,
dispose of the subject. For there are many factors, real or apparent, wh1ch
influence the behavior of nations and their governments and may affect the
way even the most basic interests are perceived and implem~nted. .
The Western alliance has occasionally teetered on the brmk of suffenng
serious inroads in its cohesion because of the differences and even antagonisms
among members. But the allies have also been able ~ overcome, ~dapt to, ~r
manage such differences to a remarkable degree. ~hus, the basic strategic
concept embodied in 1967 in MC 14/3, to take an example, has served the
13
alliance well despite its compromises and the unevenness with which its
prescriptions have been implemented. It was an instance of sound political
decision-making in an area where total agreement is bound to be elusive. Its
continued retention as the underlying guide to allied defense is another such
instance.
But an accumulation of unresolved divergences may gradually come to
outweigh or obscure fundamental commonalities and then adversely affect the
common ~efense. We may be unable to do better than manage some problems,
but our b1as should be in favor of resolving them. Among present uncertainties
there ~s -the worrisome one that internal political changes in some allied
countnes may, for the first time since the forties, become so fundamental as to
raise the question whether that bias in favor of cohesion retains its vitality.
II
When Western defense arrangements were originally made, the Soviets
maintained large forces on their Western periphery; their actions in Easte~
and Southeastern Europe caused major concern about the extent of their
ambitions. The U.S. had major strategic advantages with respect to the USSR.
Although the Soviets had exploded their first nuclear devices, the U.S. had a
~umber of. usabl'? nuclear weapons and the means of delivering them to targets
m the Sovtet Umon. The American navy, along with those of Britain and other
allies, had substantial control of the seas, assuring both an additional means of
retaliating against Soviet territory from aircraft carriers and of protecting
se~anes needed to reinforce Europe. These forces, and modest American and
allied ground and air forces in Europe, were judged to provide substantial
assurance that local Soviet military superiority could be adequately offset and
that the Soviets were deterred from using it either directly or indirectly.
Th~ outbreak of the Korean war - widely seen as supported by the Soviets
- raised fears that American strategic advantages might no longer be adequate
t~ .d~ter Soviet attack in Europe, and the dispatch of four additional U.S.
dtvtswns to Europe was authorized. The S,upreme Allied Command Europe
was set up with General Eisenhower as its commander. Following the failure of
~he EDC in 1954, arrangements were made for German and Italian participation
m the 1948 Brussels Treaty, which was transformed into the WEU. After
German accession to NATO in 1955, German troops were added to the
Western forces arrayed against those of the USSR and its satellites in central
Europe, which were now grouped in the Warsaw Pact. The latter had been
created as a riposte to the FRO's entry into NATO but in fact changed little in
the Soviet-dominated alliance system.
I_n the l~te fifties, as the Soviet nuclear arsenal grew, questions were
senously ratsed whether the threat of recourse to American strategic nuclear
forces could be relied upon indefinitely to deter Soviet regional attack or to
14
resist ~Soviet pressure in central Europe. To meet these concerns, the U.S.
deployed increasing numbers and types of nuclear weapons t.o the Eur~pean
theater some suitable for use in a land battle and some also With a capac1ty to
reach ~argets inside the USSR itself. While retaining final authority for the
release of nuclear weapons, the U.S. distributed them to allied forces.
Gradually, in the sixties, nuclear weapons made their. appearance i~ Soviet
theater forces, but the West continued to hold substantial advantages m these
weapons. .
In connection with the emergence of theater nuclear forces, complex 1ssues
arose in the alliance about the precise role of nuclear weapons. These issues
have not been adequately solved to this day by the government~. and
institutions of the alliance. In all probability they can not be defimt1vely
resolved.
One of the issues was that while Europeans, particularly Germans, have a
major interest in the deterrent role of nuclear weapons, they are bound to be
qeeply concerned about the actual use of these weapons .on their soi~ or on s<:il
adjacent to them. Americans, while likewise interes~ed m the ~rst mstance m
deterring war, are chiefly concerned about the possible escalatiOn of a war to
strategic dimensions, i.e., involving American soil. They consequently have
been less inhibited in envisaging the use of nuclear weapons m theater warfare
should deterrence fail.
There is nothing sinister about this difference i? the perspec~ives .of ~he
allies. Its existence has long been recognized despite the goverrung doctnne
that the NATO "triad" (conventional defense, theater nuclear forces and U.S.
strategic f~rces) ·constitutes a seamless web of deterrenc~. F?r many ye~s
now the best means of overcoming the problem of the diffenng perspective
has 'been to concentrate on an effective conventional defense which would
deny the Warsaw Pact the certainty of quick breakthroughs and thus postpone,
for the West the need for immediate decisions concerning the employment of
nuclear wea;ons. In addition, of course, NATO's o~ficial flex~ble response
doctrine calls for possible use of nuclear weapons If con~entwnal d~f~~se
cannot hold the aggression. The attacker must thus operate with the possibility
that NATO might resort to nuclear weapons, whatever the divergences in
perspective between Americans and Europeans.
Still our nuclear "threshold" appears to be pegged at a relatively low point
for pu;poses of deterrence and at a relatively higher, though unspecified, point
for the event that deterrence does not work and a war may have to be fought.
The situation has been compounded by the strengthening of Warsaw. Pact
theater forces and many observers are concerned that the length of warrung of
an attack whi~h Western governments might expect, and of the time to prepare
for battle, are becoming dangerously contracted. This has n:ade correct~~n of
deficiencies in Western forces increasingly urgent, both to Impose addttlonal
requirements on the potential attacker, and hence increase warning time, and
15
to re~uce the urgency with which recourse to nuclear weapons may have to be
considered by the West. (This assumes that the Warsaw Pact does not itself
initiat.e the use of nuclear weapons, though some of its military literature
exerct.ses and force dispositions indicate otherwise.) '
While efforts to refine NATO's nuclear employment doctrines should be
pursu.ed, they ~an probably not be carried beyond a certain point because of
the ~1fference m perspective between the allies. The conventional capabilities
req.Uired for .a ~redible forward defense must, therefore, continue to be given
major attentiOn by all governments involved despite the attendant economic
burdens.
Credible f?rward defense requires forces which with relatively short warning
can blunt, ftght to a standstill, and then beat back enemy offensives on the
central front. These for.ces ~hould incorporate newly available weapons
system.s capable of a~tackmg With conventional ordinance enemy supply lines,
stockp~les, choke pomts and reserve concentrations well to the east of the
~attlefteld. The U.S., in its fiscal '79 budget, is also taking steps which in some
fiVe years would substantially increase the number of ground and air forces
that could be moved to Europe within ten days. These actions should be
pressed and accompanied by European actions likewise designed to augment
the forces needed for conventional forward defense.
Th~re are those who believe that American emphasis on the need for
effective forward defense indi~ates an intention to "decouple" the use of
nuclear we~pons from conventional defense and, in any event, to "decouple"
the strategic part of the NATO "triad" from the theater elements. Such
concerns were recently further aroused by press leaks in connection with PRM
10, tmplymg that the U.S. might be prepared to seek an end to a conflict in
central. Europe even though some portion of the territory of the Federal
Repubhc had. b~en overr~n. It is to be hoped that this unnecessary question
about the validity of.Alliance commitments has been put to rest.
. Whether other_ verswns ?f the "decoupling" concern will be put fully to rest
18 an open questton. Amencan plans to invest heavily in the forces stationed in
E~rop~ a~d to pre-position additional quan~ities of equipment in connection
With an _mcreas~d capactiy for rapid reinforcement should strengthen the
presu:nptiOn aga~nst "decoupling." These actions in fact would increase the
Amencan stake m a successful defense.
In any event, in supporting improved conventional capabilities for effective
for"':'ard defense ~oth in an initial battle and, if required, over a longer period
of t1me, I emp~atically d? not favor raising the nuclear threshold out of sight.
The opponent s uncertamty about the point when, and the manner how
nuclear wea~ons, including enhanced radiation weapons for anti-tank and othe;
purposes, mtght be used adds measurably to deterrence.
At _t~~ same time, all the allies should be able to face a battle with
capabilities that provide reasonable assurance that a decision whether to use
16
nuclear weapons will not impose itself on Western political leaders in the very
first moments of a conflict.
The disputes about the acquisition and deployment of the "neutron bomb"
an issue also being vigorously pressed by the Soviets - are regrettable.
Public information concerning the characteristics of this type of weapon
indicate that it would provide useful additional capabilities though far from
the only ones- particularly against the tank forces of the Warsaw Pact, which
have long been a concern for the West (and whose reduction has been one of
the major objectives of the MBFR negotiations).
Arguments that these weapons are peculiarly "inhuman", due to their
specific effects on ,personnel, seem to be misplaced when they are compared to
nuclear weapons now in the arsenals of both East and West, with equal if not
far more severe effects on human life. Arguments that these weapons represent
a technological developmen't that blurs the distinction between nuclear and
conventional weapons seem equally ill-founded. There is no evidence that
arrangements for releasing these weapons would be less rigorous than for
previously deployed types of nuclear weapons.
The point that their greater "usability" lowers the nuclear threshold, appears
to go back to the divergences over the location of the threshold within the
spectrum of flexible response. But the enhanced usability of a weapon should
not imply its immediate or careless use, especially since that matter has now
been highlighted in public and political discourse. On the other hand, an
attacker's awareness that such weapons are available to the other side may
contribute to deterrence by raising uncertainties about the prospects for
successful attack as well as for escalation. No doubt it is this latter effect that
evoked such vigorous Soviet pressures against deployment.
It would seem unwise to single out a particular technical development in
nuclear weaponry, especially one directly germane to the deterrence of theater
war in Europe, for separate negotiating purposes in MBFR or other forums .
MBFR negotiations already .include, at Western initiative, a possible tradeoff
between Soviet tank forces and Western nuclear capabilities in the geographic
area involved. Deployment decisions concerning particular weapons systems
might conceivably be related to progress in, and the eventual outcome of, those
negotiations. But it is hard to see why the West should deny itself benefits
from weapons which contribute to offsetting asymmetries in opposing force
capabilities and dispositions, the more so since the Western objective in the
MBFR talks is to seek improved stability by reducing asymmetries and
evolving relatively more balanced opposed forces, hopefully at lower levels.
The disputes that have arisen within the alliance over the "neutron bomb"
should serve as an incentive for better use of existing consultative mechanisms
and for conducting careful public debates about security issues on the basis of
the fullest available information. At a time when issues not directly related to
defense already impinge upon the coherence of the alliance, the divisiveness of
17
defense issues should be held to a minimum.
It was probably unwise to portray the neutron weapon, whose technology
has been available for over a decade, as a dramatic innovation and to allow
decisions concerning its procurement and deployment to appear psychologically
and politically more significant than a whole series of other decisions
concerning particular weapons systems which have been introduced into
NATO forces.
The issue is not one of secrecy versus openness. Matters of this sort are
always addressed in public consideration of the defense budget in the U.S., and
are regularly discussed in public by those concerned with NATO defense. In
this instance, the setting of deadlines for decisions and the special publicity
given to reputedly unique characteristics of the weapon produced domestic
political controversy out of all proportion with the issue. The unusual device of
making the U.S. production decision dependent on allied decisions concerning
deployment and hence a matter of intra-alliance bargaining rather than, as
customary, one of joint and cooperative decision contributed to these
unnecessary tensions.
The introduction of the "neutron bomb" would not require a major revision
of existing NATO doctrine; it would contribute to its implementation. That,
indeed, should be the broad effect of the various military actions by NATO and
individual governments that are currently being taken or contemplated. While
the recent improvements in Warsaw Pact forces will continue to require serious
efforts by the West to maintain an adequate. balance, they do not justify
revision of the basic concepts that have governed our defense policies for
several years (especially since a consensus for alternatives will be difficult to
attain). By the same token, the allies will have to insure that the meaning of
these established concepts is not eroded in practice. The problem with NATO
defense concepts has not been their inadequacy but the readiness of allies to
implement them satisfactorily and to adapt forces and dispositions to changes
in the threat.
III
Much concern has been devoted to the military imbalances that have
developed in central Europe and to measures required to redress them both by
unilateral action and by negotiation. But there is reason to be concerned as
well about the security of what are call "the flanks" (that is, allies located
north of the region where East and West abut in central Europe, i.e., Denmark
and Norway; and located to the south and southeast of the center which abut
or are adjacent to the Warsaw Pact, i.e., Italy, Greece and Turkey). Both
.~flanks" include important bodies of water where the relative naval balance
affects the security of the littoral states.
The term "flank" carne to be used for both areas because it was assumed
that the central front was the major area of confrontation and the principal
18
avenue· through which attack would occur; and Germany as a divided nation
see~ed to represent the main area of tension and thus the principal source of
possible war. But we should probably drop this terminology, insofar as it
implies a subordination of concerns re~ardin~ the north and the so~t~ to .tho~e
regarding the center. The North Atlantic Alliance makes no such d1stmction m
stipulating obligations between members; it regards an attack on any member,
wherever located, as an attack on alL
One can speculate whether a threat to a "flank" nation could occur wit~out
the center's being directly threatened; or whether a threat or attack rn1ght
occur in the center without simultaneous hostile actions in the north and south.
In the light of Soviet military dispositions in the north, it would be rash to
dismiss threats at least initially confined to the north, and it is wise to prepare
for military contingencies centered on the north. NATO, at least, would n~t
necessarily extend a conflict that arose in the north to the center, though 1t
might take action elsewhere. It cannot be assumed that sooner or later the
Warsaw Pact would move aggressively also in the center. And there is likewise
reason to be concerned'about contingencies in the south which might, or might
not, immediately involve the center.
In any case, while the security of the northern and southern members of the
alliance is of crucial importance to the security of the center, the former should
not be viewed as subordinate to the latter. This point is important because
there is a tendency to focus military planning on the needs of the center and to
view the military requirements in the north and south as being heavily
determined by the contribution that would be made to the defense of the
center. Thus,-there are those who would view the Sixth Fleet as having largely
a peacetime mission in the Mediterranean as well as some role in various
Middle Eastern conflict contingencies, but as being promptly diverted to
support a land battle in the center. Similarly, one hears that U.S. naval fo~ces
which may have peacetime missions in northern waters would rapidly
concentrate on the protection of the Altantic communications lanes to the
central front, while missions in the north would be discharged by aircraft
deployed to fixed land bases in Greenland, Iceland and the northern U.K.
The issues are highly complex and relate to unresolved questions about the
future size and composition of the U.S. Navy. Our legitimate concern with the
needs of the central front should not become a fixation to which all other
concerns are subordinated. Any sense that security in the north or south is no
longer of intrinsic importance would have a debilitating effect in those re~i?ns,
and in the center as well. It would also detract from deterrence. DecJswns
concerning the future character of the U.S. Navy should be made in
consultation with the allies; shifts in traditional deployment patterns should be
weighed in terms not only of improved flexibilities but also of what they may
convey about U.S. political priorities and how they affect deterrence and war
contingencies.
19
Of the two regions, the south presents the most disturbing problems. This is
not without its irony, since the Soviet threat in the Mediterranean does not
now loo~ as large as it once did. The loss of naval and air facilities in Egypt
has depnved. the USSR of important assets in the area and complicates
sus.t:;u~ed Soviet naval as well as air operations. While the Soviets have sought
fac!l~ties elsewhere to take the place of those lost in Egypt, they have not yet
obtamed them. Facilities available in Syria and those sought or used for limited
pur~oses in Libya, Tunisia and Algeria are less effective than those in Egypt.
~oviet naval operations in the Western Mediterranean are more sporadic than
m t~e past and the ~editerranean squadron must depend on more support from
Soviet bases, transit from and to which must take place through constricted
and po.tential!y dangerous waterways. Still, the uncertainties and hazards facing
the alliance In the area are major ones.
. In Italy'. the new political adjustments, including an enlarged Communist role
m th~ parliamentary coalition on which the minority government depends, have
o~y.Just been agreed on as this paper is being written. The Communists, while
stn.vmg for a. share of formal government power and contemplating a possible·
natiOnal electiOn .after the interlude of the presidential election, seem unlikely
to take overt actions affecting Italy's relations with the alliance or individual
~lies. They recognize that the majority of Italians continue to see Italy's
mt~ests best safeguarded by undiminished participation in the alliance as well
as m ot~e: :Vestern institutions. Political expediency thus dictates a posture
which mmlmizes questions about the PCI's loyalty to these associations. That
loyalty: however, is of recent origin and the completeness of the conversion
from bitter past opposition, at least to NATO, remains in question. But it does
not seem to be uniform throughout the leadership, cadres and members of the
party. Tactically, the PCI would probably try to leave any initiative curtailing
Italy's NATO role to other members.
What.ever th~ future .may _hold, there is a growing uncertainty about Italy's
future mternatwnal onentatwn. Italy's allies seem unclear how, or indeed
:-vhether, ~o seek .to influence these developments - apart from agreeing that
Improved International economic conditions,would benefit Italy and might slow
the PCI's political rise. But one can hardly be unconcerned about the
po~sibility, if the PCI continues its ascent, of a lessened Italian role in the
alliance and of curtailments in the use of Italian facilities by the U.S. and other
allied military forces.
Some may. believe :hat Italy's geographic position is so important that,
regardle.ss of 1~s status m the alliance, Western nations would defend it against
~e. ~ov1e~ l.!mon. Perhaps so, but the feasibility of doing so could be greatly
m?~b1ted If m the meantime Italy had become a de facto neutral, or if allied
m1htary power had had to be deployed at a great distance from Italy.
Moreover, the deterrent capacity of that power would probably also have
declined in the event of such redeployment.
20
It is Jr~quently suggested that a PCI government role might actually enhan~e
Italy's. participation in Western Defense, because the PCI would see Its
independence from Moscow best safeguarded by the maintenance of present
alliance arrangements. Consequently, it is argued, Italy's allies should plan now
for dealing with an Italy whose government includes Communists, and for ways
to encourage the PCI in its pro-western and anti-Soviet tendencies. If Western
governments wanted to engage in such contingency plans, they had best do so
in complete secrecy lest they contribute to self-fulfilling prophecies.*
The continued problems between Greece and Turkey, Greece's withdrawal
from the integrated forces of the alliance, and the estrangement of Turkey from
the U.S. all pose severe concerns to the alliance. There are signs of renewed
efforts by Greece and Turkey to explore improved bilateral relations and to
contain their conflicts. These efforts should of course be welcomed by the
allies. The U.S. in particular, but Turkey's other allies as well, must be
concerned by that nation's growing disenchantment with its Western
association and by the economic difficulties which further compound its
situation. Turkey's defense capacity meanwhile is declining, while the U.S. and
hence the alliance, is deprived of facilities important to Turkey's as well as to
the common defense.
It was hardly a coincidence that one of the crucial early steps resulting from
America's recognition that the defense of Europe was vital to its own security
was the Truman Doctrine. The imperatives that produced that initiative just
over 30 years ago, and then led to the inclusion of Greece and Turkey in the
alliance in the early fifties, have not changed. They have become more
compelling as Soviet power has grown and Soviet involvement in the Middle
East and Africa has intensified.
The Turkish government has insited that the question of Cyprus should not
be linked to the lifting of the U.S. arms embargo and the ratification of the
U.S.-Turkish Defense Cooperation Agreement (DCA). But a significant body of
political opinion in the U.S. continues to make the connection. This deadlock
is likely to persist if the issues continue to be treated in such stark terms. The
time has come to find ways in which partial or tentative actions on one side
would be reciprocated by actions on the other without explicitly connecting
them.
While the U.S.-Turkish deadlock is perhaps the most disturbing element for
the alliance, along with the danger of open Greek-Turkish hostilities, the
members of the alliance who are also members of the European Community
need to consider the effect of eventual Greek entry into the EC. This, together
with Spanish and Portuguese entry, is to be welcomed. But it would be
*This paper is being written before results of the French parliamentary election are known, and
includes no discussion of the potential impact on French defense policy of a possible Left victory.
It is hoped that such a discussion would have proved academic, and that trends toward de facto
French military cooperation with alliance forces in the south and elsewhere would continue.
21
unfortunate if Greek entry into the Com 't
Greece's active participation in NATO I ~um y were seen as a substitute for
of Greek-Turkish rapprochement . I~ ISbto be hoped that one of the results
participation in NATO. wou e the return of Greece to full
There is also the danger that Greece's . . .
serve to highlight the alienatio f T ~~corporatiOn m the Community would
detrimental to Western interest: eo ~; ey from the West. This would be
predictions that Turkey would fin~e~t I l;~e. does. not acc~pt the more dire
Turkey's military isolation were to ~es:cconven. mto SovJe~ ~rms. Still, if
malaise and general disassociation f h mpan:ed by persistmg economic
Turkish relations with Warsaw Pactl~m t e West, It. would not be surprising if
and if Soviet use of the Strait d omec~n co.untnes became more extensive
Whatev.er the rights and wron sso;~h Turkrs~ .rurspac~ became less inhibited.
Western defense if 50 gf e pas~, It 18 certamly not in the interest of
years o progress · ·
Western world were somehow t b m m~vmg mto association with the
B II o e reversed rn Turkey
y a odds, then, the question of G k T . :
b?th countries with the U.S. and hr~e - ur~Ish relatJO.ns, the. relations of
distrubing single complex of . t ~Ir. role m the alliance, IS the most
successully it could, des ite the r~sues .aci~g the ~lliance. If not managed
a breach in the southeasfern orti:::lymg m~erest m ~~llective defense, open
pressures at the very t' p h f the allrance; facilitate Soviet southward
rme w en the S · 'I'
Mediterranean labors under th ff ovret . mi Itary position in the
tendencies toward diversity in ;hee ect~ of ~n Important setback; inhibit
further weaken Western o ·r . sout ern tier of the Warsaw Pact; and
the position in the centraf a~ IOns m the Eas_rern Mediterranean at a time when
the Left, when development d. W;stern Mediterranean is clouded by the rise of
when communication lines :oi~h u~~~~~lvia after Tito are a question mark, and
The stakes are therefore h. e r e Eas~ are already none too secure.
U.S. in particular the execu~h and statecraft IS needed to match them. In the
harmony to devise calibr t vde an~ the Congressional leaders should work in
. . . a e actrons which w uld 1 d .
~ormalrzatwn of military and olif . . ? ea steadily to the
mcentives to proceed alon t: real relatiOns, giVIng the parties in the region
yielding to pressure. g e same gradual path, without the appearacne of
Those .in the Congress who have maintai d .
a moral rssue, i.e.' the sanciti of . ne t~at t?e U.S. embargo mvolves
another state, and henc f hy Amencan legrslatiOn and the compliance of
legislation, should consi~~ t~:t U.s.. gove~nment itself: with the terms of that
the U.S. (and others) to I t~e mtegnty of the alliance and the ability of
involve moral issues as co~p y ;Ith the commitments enshrined in it likewise
A gradual process of n:e l~s .undamental security interests.
. . rma Izatwn would not d . h C
opportumnes to review th . . epnve t e ongress of annual
restored military relations~i Sit~tJon, as appropriations associated with a
procedures. p ould have to be approved by normal
22
IV
With the growth in Soviet capabilities for military intervention over long
distances, the alliance has had to face the question of how its security might be
affected when Soviet actions of this type occur. The term of the alliance,
insofar as the commitments of the members to each other are concerned, apply
only to Europe; nevertheless it has long been recognized that the alliance
cannot ignore events outside the treaty area. Assessments of such events have
been made within the alliance and discussed in its various organs. The
evolution of Soviet military power has been carefully monitored. Individual
allies involved in various problems beyond the treaty area frequently report
through the mechanisms of the alliance.
When Soviet military actions were concentrated in Middle Eastern countries
that were also on the Mediterranean littoral, the direct relevance to security in
the treaty area was evident. Joint and harmonized alliance actions did not,
however, extend to policies toward those Middle Eastern countries. On the
contrary, as was apparent during the Yom Kippur war, not only did
coordination prove difficult, but divergences appeared among the allies even in
regard to .policy actions that might be taken toward the USSR.
But in the last two years, there have been major Soviet/Cuban military
interventions in African conflicts. These interventions, moreover, have been
directed not only at the immediate area of conflict but appear to involve Soviet
interest in securing facilities for the use of naval and air forces which, as in
Egypt and Somalia earlier, would operate from them in furtherance of Soviet
military objectives. All the North Atlantic allies are aware of these trends and
share information concerning them, but they have no forum in the alliance in
which to coordinate·individual or common policies or actions. It is unlikely that
this situation will change, and a case can be made that it would be unwise to
turn the alliance into an institution with even tenuous commitments extending
beyond the traditional treaty area. Apart from other obstacles, any attempt to
do so would face the problem of accommodating the concerns of other friendly
countries, e.g., Australia.
In the absence of formal mechanisms for dealing with extra-treaty
contingencies, there has been frequent resort to ad hoc meetings and
coordinated actions on the part of those allies whose interests were engaged.
This kind of flexible ad hoc approach has worked reasonably well and can
benefit the alliance as a whole, though in some instances it has also raised
controversy. But if the common denominator in many international crises will
in the future be some sort of Soviet military involvement, the alliance may
have to find ways to address systematically the issue of how its security
interests might be affected and what to do about it. If the Soviets establish a
network of facilities for the sustained use of their naval and air forces astride
the major searoutes on which alliance members depend, this could constitute a
23
~ajor alliance security concern. Simply to monitor developments would be
mad~quat~. The ~aditional worry that formal North Altantic Council
consideratiOn of .third ~orld issues would introduce a bloc approach to
North-South relatwns With adverse effects on the interests of some allies
would perha?s be less r.elevant in the postulated case since the prime concer~
would be With the Soviet factor.
Given past difficulties in adapting alliance consultative and coordinating
procedur~~· an enlargement of the ~eographic scope of alliance responsibilities
seems u~ Ikely. ~ut when those allies whose interests are cheifly engaged take
m~tters mto their own hand~, they must bear in mind the concerns of the
alliance ~s a whole and use Its mechanisms whenever feasible.
k' ~ore/m??rtant than the procedures is the capacity of allies to take various
1
~. s 0
mih~ary measures when necessary. These could range from providing
ill! Itary e~UJpment t~ the deployment of naval or other forces as a
d~monstr~twn, precaution ?r o.ther ~ffort to influence the course of events. It
mi~~tdas m the Fr~nch actwn m Zmre, involve lifting troops and equipment of
a. hir party. An Important issue is whether such action can be undertaken
Wit ?ut d.rawing. d?wn forces and equipment earmarked for alliance
c?ntmgencies. This Issue arises. p~ncipally, though not exclusively, for the
U.Sd if one postulates that Soviet mterventions may be on the increase the
nee ..or W
1
estern nations to have the option to take counter-action must figure
promment y on the agenda.
Tdhe most recent report of U.S. Secretary of Defense, as did its immediate
pre ecessors pegs u s fo 1 · .
half" ' · · rce P anmng to the reqUirements for "one and a
wla~s. B
1
ut would the "half war" concept be adequate in circumstances of
severa Simu taneous c · ? It · h b
, . nses · m1g t e more appropriate to think of the "half
war In terms of ''ten tw r h" .
Tta . - en Jet cnses, not necessarily involving overt
d
m
1
.,
1
ry a
1ctw~s. This more diverse concept might also be more relevant to
e1
ense P annmg by other allies.
Inany .event, th~ allies individually and the alliance as a whole must sooner
~r l~ter give at~entwn to the question of what to do in contingencies outside the
rea Y ~rea which. have a bearing on the security of the treaty area. A pattern
~~:art~~ll~· coordmated or ~ncoordinated unilateraHsm, or the formation of ad
d. stu a diances • are the hkely alternatives. This would not necessarily be a
Isas rous evelopment ·d d · d. · .
. . prov1 e m !VIdual alhes, or groups of them, in actin
:ur~~~~~t eei~dnterests. respect those of allies not associated in the endeavor~
establ' h d fou .be a nsk of fragmentation and this could spill over into the
IS e unctiOns of the alliance.
v.
f
The abhove ~ketches of some of the political problems of allied defense are far
rom ex aust1ve but th ·11
• ey serve to 1 ustrate the enduring character of the
24
interests that brought the allies together to ensure a common defense. Those
interests reflect not only a sense of common danger but a commitment to
broadly shared values. Indeed, for the first time since the early days of the
alliance, -alf members, as well as Spain which is associated with the alliance
through its bilateral treaty with the U.S., adhere to democratic forms of
government. This adds a further element of strength to the alliance.
But democratic politics also pose challenges to coalitions such as the North
Atlantic Alliance. Controversies over priorities, the political diversity and
mood swings characteristic of democracies, and transnational interactions
between various domestic interest groups can all have a divisive impact. I have
briefly alluded to three areas - strategy on the "central front", problems of
the "flanks", and problems of crises outside the treaty area but affecting the
security of the alliance. All of them involve divergent interests or perspectives
which, if not managed with care, could erode the underlying commonality that
has sustained the alliance. Several other problem areas could have been cited:
arms control, economic problems among the industrialized nations, aspects of
"detente", internal political transformations in several allied countries, etc.
I remain convinced, however, that the problems we have encountered in the
alliance are manageable and that our common interests will assert themselves,
as they have for nearly 30 years. The alliance is not a rigid structure but is
adaptable to change. Despite shortfalls, all allies contribute their share to the
common defense, even when they are not members of all elements of the
alliance structure. This remains a remarkable historical accomplishment among
free, sovereign nations and will provide the impetus to cope with the challenges
we now face.
*
* *
In his introductory remarks, the author of the American working paper
observed that there were profound interests that had brought the United States
and Europe together after the second World War. The underlying confluence of
interests that had created the North Altlantic Treaty Organization was just as
valid today as it had been 30 years ago. However, he warned that other
factors could erode even as fundamental a set of common interests as had
made the alliance. One of these factors was the problem of the use of nuclear
weapons, illustrated by the debate over the deployment of the neutron bomb.
Another matter of concern was the problem of events taking place outside
the alliance area proper. The author suggested that it was appropriate to
consider what the role of the alliance should be with respect to areas of crisis
that involved the Soviet Union. It was correct to assume that many of these
crises would involve the Soviets, and this had a profound effect on the security
25
of the alliance. One could not avoid the question of how the allies as allies and
the alliance as an institution should organize themselves with respect to regions
outside the strict treaty area.
The American author concluded with what he called a hopeful note
concerning the future of the alliance - that 30 years was a long time for
sovereign democratic nations to stay together in peacetime and that this was
perhaps unique in history and thus augured well for the future.
International Working Paper:
"DEFENSE, SECURITY AND THE WESTERN ALLIANCE"
The security of the West has never been, in the first instance, a military
matter but primarily a political one. This is more than a statement of the
?bvious; it is centra~ to the Western system of collective security. The Alliance
IS a group of sovereign states who cannot be cajoled into cooperation but must
agree to it; only political cohesion on the basis of durable consensus can
provide this. The Alliance must reconcile the security of the world's leading·
power, the U.S., with the security of half a continent some 4,000 miles across
the Atlantic; this cannot be imposed by written guarantees; it must be based on
the continuity of joint interest. American self-interest in the security of
Western Europe is the only reliable guarantee of American support in a
Euro?~an war. Fi~ally, political stability is a deterrent against the employment
of m1htary force; m a disunited Western Europe Soviet military might can be
turn.ed t~. political advantage, and in a politically restless Eastern Europe,
Sovtet m1htary forces will actually be used, if the past 25 years are any guide.
At the same time, there are specific reasons why political cohesion is not a
su.f~cient condition for Western security and why it must be underpinned by
mtl_I~ary stre~gth. For the Soviet Union, military power has a supremely
poh~t~al f~nctwn, as a means to keep her empire together. It offers the primary
JUStificatiOn to the Soviet claim of great power status and is the chief
compensator for the obvious weaknesses of the Soviet system: poor economic
performance, ideological stultification and internal repression. The greater
these weaknesses, the more the temptation to rely on military power might
grow.
J_'herefore, Western security strategy must combine military strength and
political cohesion. One is meaningless without the other. To meet the threat
from wit.hout is a familiar task for the Alliance; after years when the military
?alance _m Eur?pe _seemed to be shifting gradttally in favor of the East, NATO
IS now Impro;mg 1~s ~ilitary capabilities with the prospect of rectifying some
of the ~ore dtsturbmg Imbalances. The main challenge to security for the West
today IS elsewhere: how to generate 'political cohesion and the consensus on
. 26
which it must rest, at a time of major political changes in a number of Alliance
countries. If we succeed in meeting this challenge, then the security threats are
manageable; if we fail, however, the resulting turbulence can shake and even
destroxAhe foundations of Western security as we have known them for the
past 30 years. I shall explore these issues with the help of three theses for
discussion. ·
I. The Soviet military threat in Europe has grown but it remains one that the
West can cope with if it has the will.
Much of the defense debate in our countries tends to be of short breath. We
look at new weapons systems, at force increases in particular areas, at specific
deployment patterns. But military forces are there to do a job. From the Soviet
perspective that job has remained constant: to repulse and defeat with the
maximum prospect of success any Western attack, and then to fight and win a
European war on Western territory. At the same time, this Soviet posture,
however defensively justified, must be seen by the West as a threat. Over the
past decade it has become a more efficient one, with the Soviet military effort
designed to reduce traditional vulnerabilities and to augment the quality of
military performance.
On the ground, this has meant a drastic improvement in the mobility of
Eastern forces. The traditional emphasis on tanks has remained, but the growth
rate in tanks about 40 per cent over the past ten years - has been much
exceeded by that E>f armored personnel carriers: almost 80 per cent. Artillery is
becoming self-propelled, logistics are being integrated into major units, and the
size of combat units has been increased to make them more self-reliant.
Anti-armor weapi:mry with front-line units has also been increased, until
recently exceeding the Western ratio. A modernization of theater nuclear
capabilities has been underway for some time. The main effect of these efforts
has been to increase the ability for rapid concentration and dispersal,
encouragmg tactics for rapid advance into enemy territory without depending
on the massive force concentrations which in the past not only provided NATO
with ample tactical warning but also offered targets highly vulnerable to nuclear
strikes.
In the air, the main trend has been to free combat aircraft from air defense
to a more direct battle role. The traditional Warsaw Pact emphasis on air
defense meant that, in the past, a considerable number of their aircraft would
be employed in defense against enemy strikes as the primary task, and this
attenuated the numerical superiority of the Eastern inventory over that of the
West. But Warsaw Pact air defense is now increasingly performed by missile
forces, thus releasing aircraft for the support of the ground battle and for
offensive missions. Moreover, air transport capabilities have been improved.
Both developments will serve to enhance further the mobility and
27
maneuverability of Eastern ground operations in a potential conflict with the
West.
At sea, the size of Soviet forces has not increased, but their performance
efficiency has. They can now stay at sea longer, cover wider spans of water,
challenge Western vessels with greater confidence, and they have acquired an
improved capability for interdiction of major shipping lanes.
Finally, the Soviet Union- and this goes beyond the prevailing pattern of
continuous force improvement - has started to introduce a new capability for
strategic nuclear delivery against targets in Western Europe. Since the late
1950s, Russia enjoyed a quasi-monopoly of medium-range ballistic missiles,
some 600 of them targeted against Europe. Now, after almost two decades of
stagnation, weapon systems are entering the Soviet arsenal whose primary
function is to do the old job even better, although no Western counter-systems
have been devised to induce such a step. These are the (unhappily termed)
"Euro-strategic" weapons - the SS-20 and the Backfire bomber - which,
while only adding further to what is already an unchallenged Soviet capability
for the large-scale nuclear destruction of Western Europe, escape from any
restrictions sought in current East-West arms control.
These are distrubing developments. They have taken place at a time of
tangible improvement in the political relationship between East and West in
Europe and in spite of repeated Soviet calls that "Military detente should
follow political detente". They have required precious financial and industrial
resources, at a time when other ·military demands - for the Soviet strategic
effort and for strengthening Soviet forces in the Far East - have been heavy
and economic growth has significantly slowed down. And they all occurred at 'a
time when Western countries, for reasons ranging from America's Vietnam
involvement to economic and manpower pressures in Western Europe, were
clearly not the driving force in the arms competition.
And yet, the shift in the military balance toward the East has neither
removed some of the traditional shortcomings of Soviet military power in
Europe nor is it beyond correction by Western efforts. Traditional
shortcomings remain: the uncertainty whether a war in Europe could be limited
to the region; the possibility of a second front in the Far East; the uncertainty
over the comportment of Russia's East European allies in case of war; the
vulnerability of Soviet naval installations. These uncertainties, together with
existing Western defenses, would make any major Soviet military action
against Western Europe - even at such vulnerable places as Berlin or North
Norway - a matter of very high risk. Soviet military efforts over the past
years, while increasing the efficiency of Soviet forces, have not markedly
reduced that risk to make military aggression against the West significantly
more attractive. What they have done, 'though, is to increase the political
weight of Soviet military power in an East-West crisis.
lt is this which has made a Western response so urgent. Today, the growing
28
concern over increased Soviet capabilities has not only pro~pted ~he_American
d German governments but other allies as well to g1ve pnonty _to the
an then/
1rig' of the conventional defense in Europe. Moreover, while the
streng . h w
Warsaw Pact has improved force effic1ency o;er the past ten years, t e . est
has not stood entirely still. American. forces m Europe tod~y are at a higher
degree of combat efficiency than dunng the years of th~ V1etnam war when
d resources were drained from the European contmgent; and the West
men an . . d a1· f
G armed forces have gained in professwnahsm, confidence an qu 1ty o
erman . II' · t ·
· t Today after a 'period of relative stagnatiOn, the A wnce IS en enng
eqmpmen . , .
a period of increased defense spending, .and greater confidence _that It can
t O
ver time the conventional threat from the East - not m terms of
mee ' ' · · f d · t th
matching all items of the Warsaw Pact mventory but m terms o en~mg o_ . e
S
· t Union a reasonable chance of military success in a war and, m a cns1s,
ovte . . I" . I d t
the prospect of demonstrating military supenor:ty to po 1t1ca _a van ag~.
This is most visible in the recent emphasis on _conventwna~ anti-tank
Over the next few years, NATO forces will have acqmred almost
weapons. · d h ·
200,000 anti-tank guided weapons; U.S. forces alone have mcre~se t e1r
overall holdings from 1970 almost thirty-fold, and so~e other_ maJo_r ~ATO
armies are not far behind. Another weapon system wh1ch promises s1~mficant
improvement for NATO's anti-tank capability is, of course, the much dtscussed
"neutron bomb" to which I shall return later. __
In addition to this strengthening of anti-armor - the ab1hty to meet the
enemy when he comes - the Alliance must develop means to red~ce. t~e
danger of surprise by the ability to detect a~ attack early and to deal WIth It m
a coordinated mantrer. The improvement m command and control, and the
likely introduction of AWACS (Advanced Warning and Control System)
aircraft reflect this concern. _
These examples show not that the West has done everyth~ng n~~essary but
that it can do so; that there are answers to the increased Sovtet ~nJl~tary effort.
But a few caveats are in order. First, the examples given above mdt~ate_ future
capabilities; many of the new systems are not even on order, and 1t wt!I ta~e
time until they are fully deployed. Second, new weapons have re_ached their
present state of development and imple~entation ~o~ without a m~J~r effor~ of
energy and money, intra-alliance persuasiOn, bargammg and negottatmn. Th1rd,
'I' h I · y be technology
however promising some of the new m1 1tary tee no ogtes rna . '
alone cannot provide the answer to the problems of We~tern d~fense.
There are several reasons for this. For one, the Sov1et Umon has been
modernizing her forces consistently; the West can no longer offset Eastern
numerical advantages by Western technological superiority alone. Mo:eove~,
much of what are called the new weapons technologies are ambiguous m thetr
effect: they can improve the prospects of success for both the defender ~nd the
attacker and many increase the military bonus of surprise, thus makmg the
future b~lance of forces in Europe a more nervous one. Finally, new weapon
29
systems must be paid for, they must be manned, and men trained to use them.
Defense budgets will not rise significantly in the future, at least not enough to
absorb both major increases in equipment cost and increases in manpower and
maintenance. Indeed, practically all Western countries will be facing a
manpower problem before long. It is true that the Soviet Union will have a
similar problem some time in the future. But it will hit Western military
establishments earlier, and not only those who- like the U.S. and Britain -
depend on a voluntary system. In the longer term, more radical answers have
to be found to the problems of maintaining an adequate conventional Western
defense than those provided by improved weapon systems and procedures.
However, these answers can be found. There is no reason to fear that
Western defense in five or ten years' time will be incapable of balancing the
Soviet conventional military threat in Europe then, provided there is the will to
do so and the common structure to put it into effect.
II. There is no alternative to reliance on the U.S. nuclear strategic forces to
deter Soviet nuclear capabilities in Europe.
This is scarcely a new revelation. Western Europe has been vulnerable to
Soviet nuclear strikes since the Soviet Union's accession to nuclear power,
long before Soviet planes and missiles could reach the U.S. Since the late
1950s, some 600 medium-range Soviet ballistic missiles with megaton warheads
have been targeted against West European cities. The small number of strategic
nuclear weapons in the French force de frappe and in Britain's deterrence
forces have no more than marginal significance in the central balance. Theater
nuclear weapons in Europe are no counter to the Soviet nuclear arsenal; their
usefulness in fighting a war has always been doubtful, their contribution to
Europe's security being essentially one of deterrence: to deter the first use of
Soviet theater nuclear weapons, and to deter any major Soviet attack through
the risk of nuclear escalation. The only available reassurance against Europe's
vulnerability to Soviet nuclear strikes is the deterrence cover of American
strategic forces.
From the European perspective, this is less th~t ideal reassurance, even if
there could be certainty that the U.S. would, in the event of a Soviet attack
against Western Europe, risk its own survival by threatening the Soviet Union
with a nuclear strategic strike. However, no such certainty is available. This is
not, as General de Gaulle suggested, because no one country can be expected
to risk its survival for the sake of another, nor because of any American
unreliability. It is because of a more fundamental characteristic of nuclear
deterrence: uncertainty is e·ssential to make it work.
Certainty of nuclear response· would not only mobilize American, but also
European public opinion against alliance. It would allow the enemy to bypass
the criteria for response or threaten specific countermeasures which could
30
I
· te Moreover it would be an artificial certainty: there has
deter a nuc ear npos . ' . l"k 1
never been a nuclear war and all predictions of how It would evolve are 1 e Y
to be proven wrong. . . .
Uncertainty is therefore unavoidable. At the same time, It breeds_ uneas~ness,
articulary in Europe. This has been a recurrent fe~tur~ in the Alhanc:; 1t h~s
~ m hasized further by the Soviet-American effort m SALT to codify the1r
d:;::enf relationship on the basis of nuclear strategic parit~. More recently,
European uneasiness has been manifested around two ~terns of nu~lear
weaponry: the neutron bomb and the cruise missile, both Issues of Alliance
politics in the cloak of nuclear hardware.
The neutron bomb: On the face of it, the neutron ~o~b _should have been
welcomed not just by military experts but by public op1mon m Europe as well.
Contrary to popular claims, it is less destructive than most of. the theater
nuclear warheads deployed by NATO, and it seems to offer a senous count~r
to the Soviet armored threat which has been at the center of much pubhc
concern in Europe. . .
From a military point of view, there are two real Issues: (l) Is the ne~tron
bomb more cost-effective as an anti-armor weapon than other' conventiOnal
systems? (2) Can it be expected to be deployed in _time, ~iven that the U.~.
president must first authorize the release? On the flfSt pomt, th~ answer will
have to depend on a careful comparison with non-nuclear alternati~es, and I do
not feel competent to offer an assessment. As a rule, a conventional weapon
that can be used right away in a war is preferable to a nucle~r on~ that cannot
be used unless released by the American president. On this pomt, I see no
reason why the president should be more dispose_d to release the neutron bo~b
than any other.JtJeater nuclear device. The_ clmm that the ?ew weapon will
"lower the nuclear threshold", i.e., that it will lead to an earlier use of nuclear
weapons, seems unjustified. True, the neutron bomb ~roduces less damage_; but
the primary consideration in the mind of the president when fac~d With a
release request is not the damage of a particular weapon syste_m. It IS whether
the release will change the nature of the conflict from conventiOnal to nuclear.
This decision remains equally agonizing for the neutron bomb_ as_ for any other
theater nuclear weapon. It is for this reason that the mam Impact of the
neutron bomb, once deployed, will be in discouraging, through d~terre~ce, the
Warsaw Pact armies from their heavy emphasis on armored vehicles; If a war
should break out, however, the presidential release decision may well come too
late to give to the new system its optimum_ ~mpact on the battlefi_eld.
In spite of this relatively straightforward military assessment, public concern,
although directed at one of the least disturbing of theater nuclear weapons,
needs to be taken seriously. It reflects anxiety over nuclear war and the
uncertainty that surrounds it. It cannot be dismissed merely as a propag~nda
campaign funnelled by the East but represents a more deep-roote~ unea~m.ess
over the nuclear issue as such by those who would be the most likely viCtimS
31
of a t~eater nuclear war. Becasue of the inherent uncertainty in nuclear matters
ther~ IS no :vay in which this uneasiness could be laid to rest. Moreover, it is
ambJ.guou~: .If n~clear weapons are emphasized in Alliance planning, European
publ.Ic. opi~IOn Is concerned over their potential use; if instead American
ad~:mstratJ.o~s give priority to a conventional defense for Europe, European
poht1~al opmwn suspects a weakening of America's nuclear guarantee.
Alhance politics will have to live with these sensitivities and contradictions
and to take account of them. If the neutron bomb debate has one lesson it i~
h?w n~c~ear di~lomacy in the Alliance should not be conducted. By del~ying
his decision on mtroducmg the weapon until European governments have made
up their minds, President Carter not only elevated the new device into the
category of a maj?: policy decision, he also passed the buck to governments
who .must be sens1tJve to the nuclear uneasiness of their citizens and who thus
find It much more difficult to take the decision themselves rather than merely
accept an American fiat. The neutron bomb controversy has to a large degree
been the consequence qf this maladroit handling of what would otherwise have
been no more than one aspect of NATO's modernization program for theater
nuclear weapons.
The cruise missile: The European concern- more inside governments than
among public opinion over this new weapon system stems from two
source-s: a gro.wing apprehension ?ver Soviet medium-range missile capabilities,
no~ moder~Ized through the Introduction of the SS-20, and fears that
Soviet-Amenc~n bilateral agreements in SALT might effectively curtail a
techn~log_Y .which could serve West European military requirements.
Agam, It IS possible to separate the military from the political argument. Like
the neutron bomb, the cruise missile is still not in production; this will take at
least three years. Its interest to Western Europe is two-fold: as a potential
successor system for French and British strategic launchers, and as a theater
srstem th.at could strike at targets inside the Warsaw Pact where manned
a1r~raft might not be able to· penetrate with confidence in the future. Yet few
senous European studies have been conducted to demonstrate the utility of the
n~w. technologies for European requirements.* They may show that ballistic
missile, rather than cruise missile, technology retains significant advantages for
the types of deterrent forces Britian and France will need and can afford, and
t~at some. of the assum~d cost ~dvantages. of theater cruise missiles might
?1sappear if confronted w1th the high saturation rate Soviet air defenses might
1mpose.
But the actual. utility of cruise missile technology is less important for
European concerns than the principle that potential options for a European
ans~er to Soviet threats should not be foreclosed. The threat of Soviet
medmm-range "Euro-strategic" systems is felt the more as SALT not only fails
*%~~.notable exception is "The Future of the British Nuclear Deterrent" by Jan Smart, London
32
to restrain th~se Soviet weapons but might restrain the ability of the U.S. to
allocate some of her deterrent forces to target them and deter their use.
The real issue behind this debate is, however, not technical or strategic; it is
political. There are limits, therefore, to the relevance of technical arguments.
That there is a tension between Soviet-American deterrence on the one hand,
and Soviet-West European on the other is evident. In its ultimate logical
conclusion, this would .argue for an independent European deterrence force
capable of imposing on Soviet actions the same restraint as the American
deterrent does today. But this is not feasible in the foreseeable future (and I
doubt if it would really be necessary and desirable). In the absence of such an
alternative, Western Europe has no other choice than to rely on the continuing
protection of the American nuclear deterrent. Moreover, she must avoid
undermining the credibility of this deterrent by actions which are insufficient to
substitute for it but sufficient to weaken it. A "Euro-strategic" balance, based
on a West European nuclear arsenal with ranges suitable for major targets in
the Soviet Union, would put in doubt the indivisibility of American deterrence
for Europe and the U.S., on which the credibility of the American deterrence
cover for Europe continues to rest. In face of the dilemma of either offsetting
Soviet regional strategic forces and weakening the deterrence link with the
U.S., or living with the imbalance and counting on America's strategic
deterrence to make it more tolerable, the rational European choice lies clearly
with the latter alternative.
This will, of c.ourse, never be easy for West Europeans to accept and
particularly for Gennany, the major non-nuclear country of the Alliance. Not
surprisingly, the current concerns are most strongly articulated in Bonn today.
If we accept that there is no "hardware" solution to the problem, political
answers must be sought. The current SALT negotiations have identified a
major task for the future: how to associate America's allies more closely with
decisions in the bilateral Soviet-American negotiations which affect their
immediate security interests. At the same time, they have revealed current
consultation practices to be insufficient: in spite of an unprecedented effort by
the Carter administration to inform and consult allies on the state of the SALT
negotiations, European concerns were more pronounced at the end of the first
Carter year than at its beginning, To devise a more promising procedure which
would both give West European governments a say on the substance, and a
responsibility for the fate, of future SALT negotiations is now among the more
urgent tasks for the Alliance.
III. The major test for the Alliance over the next decade is whether it can
maintain its cohesion in the face of domestic political change in Alliance
countries.
The military tasks of West European defense are manageable, the nuclear
33
uncertainty we can live with. Yet both these statements depend on one major
condition: the continued vitality of a common structure of collective security in
the North Atlantic area.
It has, of course, always depended on this. But today, after the Alliance has
existed for over a generation, this issue is becoming of central relevance for the
security of the West. When de Gaulle took France out of NATO's military
integration in 1966, it was still possible to assume that in a major crisis or a
European war Gaullist France would remain a firm ally. Today, Gaullist ideas
are voiced in Turkey, Greece, and on the French Left, yet the commonality of
interest can no longer be assumed. There are a number of reasons for this.
First, detente has made the military threat less tangible and hence allowed
other issues to acquire greater weight. Second, the Alliance has provided
stability and security for over a generation, hence stability and security seem to
many to be a natural state of affairs, not requiring continuous effort. Third, and
most important, we are witnessing a generation change in political parties and
political leadership in Europe and in the U.S. It would be surprising indeed if
· the new generation were to adopt automatically the consolidated wisdom of its
predecessors. It is this which gives new significance to old Communist parties
in Western Europe. Eurocommunism may or may not be a genuine movement
of ideological reform within Western Communist groups; its significance for the
Alliance lies in the simultaneity of this process, which makes left-wing views
more respectable, with the search for consensus among the new generation of
political elites in Western Europe.
Like most institutions, the Western Alliance is apprehensive of the period of
questioning, critique and debate which must precede the gradual evolution of
the new security consensus. In many ways it resembles those prestigious
gentlemen's clubs that stretch their pleasant facades along London's Pall Mall:
. a place of shared assumptions that no longer need to be made explicit, and of
congenial familiarity that tolerates but does not really welcome newcomers.
It cannot, of course, be excluded that consensus among Western nations on
the common needs and means of their security is no longer attainable. Perhaps
we are drifting into a two-tier Alliance, with Southern Europe opting for a
looser link with NATO than the countries concerned with the defense of the
central front. Perhaps the future lies with a de facto bilateral security
arrangement between the U.S. and West Germany, as the prophets of
"bigemony" have it. But it is important to remember that the Alliance is not
just an accumulation of convenient building blocks; it is a carefully balanced
framework for political stability. You cannot change it without endangering
stability itself. A bilateral American-German alliance, for instance, may
adequately deter the Soviet Union, but would it also enjoy the political support
in both countries that is the condition for a harmonious and durable security
relationship?
These risks have recently been highlighted by the prospects of, a left-wing
34
government in Franc~. As this paper is being writt~n, the outcome of the
M rch elections remams unpredictable. Whatever the1r outcome, they m1ght
1
~ve to provide a hypothetical "worst case·'. Supposing the Left forms a
se vemment with the participation of the Communist Party, whose leader has
go · · h f F ·
tated in December unequivocally that the mam secunty t reat or ranee IS
:he German Bundeswehr. The new government, eager to honor its election
promises, nationalizes large sectors of industry, ~ncreases basic wages and, to
rotect high-price French products from cheaper Imports, closes the borders to
hs Common Market partners. The common West Europ~an institutio.ns, in. t~e
European Community and in the Alliance, cannot survtve the en~~mg cnsts.
West Germany, seeing her European hopes dashed and her positiOn as the
strongest economic and military power on the continent resented ~pen!~ by her
major neighbor, rediscovers, in the new mood .o~ .European nat~ona!tsm, her
national vocation and begins to challenge the dtvtston of the nation mto East
and West, a division on which post-war security in Europe has rested.
This is, of course, very much a ''worst case" scenario. It is not intended to
provide an accurate prediction of the future. But it sho:vs what far-reachi.ng
consequences could arise once the consensus of coll~cuve W~ste:n secunty
starts to crumble. European unity and Western collective secunty IS not only
the condition for deterring Soviet pressure and for maintaining America's
security guarantee. It is also the condition for. making the national. di~ision
tolerable for West Germany. The political cost wtll therefore be very h1gh tf the
new generation oJ political leaders should fail to produce the consensus on
which Western cooperation can be built.
. This will be no easy task. The pressure of domestic priorities is felt in all
Western countries today, and will often push security concerns into second
place. Nor can we count on the Soviet Union for frightening West~rn opi~i~n
into joint action, although its continuing military effort and tensiOns w1th~n
Eastern Europe will underline the advantages of the Alliance in Western pubhc
opinion. Rather, conscious effort on two levels will be required to build the
new consensus.
The first level is that of debate, of making European and Western security
interests in a changing world explicit. A number of fundamental questions are
confronting our security in the 1980s, and they must be argued out in the open:
What are the requirements for security in Europe? What the prospects for
detente? What the contingencies to prepare for? What the impact of Third
World conflict on relations between the First and the Second World? And what
are the prospects not only of defense and deterrence against the East but fo: a
posititve contribution toward a more equitable international order? To provtde
for an efficient East-West balance of power will not be a sufficient ideal to
generate popular support for the Alliance in the next decade.
This debate will not be conducted in terms of abstract principles. East-West
security relations are entering a new phase. In the Soviet Union, a new
35
generation of leaders will shortly take over, formed less by ideology but also
less by the experience of the last World War. In Eastern Europe, economic
frustrations could again undermine the authority of the regimes and lead to new
challenges to Soviet power. In the Middle East, the renewal of military conflict
remains a real possibility. The growing tendency for conflict in the Third World
will offer to the Soviet Union opportunities for manifesting the continuing
utility of military force and could challenge real Western interests as the access
to raw materials acquires increasing weight in our security concerns. In
East-West relations, disappointment over detente, concern over Soviet action
in the Third World, and frustration over the failure of arms control may give
way to harsher rivalry. These will be most directly felt where East and West
meet: in Europe. We are in for a turbulent period, but one which will also
emphasize the continuing relevance of the Western security alliance.
The other level of effort to maintain cohesion in the face of change is to
strengthen the existing structures of Western cooperation and to resist the
temptations of unilateralism - in the military as in the economic and monetary
field, energy and on development aid, in the Alliance as in the European
Community. As Western security enters what could be a long period of
turbulence, we will do well to fasten the safety belts of Alliance.
*
* *
The International author introduced his working paper with the observation
that the alliance was discovering a sense of new vitality at a time of increasing
political tensions between East and West. Here lay the real significance of the
current Strategic Arms Limitation Talks and their outcome. If there were no
SALT agreement, the trend toward a hardening and a tightening of positions
would be reinforced. The strategic nuclear issue was the main plank for
Soviet-American cooperation. 'Fhis was a regrettable fact, because if it were to
crack, there was very little to take its place. The consequences would be felt in
the first instance least of all in the U.S., but rpuch more in Europe and the
Soviet Union. The U.S. could, if it had to, manage without detente; most of
Western Europe could not. Hopes that the present or future leadership of the
Soviet Union might be encouraged to see advantages in restraint and less
reliance on military power would be dashed. Thus, not just the military
implications of a successful agreement should be considered, but also the
political implications of a failure to reach an agreement on SALT.
The major test for the alliance over the next decade was to maintain
cohesion at a time of significant domestic political change. The author observed
that his paper was written before the recent elections in France. Many
observers were relieved when it became apparent that the Communists would
not get into a French government. But it would be wrong to become
36
complacent, because the problem of domestic political change re~ained. The
outcome of the French elections had been very close, an? poht1cal ~rou~s
which did not share the basic consensus on Western secunty could still wm
majorities· and form governments in a number of member countries; p~r:icularly
in Southern Europe. The alliance required a degree of rehab1hty and
predictability and strains on its cohesion had not gone away.
Another p;oblem was seen to be confused and uncertain leadership ~n the
U.S. This was not just the fault of personalities but also of changes m ~he
system. The authority of the President had decli~ed without an~ compensatmg
increase in the authority of any other body. Th1s state of affairs would make
life difficult for allies, adversaries and Americans alike. Confused allies would
become irritated and frustrated and confused Soviets would likely be more
militant. The impact would be felt most where alliance cohesion was necessary
for domestic cohesion. This was especially true for West Germany, where the
decision of whether or not to remain in the alliance was more a political than a
security question.
Finally, there had been a failure to use existing institutions or to d~velop
new institutions for proper consultation among alliance members. Th1s ha?
been especially true with the neutron bomb. There had been no nee? to make 1t
a major policy issue; passing the buck had not been consultatiOn. Proper
structures for joint decision-making did not exist. There was a great need for
an institutional framework for consultation so that ·European governments
would be listened to on matters such as SALT which greatly affected them.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
An International participant was called upon to provide an ~verview of
progress made in strengthening the alliance. He began by refernng to three
fundamental aspects of the change in Soviet military power:
(1) It was a relentless change, not the product of a precipitous shift of mood
in Moscow which suddenlv allocated greater resources to defense. The
military-industrial comple~ in the U.S.S.R. was undergoing a profound
transformation that had contributed to concern about the threat. Increased
quantities of high-quality weapons were being manufactured, ~nabling the
Soviets to revolutionize and increase the number of forces facmg Western
Europe. In the past decade, they had also built up their fo~ces facing
Communist China to 45 divisions - with associated rocket and tactical support
- without skipping a beat in the improveiJlent of their European forces. At the
37
same time, they had built up a large residue of military equipment with which
they could respond quickly and effectively to the calls of Third World leaders.
The cutting edge of Soviet influence in the Third World was their ability to
respond to these calls. The Soviets greatly exceeded the U.S. in Third World
arms shipments. The implications of all of this were that the West could no
longer count on qualitative superiority to offset its clear quantitative inferiority.
Nor could it be sure of having enough time to mobilize its resources for a
future conflict.
(2) The new Soviet threat was a balanced one, not just a mindless feeding of
military appetite. A careful analysis confirmed that we had witnessed the
elimination of Soviet deficiencies. The days were past when anomalies in the
Russians' military structure kept them from global activity, a limitation which
we had been able to exploit at great savings to ourselves, with our theories of
massive retaliation and the trip-wire. The current strategy of flexible response
was thus an imperative, although the contemporary fetish to analyze and
dissect the effect of this deterrent destroyed the ambiguity which made it work.
Potential aggressors were provided a road map to overcome the deterrent.
(3) The Soviet threat had changed from a Eurasian continental one to an
increasingly global one. This suggested a management task for the West far
different from that at the start of the alliance.
To meet that task, NATO had been undergoing a period of hyperactivity in
which needs were analyzed and recommendations were made to strengthen the
alliance. The first need had been to generate a political consensus for the
sacrifices needed to face up to the threat. Three and a half years ago, there had
been leaders who did not acknowledge a threat and were not prepared to meet
it. Plans and programs had had to be developed for more effective mobilization
of civil and military resources. In recent months, some 140 measures had been
agreed to by nations on both sides of the Atlantic, and ten long-term studies
had been completed. While a decade of neglect could not be repaired in two or
three years, one could be cautiously optimistic that the corner had been turned
on the military side.
The speaker ~as less sanguine about certain non-military aspects of the
alliance, and he referred to five contradictions or confusions which bedevilled
policy-making:
(1) The Center vs. the Northern and Southern regions. It was a delusion to
think that merely correcting imbalances on the central front would assure our
security. Problems outside Western Europe were also threatening, and we
needed ways to deal with them. There could be no security for the U.S.
without the security of Western Europe; and there could be no security for
Western Europe if we ignored events outside our sphere.
(2) Our socio-economic needs vs. our security needs. There was a risk in
38
d ~ t eet socio-economic
diverting resources traditionally needed for e ense o m
crises. . . . totalitarian regimes. The former were
(3) Authontanan regtmes vs.
I
h duct of historical events or transitory threats or pressures,
frequent y t e pro common standards of individual freedom. A
d did not run counter to our d
an . . a! · d ments was not warrante .
blanket approach Ill applymg v ue JU ~ . ·1
ds Technological
(4) Arms control objectives vs. contwwng secun y nee . E t t .
d lopments had begun to blur the line between the two, ~s a uro-sf ra e?Jc
eve " d The language of non-circumventiOn was o maJOr
"grey areaW e~erg~u~opeans. A modernization of Western European theater
concern to e~ ~m tl eeded which required a new form of
nuclear capabihtJes was .urgen y n ,
coz5s)u~~;o~e:d~~~ ~~fen~~~~~:~ity vs. our nee~ four d_eten~e. 1~; ~t=~e:~~t ~!
. . . t d b the U.S. and the SovJet mon m '
pnnciple enuncia.~ y ld not take unfair advantage of the other. Since then,
effect, that one SI e. wou . h the Cubans - had spawned or
the Russians m Afn~a \" dJrectly n~: ~~~l~gthe West sat by helplessly. This
seized insurgent natwna mov~::nd reassessment of policy by the Western
su?gested hthe neel~ti.fcoa~ ~c~noomic and social resources far surpassed those of
alliance, w ose po 1 ,
the U.S.S.R.
The wide-ranging discussion that followed focused principally on seven basic
areas of concern:
A. The General Evolution of East·West Relations
· · but we were
un~~ek~~:u!h~~~:~i~~~r~~~~s:ul~o~~~~:na;:~~~~~~~~ :~lto;~:~e .we~i;::~~
b headed by (1) freedom from external threat, (2) str~tegic panty h h
to e modernization of Soviet society. We did not know, t ou? '
U.S., and (3) the . f . J'cy lay Was their priority defensive
where the dynamics of S~viet oreig~ poI ·t~elf? On the external side, the
or offensive? Did the Soviet lead~rshlpfkn~;, Iks I~ternally it had potential
Soviet Union had su~ered a stnng ;h se c~:ld ·be some ki~d of reorientation
woF!'ies about such thmgs as energy· ere .
1
if Eastern European countries hafdl toStur.nte~~et:~:;:n~o~~~~ fundamentally
But several other speakers e t ovie I . t Ch" a as a threat to the
· N · dismissed Commums m
offensive. A orwegian · on their Eastern
U.S.S.R. and argued that the Soviets had a strong gnp
European allies. d the will to act
A Swiss participant said the Soviet Un.ion. had the means a:test only where
as a global military power, but th~t Soviet mfluence w.asdgr~uld be transitory
arms were the decisive way to get tt. Influence so acqmret· c nt to political
and superficial; military influence was not always tan amou
39
influence. He foresaw growing Russian economic dependence on the outside
world. But as the Soviet Union's major objective had shifted from the struggle
to secure power against the external world to a quest for a larger place in it,
the result might mean greater aggressiveness.
While Soviet power and capability in many areas would remain marginal,
there was a new reticence - especially in the U.S. - to assert Western
power. This might foster the Russians· aggressiveness by leading them to
underestimate the firmness of our resolve. In the end, our perceptions of the
Russians' strength served to paralyze us just as much as their real power
("immobilizing pessimism"), and we realized that detente and arms control
talks had not persuaded the Soviets to de-emphasize military power in
nternational relations.
B. Crises Outside the Alliance Area
If indeed the Soviet threat had now become global, then the alliance had
ogically to be concerned with "out-of-area contingencies," especially those
nvolving the Soviet Union. One school of thought remained unconvinced of
his need, believing, as one American put it, that NATO already had "enough
,n its plate" in dealing with crises in its own geographical area. But several
artici}Jants argued that it could not afford to ignore developments further
field. A Briton used the example of the shipping route around the Cape of
food Hope. He said it was as vital to the U.S: as to Western Europe and
1erefore events in Africa or the Indian Ocean had to come into the
liculations of NATO.
Regarding Soviet activities in the Third World, an International participant
tid the Soviet Union had shipped $1 billion in arms to Ethiopia- more than
te total of U.S. shipments to that country since World War IJ. Soviet claims
at they were supporting "legality" in their various African adventures were
ewed with skepticism. First of all, it was Soviet arms which had made the
)mali move into the Ogaden possible; secondly, the Soviet reaction had had
Jthing to do with the Somali move, and the mere flip of a coin, as the author
the American working paper put it, might have brought them to support the
her side. Did we mean to accept the proposition that the Soviets could
tervene anywhere in the world against what was defined as "illegal," while
tving the task of definition to groups such as the Organization of African
1ity?
This pattern of Soviet conduct, which might be applied in other areas, such
the Middle East, was described by one American as an "exceedingly
ngerous evolution in the international political arena." We ought to deter it
maintaining a high level of risk for Soviet-sponsored military activities,
tich would require a definition of our interests and a clear resolution to
ploy or make available our military equipment. His statement that we had
the means to make such adventures expensive for the Cubans was supported
by another.American, who feared that the notion that the U.S. was afraid of
nine million "invincible Cubans" would foster a psychological handicap that
would be hard to remedy.
A British speaker - while not advocating the presence of U.S. arms or
troops in Africa - said that so long as they were not there, while Soviet
elements were, the Russians could cut through Africa "like a knife through
butter," and nothing could,be done about it. Other participants, who did not
argue with that conclusion, were nevertheless not so worried about it. An
American suggested that the Soviet experience in Africa had, by and large,
been an unhappy one. He cited Ghana, Egypt and Angola as examples, and
added that Cuban losses in Africa had been substantial. The Russians had tried
and failed to form satellites in Africa, ending up with the enmity of the local
peoples, who were not interested in Marxist ide_ology. .
A Danish participant went so far as to say that If the West had not turned Its
back years ago on African nationalist groups "there would not be a sing~e
Cuban soldier in Africa today. It's our own fault." But he concluded that, m
any case, the West could not build its future relations with Africa on the b~sis
of confrontation, so that probably President Carter's approach was the nght
one.
Other speakers argued that the Russians had never been checked where they
were not up against substatntial opposition. But whether the Soviet-Cuban
adventures were to leave a lasting mark on any particular country was not the
real issue here, aecotcling to an American participant. It was the lack of any
discernible, coherent line of Western policy. Soviet influence outside the area
of the alliance had been greatly magnified in recent years, but the West seemed
paralyzed because we had no clear idea of what affected our security'. of what
purposes we were trying to serve, or of where we had to draw :he lme. One
problem in reaching a consensus within the alliance on these questions _was that
the impact of extra-European developments was likely to be felt mor~ mt~nsely
in the future in Europe than in America, which was more self-sufficient m raw
materials.
C. The Current ivlilitary Balance
An International participant described our present military position vis-a-vis
the Soviet Union, across the board, as one of rough equivalence or essential
parity (defined in terms of our entire deterrent, or "triad of forces.") He said
that succeeding political leaders had described this parity in terms that were
increasingly flexible, which was disquieting. It was extremely important to
maintain parity, which, the speaker pointed out, was not an inevitable fact of
life but a calculated management decision made in the U.S. Congress and the
Pentagon in the 1960's.
41
When it came to an assessment of the alliance's conventional forces on the
central front, however, some participants expressed concern that the Soviets
had ~?e edge. Even with no Soviet reinforcing, said a British speaker, NATO
was o~tgunned, outmanne~, a~d out-tanked." A Belgian agreed, pointing out
that the! e had been a quantitative and qualitative erosion of alliance forces in
the last two decades. Without adequate reserves immediately available for
rotation of the combat units, resort to battlefield nuclear weapons would
appear necessary within perhaps four days after the outbreak of hostilities.
Th_e smgle most urgent requirement for the alliance was therefore a
cont_I~~mg and improved build-up of conventional forces to sustain the
~redtbthty of our forward defense. Our emphasis on effective forward defense
m recent years represented an attempt to avoid divisiveness within the alliance
on the perennial question of the role of nuclear weapons. Europeans had
always tended to want the nuclear threshold as low as possible for deterrence
and as htgh as possible for fighting a war if deterrence failed. This was bound
to be hard to resolve, and the debate about the neutron bomb was in part a
reflection of this dilemma.
D. Theater Nuclear Systems and the Neutron Bomb
In the theater nuclear area, said an International" participant the situation
had changed rapidly in r~cent years. The theater nuclear threat ln Europe had
greatly mcre_ased. He pomted out that modem Soviet missiles had doubled the
range and tnpled the load-carrying capacity of earlier systems. Moreover, they
had been relieved of a defensive role. The range of the SS-20 included all of
Western Eu;ope, as w~ll as Great Britain. At longer and middle ranges, NATO
was mcreasmgly defictent. The cruise missile was not the answer to all our
problems; It was not a match for the SS-20. The alliance needed to have a
pa~~~ge of systems, including ballistic systems, improved aircraft, offshore
facthtles, and the cruise missile.
As t?e consequences of parity - or inferiority in our theater systems
crept. m, th~n the very credibility of any nuclear response was put into
questiOn. Thts was why introduction of the neutron bomb would raise the
nuclear threshold, rather than lower it, as the Soviet press had claimed. ("It
must scar~ them," remarked one U.S. participant. "It means NATO
~eterrence IS alive.") The more usable the system, the less likely it would ever
ave _to be ~sed. Thrs was "the paradox of deterrence." which laymen
sometimes failed to understand. -
Some participants expressed concern that deployment of the neutron bomb
~lgh~ have th~ effect of "decoupling" nuclear from conventional arms. A reply
? thi~ heard m Eu:ope was that a more likely cause of decoupling would be a
Shituatwn of strategic panty combined with overwhelming Soviet superiority in
t eater nuclear weapons.
42
In any event it seemed certain, as one American observed, that our tactical
nuclear arsenal, including battlefield weapons, was going to be modernized,
and' w~uld become more effective in terms of both military utility and
command and control. Care and circumspection had to be used in public
discussions of this modernization, as things tended to be judged according to
our description of them.
Several participants questioned why the neutron bomb had become such a
controversial matter. One International speaker called it a greatly inflated issue
and an example of weakness and vacillation by allies on both sides .of the
Atlantic. He said the whole matter had become a victory for the Soviets and
for left-wing leaders in the member countries of the alliance. A British
participant argued that we had fallen into a trap of Soviet propaganda by
calling the neutron device a "bomb" in the first place. In fact, the device was
an eight-inch anti-tank shell. The speaker went on to say that there really
should have been no argument at all, as the choice was between nuclear
weapons or defeat. A Danish participant criticized Western governments for
not having had the courage to explain to the public what the real nature of the
neutron bomb was.
Whether or not the alliance had the will to make use of nuclear weapons if it
became..necessary was a question on the minds of some participants. An
Italian, remarking on the "wishy-washy" attitude of European governments
toward the neutron bomb, suggested that perhaps we had ceased to be
psychologically ready to use nuclear weapons.
Several questions were raised by a German speaker about the implications of
President Carter's handling of the neutron bomb issue. Would his apparent
deep perscmal-aversion to things nuclear spill over into debates about weapons
modernization? Did this signal a major change in strategic doctrine? Did
America intend to yield to the Europeans part of its sovereignty over the
development and deployment of new nuclear warheads? One French speaker
thought that the affair would have the healthy effect of making the Europeans
think more about their own defense. But a Briton argued that there was no
substitute for the U.S. nuclear deterrent; it was what kept the alliance together.
When doubt existed, the U.S. would have to reassure Europe of its
commitment.
E. Consultation and Mutual Understanding
The author of the International working paper said that if the neutron bomb
affair was any indication, we had not yet developed the right structure for
consultation. Institutions could not substitute for political will, but they could
facilitate it.
A Dutch view was that existing structures were adequate if properly used,
and that we should not try to involve organizations such as the EEC or the
OECD directly in alliance affairs. An Italian speaker said that our security
43
could not be insured until our summit meetings dealt with political, strategic,
and even psychological questions, not just economic ones.
A German said that Europe had yet to find a way to make its voice heard in
real consultations on defense matters. It had been suggested that a "third
window" be opened where Europe could have a say about the "gray area"
weapons, or that these questions be thrown into the MBFR basket. Perhaps
they should be left in. SALT, but a completely new kind of transatlantic
consultation should be institutionalized. An International speaker argued that
negotiations on atomic weapons that were to be deployed in Europe should not
be conducted unilaterally between the U.S. and the Soviet Union.
Several participants raised the question of the strength of American
leadership. There was an uncertainty about it that was confusing to allies and
adversaries alike. It was clear, as one American pointed out, that President
Carter's lofty goals in the area of human rights had run into the realitites of
power; a compromise of principles with power was necessary. Another
American advised the Europeans not to worry about the current state of
unpredictability in the U.S. He said it was historically true that shifts of power
from president to Congress and back occurred, and that the situation would
improve. Meanwhile, he said, Europeans should take advantage of an
opportunity when the U.S. was not trying to play the dominant role.
At the extreme, Europeans questioned the steadfastness of America's
commitment to use nuclear force to defend the Continent. Although no
individual at the conference said he shared this doubt personally, there was a
consensus that Europeans, being dependent on the U.S., were uneasy and
needed reassurance.
A Canadian speaker, who was used to the swings of the pendulum in U.S.
politics, said he was beginning to wonder if all our countries were not afflicted
with a structural crisis of ungovernability. Values which had been accepted
since the war were now being challenged, and we would have to take this into
account in our defense planning. Several other participants echoed this
concern; they felt that the younger generation especially had doubts about
fighting to defend Western society. A Dutch speaker observed that the
post-World War II generation tended to be disenchanted with anything that had
to do with nuclear armament.
But an American had come to the opposite conclusion. He sensed that the
electorate in his country was considerably ahead of its leaders in its perception
of problems of defense. This was reflected by the debate over the Panama
Canal, which showed that the policy of the executive branch was out of step
with the public mood.
F. Political and Economic Strains With the Alliance
The possibility that political groups which did not share the basic consensus
44
l
J
of the West might come into governments in the member countries was viewed
as a grave danger for the alliance. Not only would it risk breaches of security,
but it would have a generally negative effect on the defense effort in the
country concerned. Eurocommunists could never be expected to engage
themselves in the true interests of the alliance.
A French speaker drew more optimistic conclusions about the implications of
his country's elections. As he saw it, a sort of veil had been torn away, and the
French were able to see that, many of the old arguments had been artificial,
unrelated to the real world. There was a much wider sharing of common values
than had been supposed, and French public opinion appeared more lucid than
before.
An Italian participant analyzed the situation of the Communist Party in his
own country (PCI). The revolutionary mood which had been in the air at the
end of World War II was now to be found in a comparatively small segment of
society, exacerbated by terrorism and extremism. The vast majority of Italians
rejected the notion of revolutionary change, a fact which the PCI could not
help reflecting on in a country of free elections.
But the Communists had not changed sufficiently. They were particularly
backward when it came to foreign policy, either because they feared or were
dependent on the Russians, or sincerely believed them to be right, or were
discouraged by social hostility from adopting a different attitude.
The conventional wisdom had been that keeping the Italian Communist
leaders out of government would accelarate their changing. But the speaker
now wondered whether keeping them in the "waiting room" indefinitely would
not so impair their credibility as to make it difficult for their members to follow
them if they were_one day able to exert a moderating influence in Italian
affairs.
Another Italian participant argued that internal instability in his country,
accompanied by intensified Soviet pressure, called for increased Atlantic and
American guarantees of Italian security. He said this was contrary to the views
of some analysts who seemed to feel that a neutral or destabilized Italy might
warrant a decreased or conditional guarantee. These opposite conclusions
resulted from a difference of perceptions, which the speaker said was the main
problem of the alliance.
In a discussion of developments in the Southern sector, it was agreed that
Greece, Turkey and the sea between them constituted a unitary area of
strategic importance to the alliance. A Greek participant reviewed the
background of his country's withdrawal from the integrated NATO military
organization in 1974 after the Turkish invasion of Cyprus. That affair had
shown, he said, that the alliance lacked a mechanism for managing a crisis
between two of its members. (An International participant intexjected that any
procedure which necessarily involved coercive measures would always be out
of place within an alliance.) Greece was now prepared to restructure its
45
relationship with NATO, keeping the bulk of its forces under national
command, while making them available to the alliance in an emergency and
participating in all activities needed to insure preparedness.
The speaker went on to say that the political option leading to Greece's
accession to EEC membership had been taken nearly 20 years ago, and had
nothing to do with present problems with Turkey. The Greeks had no wish to
isolate Turkey and indeed would be pleased to see it join one day in a united
Europe. A Danish speaker reported that the Nine all took a positive approach
to Greek membership, but that they did not want Turkey to have added
difficulties with its allies and friends. A Turkish participant remarked that he,
too, hoped the Turkish-Greek disagreement was only temporary.
Other generalized European political trends were referred to as posing
potential threats to the cohesion of the alliance: pluralism, regionalism, and
generational changes, for example. Referring to the last, an American
participant said there were serious implications of the coming to power, or to
the threshold of power, of a generation that did not have the experience of
World War II. This was especially true in the Soviet Union, where the
memories of the Stalin era, with all its excesses, were fading and a new and
possibly more dangerous group of leaders was coming to the fore. Fortunately,
the speaker said, he believed the new generation in the West was not
unconcerned about defense.
One of the most disturbing of current phenomena was the wave of terrorism
which was being manifested particularly in Germany, Italy, and France. A
Swiss speaker warned that terrorism could paralyze authority. Left-wing
terrorists would become victorious if governments, as a response to terrorism,
moved too far to the right and became repressive.
On the economic side, concern was expressed that the worldwide recession
foretold new pressures for reducing defense expenditures. A Dutch participant
said the alliance could not ignore the slow-down in economic growth; it could
not increase defense expenditures without adequate measures to economize.
Future defense budgets would be closely reviewed to see if everything possible
were being done to economize and to make the most efficient use of scarce
resources through standardization and unification. '
One American warned that international competition growing out of Europe's
new economic strength could have a corrosive effect on the political cohesion
of the alliance, as the Americans saw their economy becoming less influential
within the system.
A compatriot, however, advocated even greater economic cooperation within
the alliance. While we had been saying that our political/economic/strategic
relations with the USSR should be seen as a whole, there was no forum where
we could talk with Russians about our economic dealings, and where we could
use our strengths and assets to seek to influence the manner in which the
Soviets operated on the world scene. As a first step, we had to aim to
46
coordinate national economic policies within the alliance, at least to the extent
thaf s~vereign democratic countries could do so.
G. Detente and Arms Control
A German participant observed that SALT symbolized detente to most
Europeans, and that they had a deep interest in the success of those
negotiations. At the same time, SALT raised anxieties among Europeans who
wanted to keep open the option of using cruise missiles in the battlefield. If the
Russians in SALT II sought to restrain our construction of cruise missiles,
should they not in turn be constrained from using weapons which threatened
the Europeans, such as the SS-20 and the Backfire? Other Europeans speakers
supported this point that SALT would infringe on systems and technologies
which the Europeans regarded as vital to their defense.
SALT III, the German speaker continued, raised questions about the
forward-based system. Today there were only about six SS-20s and 150
Backfire bombers, but the force was growing and we had to respond to it.
Another worry was that the U.S. might reduce its own strategic forces below
the level necessary to cover targets of particular interest to Europe. . .
The author of the International working paper referred to the relatiOnship
between parity in SALT and disparity in European nuclear delivery systems.
Using phrases like "gray area weapons" did riot help, and there was no way of
knowing whether the U.S. would eventually co~er Europ~an targets. It .was
useless to generate political excitement and tensiOn by posmg these questiOns
to which -the.re was no clear answer. Vulnerability unfortunately was a
condition of s~~urity we all had to live with, he concluded.
An American commented that Europeans were mistaken to focus on a
particular weapons system instead of making themselves heard on the central
core of the SALT negotiations. In reply to a suggestion that SALT III or the
next phase of SALT II be multilateralized, the spe~ker said thi~,would serve n.o
purpose unless the Europeans had first "done their hon:ework to defin~ their
own interests and purposes. It was no good for them simply to complam that
U.S. decisions were depriving them of some vague, insubstantial options.
Hopes that SALT would be successful were expressed by participants from
both sides of the Atlantic. An American said that in the U.S. there was a
gradual acceptance of SALT as a better alternative. to the n~ed for maintain~ng
a stable strategic balance than a continuing mutual mcrease m more destructive
weapons. In the end, the West might seek to acquire a habit of .security ?ased
upon the acceptance of the values of parity and eqmval~nce m the .mth:ary
balance. Whether the Soviet leadership would also acqmre that hab1t might
depend on whether we, through the arms control process, could become
comfortable with that kind of thinking ourselves.
Other participants had a much Jess sanguine ·outlook. A French speaker
47
48
described Russian objectives in arms control negotiations as threefold: (a) to
protect their quantitative advantages; (b) to restrain our qualitative
Improvement; and (c) to protect their freedom to make qualitative progress. On
the pretext of detente, the Soviet Union was thus seeking to make it more
difficult for the West to defend itself.
~n American participant thought that perhaps the biggest problem the
alliance would have to face would be not the failure of detente but its success.
If the SALT negotiations failed, the alliance was likely to be blamed for being
an obstacle to peace. But if, as he expected, they succeeded, then the alliance
would have to face once again the old dilemma: our citizens and their leaders
demanding some progress in relations with the Soviet Union while we were
unable to define a geopolitical conception by which to measure such progress.
For years we had been so strong and technologically superior. that we could
afford to sweep under the rug a number of issues (nuclear, consultative.
extra-European). We had taken refuge in slogans and in our faith that evolutio~
would somehow take care of us and defeat the Russians. But it was essential
tha~ we come to grips with our security problems. We had used up much of our
capttal, and we were now getting close to the margins of what the Western
world could stand without suffering in the '80s a rapid detrioration in its
overall position.
*
* *
II. THE CHANGING STRUCTURE OF PRODUCTION AND TRADE:
CONSEQUENCES FOR THE WESTERN INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
American Working Paper:
"ADAPTATION TO STRUCTURAL CHANGE"
The history of the international economic system since the end of the Second
World War is largely a story of structural change. The main pieces are familiar:
the reshaping of western Europe, the modernization of Japan, the growth of
Canada, the internationalizing of the American economy and the changes in
world trade that went with these developments. Industrialization and even
faster growth have brought major structural changes in the communist
economies that have not been as fully reflected in their external trade. The
rapid though uneven growth of the developing countries and the surging
industrialization of some of them have changed the world. That classic of
tropical ports, Singapore, has become an industrial city. Hong Kong produces
most of what it exports instead of serving only as an entrepot. Korea competes
with Japan. Brazil is a factor to be reckoned with in world markets not only for
coffee but for soybeans, shoes and steel.
Statements about how the speed of communication and travel has shrunk the
world are no less true for being banal. Technological changes have not only
altered how industries work but what they make. There is now mass
production of any number of things that did not even exist a few decades ago.
AgricuJtu,re,_In the United States and other places has become a
capital-intensive activity with one man feeding many more than before. Old
truths have died; every schoolboy used to know that to make steel a country
had to have coal and iron fairly close together. In our most highly
"industrialized" countries, fewer than half the workers are engaged in industry
(in the U.S. only 29 per cent in 1975).
These structural changes have not simply coincided with great growth and
unprecedented levels of income in the democratic industrial countries they
have made that prosperity possible. New technology, shifts in the use of
resources within countries and changed patterns of world trade were
prerequisites for the levels of production, consumption and leisure that
prevailed in the western world up to 1973.
Looking back over these changes, one can see them as having taken place
without traumatic disturbances and with little lasing damage to significant
groups or areas. Governments have helped limit that damage and have played
some part in furthering the process of structural change. But the underlying
dynamism seems to have had deeper causes. The nature of western society
favored change in ways that one may not see altogether clearly but that are
identifiable enough in parts. The parts include technological innovation and the
49
private economy's use of it to meet demands, exploit opportunities and make
money. Governments have provided security, managed economies on the
whole better than worse, and removed some obstacles, not least by the
unprecedented liberalizing of international trade and payments. Those who see
matters this way are saying, more or less explicitly, that structural change is
on the whole good and that it mostly takes place without great damage or much
guidance by public powers. That view is not to be forgotten as we wind our
way through an inquiry that will more often than not be concerned with less
optimistic views of what is wrong and whether or not it can be set right.
The same facts of postwar history can be viewed differently. Governments, it
can be argued, had a much greater role in promoting change: Japan's industrial
policy, the guidance of the French Plan and the research and development
undertaken by the government of the U.S. Structural changes did not come
about smoothly nor were they altogether welcome. Japan's rise was resisted by
trade restrictions, and that country is not yet fully accepted in the West. Do
the agricultural policies of Europe and North America, with their costs and
disputes, warrant the picture of flexible societies? Though the industrial
countries have helped the growth of the developing countries in some respects,
they have hampered it in others. Development is financed but access to
markets is limited. Potentially an innovative device for orderly transition, the
cotton textile agreements - now 15 years old - were extended to woolens
and manmade fabrics when they proved not restrictive enough. That pernicious
combination of inflation and unemployment called stagflation can hardly be
explained except by structural problems, at least in labor markets and probably
elsewhere as well. There is a widespread sense that the recession of the mid
'70s is more than a conventional cyclical phenomenon slightly enlarged, that it
may reflect the accumulation of difficulties partly hidden over a period of
years.
These doubts about the optimistic, easy-going, rather comfortable view
outlined above raise further questions. Is the point only that structural change
is not necessarily always benign? Or is the emphasis on the resistances to
change that have piled up over the years? Does th,e analysis argue for more or
less government intervention or simply different policies?
Tl1e present situation
Recessions are the best of times and the worst of times for coping with
structural issues. On the one hand, trouble brings to the surface difficulties that
are often concealed in periods of high demand and makes people think they
should do something about them. On the other hand, to do something about
longrun problems when immediate issues are so urgent is extremely difficult.
The margin for adjustment is thin. "Rationalization" is apt to mean reducing
the number of jobs, anathema to governments during recessions. Moreover
50
I.
ster.s taken to deal with pressing problems - say, to avoid the failure of a
major enterprise - may mortgage the possibilities of reshaping the use of
resources in the same field later on. Nor can one find much in a recession that
helps distinguish structural problems from cyclical ones, something that is
sometimes easy and sometimes very hard indeed to do.
Perhaps a word should be said about the use of the term structural - though
an effort at strict definition would be out of place in a paper such as this. As a
word becomes fashionable, it loses precision and accumulates meanings. These
days "structural" is sometimes used to mean "bi_g", or "prolonged", or
"intractable", and serious structural problems are likely to be all of these. But
there is something else that distinguishes them from the difficulties, however
great, that one may reasonably believe to be passing. The essence of the matter
is that structural changes involve relatively lasting shifts in the way resources
are used. The shift may be cause or effect; the problem may come from
accepting or resisting the change. Inevitably other sets of relations are affected
and they have to be treated as part of the structural problems as well. Thus,
for example, large changes in a country's balance of pay(Tients may be the
symptom either of structural change or of failure to adjust to structural change,
or they may be signs of wrong macro-economic (or cyclical) policies, at home
or abroad. Uncertainty about what is temporary and what is lasting is in itself
part of the problem.
Looking at the current recession, one can be sure that some of the
unemployment of people and resources is cyclical and will disappear once
aggregate ,demand is again .high enough. But the earlier experience of shortages
in skilled lal:Jor accompanied by the heavy concentration of unemployment
among minorities and youth in the U.S. pointed to structural problems.
Something of the same sort seems to be appearing in Europe and Japan. The
lag in investment that is both cause and effect of slow recovery is surely
attributable in part to uncertainty about where expansion of capacity is
warranted and whether modernization is likely to pay in one field or another.
The structural consequences of the world's new energy economy will take time
to work out fully. They concern not only adjustment to higher costs and energy
saving but the location of some industries (most obviously petrochemicals), the
stimulus to alternative energy sources, changed patterns of demand in
producing and consuming countries and the accelerated development of the
oil-exporting countries. The Commission of the European Community has no
hesitation in speaking of a "worldwide structural crisis" in steel, shipbuilding
and textiles and few observers would question that judgment. More open to
debate is the question of how many other industries may also suffer from
underlying structural difficulties and when and how these may show
themselves. Will automobiles be next?
The international impact of these structural problems intensifies the
pressures to foster exports and shut out imports that already come from
51
cyclical factors. The recession heightened the concern in many countries, over
balance of payments difficulties, that had started with the rise in the oil price.
But the protectionist pressures of recent years are in some respects different.
They stem from the problems of particular industries and areas, not from
generalized concern with the balance of payments. Their political impact is
sharper. When the oil crisis started, fear of the consequences led to the
adoption of the OECD pledges not to resort to beggar-my-neighbor measures,
and these have been remarkably well kept (partly, no doubt, because of
reasonably good experience with recycling). Now, however, the new
protectionist pressures have put serious strains on the pledge and it is worth
speculating why these were most strongly felt not when the recession was
worst but after there began to be some improvement.
Part of the explanation, no doubt, is simply the continuation of difficulties.
Partly, though, it seems as if the persistence of the recession has persuaded
many people that full recovrry to pre-recession levels is not possible, or at
least will take a very long time. There is a connection with the spreading view
about the probability of slower growth in the future than in the past 30 years,
and sQmber thoughts are likely to accompany that prospect. There is also a
related set of attitudes toward what is acceptable or desirable in the economic
life of the advanced industrial countries that are not altogether new but seem to
?ave gained strength as time has passed. All this taken together is only
madequately described as "protectionism", though it has profound implications
for trade liberalization and long-run structural adjustments.
One of these attitudes may seem implausible at the moment but was quite
common before 1973 and will probably reappear. This is the feeling that the
western industrial world has reached a level of such prosperity that the cost of
maintaining a certain degree of inefficiency in each national economy is not
only quite bearable, but actually preferable to the political and social effort of
making further changes that will be resisted by significant parts of the
population. The same conclusion is reached by people who believe that the
gains that might be obtained from a further liberalization of world trade are
small. Some think this is because the biggest bar.riers were those removed in
the past. Others argue that at the present sophisticated level of technical
adv~ncement countries do not gain much from specialization or further steps in
the mternational division of labor. Everyone can do about as well as everyone
else With the same technology, is the reasoning.
While not many people will make an explicit argument that evervone should
always be allowed to go on doing what he has always done in the. same place
~e h~~ always done it, ther~ can be no doubt that something like that attitude is
1mphc1t m a good bit of social and political behavior. Perhaps too much has
~een made ?f the. unwillingness of people to move from place to place and too
little attentiOn g1ven to the consequences of the perfectly natural wish of
working men to keep doing what they know how to do best. Obviously millions
52
of people have changed their work and responded to improved opportunities -
but 1:he resistances can be strong. If remuneration and productivity were
always closely linked, labor would move from industries where comparative
advantage was being lost to new, higher paying activities. Or at least, new
workers would stay out of the declining industries. But as recent GATT and
ECE studies have emphasized, strong pressures have grown up to retain
established patterns of wage differentials. There is also a natural tendency of
unions to gear wage demands to costs of living rather than to a worker's
production. The combination not only slows the shift of labor but contributes
directly to inflation, thus setting in motion one more of those vicious circles
that are becoming so familiar.
The problem is not just with labor; capital and management also ask for
protection and like to go on doing things as they have before. It was said of
Britain between the wars that "the historical evidence .... suggests that the
stickiness of capital rather than the stickiness of labour was most responsible
for the rigidity" of the economic structure.* Whether that has also been the
case in recent times and other countries would require further study. It is
probably true, though, that in looking for an explanation of structural
difficulties "any attempt to fasten exclusive responsibility upon one factor of
production rather than another will almost certainly be misleading .. " The
reluctance of business to invest in an industry in structural difficulties may help
bring about change, but it can also worsen the problem by denying the means
of reorganization.
Another source of resistance to structural change is the belief that a country
will lose the capacity to produce some things it has always produced for itself.
This is an old and familiar fear. We ought, however, to keep a few facts in
mind. It is now generally understood that the reason the creation of the
Common Market did not have major disturbing effects is that the expansion of
trade took place through specialization within industries rather than by the
replacement of one industry with another. While some activities have indeed
disappeared entirely from the old industrialized countries, the more usual
results involve shrinking certain activities, expanding others, reorganizing, and
competing in different ways. As for national security arguments, there is room
to doubt how much protection can be justified on those grounds when almost
every country lacks some essential ingredients.
To perserve a way of life, to provide diversity, or to foster some other
values than economic efficiency is every society's right. But then it must
accept the costs and ought to minimize the burden on others. Change may be
costly, but so is the failure to change. There is not much doubt that such issues
are not being looked at very analytically. It is no great distortion to say that
quite a few people seem to be acting tacitly on the assumption that their
•Allan G.B. Fisher, Economic Progress and Social Security (London: Macmillan, 1945), p. 76.
53
~~~~o~al economy ought to produce. at least something of almost everything.
IS a luxury few countnes can mdulge in; most have had the possibility
~aken away. fron;. them by nature, or they have accepted interdependence with
1ts econom1c gams and accompanying vulnerabilities.
If we take a!l these observations together (and if they are sound) the
structural questiOns that face the industrial countries have to be thought ~f in
terms much br~ader .than those of international trade and protectionism. We
::~: to be de~lmg with a set of attitudes about out mature, rich societies that
.
1
s.preservmg them much as they are (or were before the recession and the
01 cnses). If we accept this as a working hypothesis what are the
co?sedquences of pursuing the kind of conservative course su~gested by these
at~I_tu ~ ~ or on .the other hand the requirements of a different course of
~~ ~~~ rtt w?uld aim to make, or at least facilitate, larger structural changes?
h 1
e neither the one nor the other course will be clearly and consistently
c osen and pursued, but a short paper must simplify.
Consequences of the new conservatism
. Tho.ugh it is easier to delineate this alternative than the other even here the
~sl~e 18
dbl.urred by some misconceptions. For instance, it seerr:s to be widely
\'eve . m Western Europe that slower growth will be accompanied by
su stanhal s.tructur~l u~emp!oyment. Of course it may be, but there are
;e:ons ~0
reJect the mevitabi!Ity. In principle it should be possible to maintain
1
u ei?p oyme~t - however defined at any level of growth A continuing
bargehmc:ease m the labor force would certainly make matters .more difficult
~! t at Is not expected for Europe. Considering how heavily Western Europ~
depended on Imported labor during these decades of rapid growth it would
appear that there was ~ cons~derable margin for adjustment to a slo~er pace.
~fh~a~~al dan.g:r, on~ ffilght thmk, is that growth would be held down by a lack
th r. Opmwns differ as to how many people may move from agriculture to
~ er employment in Western Europe in the next two decades but there is at
east ;orne .labor reserve there. A more important one is the one-sixth of the
~anu acturmg ~ork fo.rce of ten Western European countries employed in
~ ree poorly patd, relatively low productivity industries· textiles clothing and
oo~wea~ .and. leathe~ products. Could these people be. transfer,red to higher
produc~IVIty mdustnes and not replaced by new labor, the contribution to
pro uctwn could be substantial.
T~e. expectation of structural unemployment is also linked to the
~7Illmgn~ss ?f Western European workers to take the poorest paying and
.st ~e.mal JObs and the probably related inability of people leaving
~mversit.Ies to find. employment commensurate with their education. The
ormer difficulty pomts toward continued immigration of a class of resident
helots; the latter possibility sends out a. variety of alarm signals with disturbing
54
rnstorical echoes, notably from the interwar years.
Comparable problems exist in the U.S., though with important regional
differences. Much of the immigration is internal (from Puerto Rico and the
south) and the expectation of the experts is that instead of becoming an
intellectual proletariat the college graduates will mostly take less good jobs and
in the process "bump" other workers downwards (which may sharpen the
competition for the lowest jobs). Inevitably these possibilities pose two basic
questions. What kind of social security or minimum income should the modern
industrial society provide? What is to be expected in the emerging
post-industrial society of the service sector - to which both the unemployed
university graduates and the illiterate garbage collectors belong? Much of what
has been said on this popular subject is misleading since there are very few
generalizations about economic behavior that apply equally to bankers,
barbers, ballerinas and bureaucrats. Most of the statistics people have to work
with are also confusing. But the topic is a vital one.
If the new conservatism means that no structural change is possible, then
long-run structural unemployment is probably inevitable along with a higher tax
burden for the better off. If the stress is on people persisting in traditional work
and the maintenance of "normal" differences, then there will also be an
additional force making for inflation for the reasons set out above. To maintain
existing patterns will require not only protection against imports but, probably,
measures to restrain domestic competition and the introduction of new
labor-saving technology so as both to protect traditional jobs and to maintain
incomes n;~ardless of productivity. The cost and difficulty of such measures
may be the principal safeguard against the stagnation that would otherwise be
the consequence of this course of action.
It seems doubtful that the industrial countries could combine a policy of slow
or minimal change in industrial structure with slow growth and still avoid losing
comparative advantage in one branch of industry after another to producers
that accepted a faster pace of change whether these were developing
countries, Japan, other industrial market economies or, in some sectors,
communist countries as well. Thus the conservative course will create balance
of trade problems and cut down the income to be divided. While a shrinking
population will reduce the impact on individual incomes, expectations of
improvement will intensify the struggle for the social product (to paraphrase
the title of Helmut Schmidt's article in Foreign Affairs, April 1974). This will
throw sharply into focus policies concerned with equity, minimum living
standards, and the provision of public goods. These problems each society will
have to take care of for itself, but for all of them it is true that concern with
fair shares puts a new emphasis on the amount there is to be distributed and
therefore on efficiency in production and that that in turn conerns the
international division of labor as well as the productivity of domestic
producers.
55
There is, in short, a contradiction between maintaining customary levels of
income and resisting structural change in the national economy. To resolve it
the new conservatism would have to become the new egalitarianism,
redistributing a static or decling product among a static or declining population
(minus what had to be paid to imported workers). At least so far as the U.S. is
concerned, this is so implausible as to need no further exploration. One would
assume that was also true of most European countries unless they greatly
improved their ability to live as rentiers (Norway from its oil?) or lowered
expectations in the face of a Malthusian menace. The avoidance of these
consequences through increased productivity, perfectly paced to permit a static
pattern of employment and no loss of income, can also be dismissed - though
it is clearly the right target for any government committed to keeping at least a
facsimile of the status quo.
Even if the internal problems created by the new conservatism could be
resolved, would the industrial countries be able to live with the external
effects? What these are is implicit in what has already been said. The most
obvious is the refusal to give ground to foreign producers in relatively
inefficient industries and hence more protectionism probably over a wider
range of products as time passes. The importance of this stance to the
developing countries (LDCs) is clear if we simply recall that 35 percent of what
the non oil-exporting LDCs sent to. the OECD countries in 1976 was
manufactured goods. As some of this flow comes from plants established by
multinational corporations producing for the OECD market, there would be
some tendency for foreign investment to decline as well (if the conservative
policy were general in the OECD countries). Development lending by the
World Bank and other institutions would have to take account of this limitation
of markets. There would be further repercussions as LDCs lost purchasing
power for the products of Europe and North America. In capital goods
required for development, the old producers would hold their advantages
longer than in other fields.
There would be some compensatory factors for the LDCs. The industrial
countries would become increasingly uncompetitive over a wider range of
products, leaving room for LDC industries at home and abroad. The effort to
keep up OECD exports might also create pressures for generous financing of
the sale of capital goods and then to forgive debts or roll them over. Food
supplies might remain relatively plentiful and cheap if the new conservatism led
to a continuation in the Community and the U.S. of farm policies that tended
to pr.oduce surpluses as a result of limiting pressures for change on farmers and
slowmg the growth of the domestic market for their products. One could spin
out these possibilities further; think of the implications of China's embarking
on a major development policy using outside resources but paying its way as
much.as possible. It can all be summed up, however, by saying that pursuit of
the kmd of new conservatism sketched here would move fairly far towards
56
trying to insulate the countries that practiced it from structural change in the
wor1d. economy and would reduce their ability, and probably their will, to
contribute to the improvement of the position of the developing countries in the
world economy, either through the transfer of resources or the opening of new
opportunities for the developing countries.
Very likely all this is a caricature. Certainly few advocates of the different
views put together here wish the results I have sketched. It has not been my
intention to bias the argument but it is hard to avoid most of the conclusions
suggested unless one assumes that people would change course once they saw
what was happening.
The requirements of accepting change
If the West is to adopt the opposite course it will also face many difficulties.
Simply to say we should accept structural change as necessary or desirable
would be wishing away the basic problem we now face. Instead we need to see
what would have to be done to find ways to: (1) make structural changes more
acceptable by easing the burdens and dislocations that go with them; (2)
facilitate and induce desirable structural changes where they encounter
obstacles; (3) cope internationally with problems that cannot be confined to
national borders; and (4) provide some rational way of dealing with the cases in
which a society accepts the economic cost of preserving some of its structures
and ways of doing things but should not thereby put burdens on other countries
or stand in the way of their achieving their different goals and values.
It would foolish to try to write so ambitious a program in one short paper.
This section merely sketches a few central but rather difficult issues that our
countries will have to face sooner or later. To simplify still further, we can
accept for the sake of argument the widely held belief that for some time to
come growth will be slower for a variety of reasons. The OECD countries can
live quite decently with that prospect. They ought not however to do things
that block growth in the poor countries. And if growth is faster than expected
- the conventional wisdom has been wrong before - the problems of
structural adjustment will be easier to deal with.
It can be taken for granted that governments need means of easing
adjustments and helping those hurt by the resulting dislocation. The
deficiencies of most national systems are real enough, but the principles are
clear. The American measures work better than they used to but are quite
inadequate to the problems, partly because import competition is treated
differently from other sources of change. Internationally, there is a need for
better international surveillance of the use of safeguard clauses and more
pressure on a country to use the time granted for adjustment. The MTN
negotiations are supposed to deal with these issues and we need not explore
them in detail.
57
A much less discussed aspect of adjustment assistance- which also pertains
to regional policies is how to decide what to do with labor and other
resources that are helped to move out of declining industries. If there were one
sick industry and all the rest were thriving, one might think the market would
take care of the matter so long as the workers were given extra help and, if
necessary, retraining. But if there are a number of industries in difficulties and
the government has to encourage new investment by tax relief, loans or
something else it must also have some responsibility for being sure the new
activities do not soon become a renewed problem in structural adjustment. Are
official lists of rising and falling industries enough _ the one to be encouraged
and tlie other not? How good are we at this kind of thing? I recall that in the
early 1960s many thought that the future of American cotton textile workers
would be assured if they were trained to work in electronics plants.
This same problem has an international dimension. If, as is often the case,
the same industries are giving trouble in a number of countries and they all
"adjust" by moving into the same new fields, thev may have embarked on new
collision courses. Increased new competition in the world market is one thing,
government-aided investment in surplus capacity and then in forcing exports is
another. If adjustment takes place within an international industry, questions
come up about the degree to which what is done in one major center could
possibly be coordinated in some fashion with what is done elsewhere. To be
concrete: The Community's plans for its steel industry seem to look toward
adjustment in capacity and structure over a period of years; similar possibilities
for the U.S. are suggested by passages in the Solomon report. Unless each of
these processes takes account of the other they may simply set the stage for
another round of difficulties. And that will surely happen if the Japanese are
not brought in. If the evidence of structural difficulties touched on earlier is
sound, steel will not be the last of the industries to cause trouble. Clearly the
possibility of fitting national industrial policies together internationally - for
which we are totally unequipped now - needs serious exploration.
Many people will draw back from such suggestions because they will see in
them "planning", and international planning at that. They are not altogether
wrong. The logic moves toward planning. One may not like that, knowing how
badly equipped our governments are to determine the best use of resources.
And one may totally reject thoroughgoing planning and anything approaching a
command economy. But can it really be sensible to say we shall act only on
the negative and leave the positive to take care of itself?
It is also not altogether fair to saddle this approach with the charge of total
planning and with the horrors that label connotes to many. The prescription
applies to specific cases, those for which other means have failed. There might
be only one or two of them at a time. It is true, however, that if governments
are all reluctant to abandon specified major industries to market forces, the
sector agreements they make among. themselves can have a strong family
58
resemblance to cartels- or will have if they are not subjected to a certain play
of market forces, inside or from the outside.
·The issue is not really one of relying on market forces; it is the unwillingness
to do just that which causes the governments to resort to protectionist
measures in the first place. Nor is it altogether clear that market forces are
adequate to do all the expanding and contracting of industries and their
sensible relocation that is called for by long-run needs. Some 30-odd years ago
a prescient student of these matters said,
"The most feasible and also the most constructive alternative to
restrictive intervention by the State is not non-intervention (laissez-faire),
but intervention of a more constructive kind - namely, a positive
program of industrial adaptation. Such a program would be designed to
assist industry and labor in reorienting themselves, so that they can take
maximum advantage of new opportunities. In this way the enterprise and
initiative of citizens will be preserved and will be exerted in the most
promising directions. The results of such a program, assuming that it is
successful, might well be in many (but not all) respects similar to that
which the automatic market system would accomplish if it were able to
function with the theoretical perfection assumed in older text books. But
the process of adjustment ought to go forward with more attention to the
human problems of the individuals directly involved and with less
infliction of suffering on particular groups.*
We do not seem to have moved very far in the direction that Eugene Staley
pointed: We lack an approach to industrial adaptation that gives priority to the
public interest and keeps both the benefits of private initiative and the pressure
of competition. If we do not wish to get involved in comprehensive planning or
rely entirely on market forces, our mixed systems will have to produce some
combination of regulation and government-business cooperation.
It might be said we have had a good bit of experience with such measures in
the last few decades: France's Plan, Japan's industrial policy, and even
Germany's Konzertierte Aktion. But in all these countries we find serious
doubts that such methods will be effective in dealing with new problems - or
are coping adequately with those of today. One wonders if these breakdowns
reflect a deeper inability of governments, business and labor to deal with
structural change.
If the emphasis is on government cooperation with business, the U.S. is
probably worst off among the major OECD countries. Its history, traditions
and laws make government-business cooperation a rarity and severely limit
cooperation among business firms. Officials and businessmen both feel that
Staley, World Economi<· Development: on Advanced industrial Countries,
Published by the International Labor Office, Montreal, 1944. p. 177.
59
something should be done, but often turn out to mean quite different things
when they say this. Both cyclical and structural difficulties have stirred a new
interest in better means of consultation and the inclusion of organized labor in
the process. It is far from clear whether anything will come of this interest, but
a better test case than usual is the Solomon Committee's proposal for "a
tripartite committee of industy, labor and government representatives as a
mechanism to ensure a continuing cooperative approach to the problems and
progress of the steel industry."
Many people are suspicious of government-business cooperation for fear of
bureaucratic dictation: cor~oratism, undue business influence on public policy,
or Simply too much distortion of market forces. Others doubt its effectiveness.
An alternative approach, or perhaps a supplementary one, is to try to make
mar~e.ts wor~ better. At one level one encounters deep differences among
traditiOnal views of what is desirable in competition; oldline American
anti-trust vs. Community merger policy; arguments that assume classical
atomistic .competition vs. the imperfect but very real competition of oligopolies;
the questzon whether monopolies are inherently bad or only when they abuse
their power; whether government cooperation can stimulate interest instead of
stifling .private activity. These and other disputes all have a history that may be
commg to life again, in part because some of the complaints of developing
coun.tri~s, especially about technology transfer, revive old complaints about
restnctive busmess practices while OPEC has demonstrated that cartelizing
impulses do not always go wrong.
A different approach to improving markets concerns international trade. How
much can be done to overcome structural difficulties by the further removal of
trade baniers? Quite a lot, is one answer, when one realizes that some of the
main difficulties come from cases in which trade has remained quite restricted.
Very little, is another answer, if we take the view that the reason for this is
tha~ .the freer flow of trade has brought on pressures for faster changes than are
pohtically and socially acceptable - or that it is feared that this would happen.
Those who say free trade has had its day confuse the issue. Trade without
tariffs. and quotas is not free trade and even tariff-free trade is fairly
except1~nal. There is no doubt, though, that "fair trade" rises in importance
alon~ With the volume of international trade. But there is no agreed definition
of farr trade; that is something that can only be worked out by the international
community as it makes rules on subjects far more complicated than tariffs and
quot~s, i.e., on subsidies, government procurement, tax concessions, pricing
~r~ctices and so on. This will only be done piecemeal and with difficulty but, if
1t IS not .done, the present degree of freedom of trade is not likely to survive.
The SUbjeCt leads too far afield to be pursued here, but I suggest that the
deeper one gets into the matter of fair trade, the closer one will come to other
efforts to deal with structural problems and vice versa.
In the minds of many people the only constructive approach to the stubborn
60
problems of structural change is a positive one. Instead of resisting, defending
and easing adjustment, the government should promote change. In addition to
what is done by macroeconomic policy to keep up aggregate demand, check
inflation and maintain stability along with growth, the government should find
ways of encouraging those kinds of activities that have a promising future.
Financial aid and measures directing the flow of investment capital are likely to
be the means. The targets have often been the creation of high technology
industries, those incorporating new methods and calling for skilled labor and
those creating the kind of demand that the rest of the economy is adept at
filling.
But how successful has experience been? We are back, in part, at the earlier
doubt of whether our governments are very well equipped to make these
choices and forecasts. To get around that difficulty, some would recommend a
stress on reasearch and development, with heavy government aid, on the
theory that the process will point the way to new goals and provide means that
entrepreneurs could turn into new industrial ventures that would assure
competitiveness by being ahead of the rest of the world. This is not t~e place
to go into the fascinating questions about the design and conduct of
governmental programs for science and technology, but one has to insert a
small note of skepticism as to whether our experiences with efforts of this sort
that are directed to problems of industrial advance are greatly encouraging.
Where positive measures have stimulated the building of new industries is in
the developing countries. Much of the stimulus comes from private investment
and publicly- financed development agencies, national and international. That
these activities have contributed to the problems of industrial adjustment all
over the world is obvious. There is no need to repeat things said earlier about
the links, but one looks in vain for promising efforts to match up processes of
growth and decline. The World Bank seems an obvious center. So are the
multinational corporations. Governments, in developing and industrial countries
alike, seem to be getting more sophisticated in finding ways to insure that the
behavior of the multinationals contributes to the results the countries want -
but that has not yet been to help solve the problem of structural change.
Sometimes a large firm is sufficiently diversified so that it is in expanding and
contracting industries at once, and so might help to balance a process of
adaptation. Businessmen are not likely to welcome this role, but some such
activity might turn out to be part of the price of avoiding greater restrictions.
The field seems open for imaginative invention that will use both trade and
financial measures to ease these difficult but desirable transitions. But good
ideas are hard to find, and every course that looks at all practical carries with
it considerable risks. One of the clearest is an increase in divisions among the
industrial countries as each tries to work out its own arrangements with
61
selected developing countries including OPEC and the raw material
producers.*
Vital as the international problems are, they can only be coped with if each
country or at least the major ones can overcome its greatest domestic
difficulties.
Job security in some form seems essential if there is to be political and social
acceptance of better adaptation to structural change. The trouble that one
concept of job security can cause was underlined in the discussion of the new
conservatism. In the long run to insist on no change means that job security
offers little more than a kind of pension, the chance to finish off one's career in
a declining industry in a depressed area at low wages. The Japanese have
managed extraordinarily well to combine "lifetime employment" and worker
willingness to do different jobs without loss of pay. That the system is coming
under strain in recession is natural but its strengths ought to be looked at in the
West and not dismissed as simply something peculiar to an exotic society. The
Swedes are everyone's example of the effectiveness of an active labor market
policy in a free society and the figures are impressive. Betweeen 1958-60 and
1968-70 they reduced the share of their manufacturing employment in three
labor-intensive industries from 14.2 to 9.6 percent, both fairly well ahead of all
other Western European countries (except Norway, which is close). What is
possible in one country is not always possible in another but there is a common
problem. And if the answer is not to provide job security plus adaptation, then
it must be some form of maintenance for the unemployed at the expense of
those with jobs. And then the vital question is who is to fall into which
category. One of the awful things about job security in times of recession is
that to the extent it is provided it reduces security for those who have no jobs
- which right now means the young.
The aim of this paper has been to provoke discussion and thought. Its
method has been to point to difficulties, very many difficulties. If the paper had
been longer, so would the list as there is no assurance of a happy ending if one
only reads far enough. Whether the challenges inspire effort or the possible
gains seem worth working for becomes a matter of personal chemistry. The
failure to attack the problems of structural change has reasonably predictable
gloomy results. It would be irresponsible to argue that therefore an effort to
attack them is bound to lead to something better - but it might.
*
* *
The author of this paper summarized his thesis in two propositions:
•To save space this paper has focused on manufacturing. [n raw materials important changes are
under way which are structural not only in the use of resources - the location of processing
plants but also in ownership. control, the organization of markets and. in many cases, the
elimination of vertical integration.
62
(1) Adaptation to structural change had been one of the best things that had
happenoo 'to us in the postwar period. It had been the condition of
unprecedented growth and prosperity, and the result of a fairly open set of
domestic economies and of some fairly deliberate decisions of an open
international economy.
(2) Part of our present trouble stemmed from an accumulated resistance to
change, exacerbated by the cyclical effects. While a recession tended to make
us aware of underlying diffic1,1lties and to give us an incentive to act, it reduced
our capacity to deal with them. Even if we could do better during the next
decade, we would continue to confront the energy issue, "stagflation" (with
structural causes), and expectations of slower growth (themselves contributing
to the problems of recovery).
We faced this dilemma: we could follow the politically easier course of
accepting these resistances, of not attacking them directly. The trade-off was
that we would have less to make do with. In time we would feel this more
strongly, as the aim <:Jf minimum living standards and more equitable
distribution became harder to achieve. We would be tempted by the normal
disposition of rrations to dump problems on one another, and as a by-product
we could expect the further co!laspe of the system of international economic
cooperation.
The alternative was to attack the problem directly, but to do better than we
had before on such items as liberalizaing terms of trade and payment. This
approach would require more attention to identifying and encouraging likely
areas of growth, which raised the spectre of planning or, worse, of
unplanned govern_fl1ent intervention. In this connection, one was stru~k in the
U.S. as well as in Europe by the amount of deregulation, by the turmng back
from the notion that things could be accomplished simply be government's
deciding they should be. In the two democratic countries where efforts at
guiding the economy had met with significant success - France and Japan
one now sensed uncertainty about what could be achieved through central
planning.
It was no answer, though, simply to fall back on "the market". It had been
the unwillingness of our societies to respond entirely to the play of market
forces that had produced the accumulation of resistances.
What we should be looking for, according to the author, was a system under
which the market functioned as an indicator of direction and allocator of
resources; responded to a set of demands reflecting social nee~s democratically
determined; and permitted the initiative and entrepreneurship ne~~ssary for
progress. And all this had to bring change at a pace that was pohtJ.~a!ly and
socially acceptable, under enough competition to guarantee productivity and
the efficient allocation of resources.
This was indeed a tall order. It was bound to produce international friction, a
tendency to say "my problems are worse than yours." A high degree of
63
consultation would be required, with labor involved at some level in the
decision-making process. But if we could revive the sort of creativity that had
attended the founding of our postwar institutions, we would have reason to be
hopeful about the chances of success.
* ' *
*
International Working Paper:
"STRUCTURAL CHANGE: A EUROPEAN VIEW"
The profound changes in production and trade structures referred to in the
American working paper affect all the Western industrialized countries in one
way or another. I shall try to explain why and how these changes hit the
European Community particulary hard, with the result that large areas of its
industry are in a state of crisis which is due not only to the short-term
economic situation but to structural causes as well. Europe's leaders do not
have any ready-made answer to this crisis of adjustment; my contribution to
your conference is therefore restricted to describing basic arguments and to
indicating a few courses of action, while admitting that their coherence and my
attempt to put them in perspective leaves something to be desired.
The traditional structure of production and trade in the Community reflects
Europe's principal industrial vocation: manufacturing. Because it depends
heavily on foreign markets and resources, European industry is much more
exposed than others to the profound changes which a new international
division of labor implies. It can only envy the less vulnerabl~ position of
American industry which, having raw materials to extract as well as process,
draws its strength from an internal market of continental dimensions and which
can draw on abundant and often relatively cheap domestic supplies of raw
materials and energy.
European industry cannot fall back on a domestic market; it has to choose
its structural reforms for both internal and external reasons. Internally, we
have inherited structural weakness which the economic crisis has revealed and
amplifted. In many sectors European industry has not taken sufficient
advantage of the boom years of the past to adapt production capacities to
demand, to modernize the apparatus of production, and to organize production
and marketing on a continental and intercontinental scale. The recession has
reduced its capacity for adjustment while showing the urgent need for it. This
is a challenge which industry cannot take on by itself in the present
circumstances; governments must do their bit as well.
The need to achieve a kind of European division of labor also stems from the
decision to enlarge the Community still further. Greek, Portugese and Spanish
membership will increase production capacities in some sensitive sectors of the
Community, but it will also make for bigger differences in production
64
conditions. These countries will therefore have to be associated with the effort
to adju"st ,the Community's industrial production appartus to the new conditions
of the· world market.
Externally, the Community's international competitiveness has declined to an
alarming degree, as indicated by the size of its trade deficit with the U.S. ~nd
Japan. A detailed analysis, particularly of the terms of trade on foretgn
markets is needed to assess the true extent of the phenomenon, but 1t can be
safely s;ud already that Europeans ought to be more concerned about it than
they are. Many of their traditional exports seem to be threatened by the cost
inflation which has hit the Community's industry far harder over the years than
its immediate competitors. The anit-dumping measures taken a few years ago
against exports of European cars had already highlighted these problems; the
situation has only got worse since then in this and other sectors and the overall
export figures reflect this state of affairs.
This loss of international competitiveness is in itself an incentive for the
Community to react by carrying out structural reforms. In addition, like the
other Western industrialized countries, the Community has to face up to the
implications of the new international division of labor which is the conse.quence
of the gradual industrialization of the Third World and of th~ decentrahzatton,
internationally, of some industrial production, particularly by the
multi-nationals.
Clearly, we cannot just passively undergo the changes now taking place. We
must act and not just react. Many branches of industry in the Community are
now in a state of crisis and reforms are urgently needed. Readjustment can
only be successful if governments support and facilitate the necessary changes,
which it is their-job to do. It is true, however, that the bureaucrats are
ill-equipped to guide this process of adjustment along the right lines. In our
market economv it is not their job to decide what to do and what not to do.
But present gro~th prospects are not conducive to spon.taneou.s chan~es. If_the
market remains the fundamental element in our conceptiOn of mdustnal pohcy,
supplementary "voluntarist" and supportive action on the part of gover?ments
would seem to be indispensable. No government can allow whole sectwns of
industry to disappear suddenly without anything in exchange, which would not
only have serious economic and social consequences, but could eve~. put our
whole type of society at risk. The action to be taken by t~e aut~ont1es must
therefore be aimed at improving the conditions under which adjustment can
take place. . .
It must be admitted that these conditions are not, even m the medmm term,
very favorable as regards the Community. A long and severe recess~on h~s_l~ft
many firms without the necessary financial resources to revive their a~tJvJties
and modernize their equipment. The very mediocre growth rates which are
forecast suggest that there can be little hope of a rapid reduction in
unemployment; on the contrary, the population figures indicate that between
65
1975 and 1985 nine million young people will be swelling a work force which
already includes between six and seven million jobless. The morose political
and social climate in Europe is not an incentive to invest. This reluctance to
invest - which is a formidable handicap for a restructuring policy - reflects a
number of factors, misgivings and uncertainties. High up on the list of
uncertainties is the unpredictable nature of government behavior. Just look at
social policy, fiscal policy, monetary policy. Other sources of uncertainty are
to be found in the revival of international protectionism and the fall of the
dollar, which make any strategy based on free trade hazardous. Inflation is
another.source of frustration. It is impossible to conduct a policy of stability at
the natiOnal level, and nothing of any significance is being done by the
Com~~nity or at an international level. Social security costs, the wage
bargammg process and the policy of income redistribution leave still less room
for :naneuver. In the circumstances it is not surprising that everybody is
lookmg to governments to take decisive action.
The Community, for its part, has taken a series of measures to cope with the
problems of adjustment which are particularly acute in the steel, textile and
~hipbuil?ing industries. The aim of these measures is the restructuring of the
tndu~~nes concerned and the reconversion, under socially acceptable
conditiO.ns, of the regions principally affected. They aim to restore as quickly
as possible the international competitiveness of industries whose survival is
~ustified. without compromising the principles underlying intra-Community and
mternatwnal trade.
The measures taken for the industries in difficulty will have to be
acco~~anied ?Y an effort to promote the growth industries, where production
capacities which are currently unused or which will be freed as a result of
restr~cturing will have to be put to uses corresponding more closely to the
reqmrements of demand. This effort should encourage the development of
modem and technologically advanced industries.
A third course of action would be to try to secure firmer international
foo~holds for European industry. The first thing to do here would be, through
vano~s forms of industrial and trade cooperatiO!il, to secure supplies of raw
matenals on stable conditions and at acceptable prices. Steps would also have
to ~e t~ken t~ encourage, facilitate and protect a bigger share of European
capital In fore1gn production and markets which are difficult to penetrate from
outside.
The success of these efforts to help European industry will largely depend on
wh.at progress the Community can make towards economic and monetary
uniOn. Sure and unimpeded access to the Common Market would be a
powerful incentive to bring about the changes in industrial structures which
must lead to a European division of labor based on the philosophy of the
ma.rket. economy. The framework of Community solidarity which monetary
umon m particular would constitute would encourage industrialists and
66
businessmen to make the necessary investments.
Those, then, are the directions in which the Community has made a start. It
must be admitted that the instruments and means available for a policy of
structural adjustment at Community level are still inadequate, even allowing for
the fact that the Community policy is only supplementing natioHal measures.
The Community must further develop the instruments which enable it to assist
industrial firms which have to change their method of production or their range
of products, to help workers who may be asked to switch to jobs in another
industry or another region and to assist the areas most affected by these
changes. It will also have to acquire the financial resources needed to deal with
increased unemployment, especially among young people, during the period of
adjustment; to do something, at least temporarily, to prevent regional
imbalances becoming still more marked; and to attenuate the effects of an
unequal distribution, among the Community countries, of the social costs and
economic benefits of industrial restructuring.
Any action taken to change production and trade structures obviously calls
for concertation between Western industrialized countries, and also with
developing countries. This need for international concertation is not an isolated
fact; it corresponds to a profound change in the nature of international
economic relations as a whole. It is a question of taking account of the
presence of the state in our market economies and the politicization of external
trade.
We in the Community are well placed to understand that discipline is
necessary in policy making to establish and maintain free trade. The state is
present in the economy, and not only at external frontiers. There must
therefore be-discipline not just in classic commercial policy matters but in the
whole economic and monetary field. For various reasons the time seems to
have come to draw similar conclusions for international trade, although they
are less radical and ambitious than those to be drawn for regional integration.
Over the last few decades the internationalization of trade. and production
has characterized economic relations between Western industrialized countries
in the first place, and then increasingly those with some developing countries
as well. Politics has not followed suit, although this has not stopped the gradual
politicization of international trade. The degree of economic interdependence
reached in business (and particularly by the multinationals) is such that most
domestic policies and administrative measures affect trade in one way or
another; by exaggerating a little, it could be said that trade has become the
scene of a potential daily confrontation of domestic policies. This politicization
is therefore largely passive, although governments are quick to learn to use the
"unclassical instruments" of commercial policy; there is still, internationally,
not enough concerted and "voluntarist" policy.
It must be admitted that we are hardly ready to remedy this situation and
public opinion in our countries is even less so. How can things be arranged so
67
that state intervention, on both sides, is compatible with the desirable measure
of freedom of trade? It is true that under the technical heading of "non-tariff
barriers to trade" we are looking for answers to these questions. But this is a
very long-term task and we have scarcely made a start on it. Until
multinational codes of conduct can be drawn up covering all the points we are
concerned with, we must be pragmatic and try and work out compromise
arrangements, in the first place between Western industrialized countries.
The objective of international concertation on industrial restructuring fits into
this general context. It is natural that we should try to bring about this
concertation first of all with those countries which act in accordance with
political values comparable to our own. The example of the steel industry is
significant in this respect because it clearly shows that it is in the Community's
and America's interest to agree on subjects like production capacities, prices
and tra~e flows without excluding other partners, particularly Japan. I entirely
agree With the author of the American working paper that Japan's inclusion in
a ''club setting a shining example of solidarity and responsibility" is essential if
the operation is to succeed. There was some progress in this di~ection last year
in the OECD.
In connection with restructuring, the "club's" agenda should include three
big issues: growth strategy (the question of directing structural changes),
relations with outsiders, particularly with developing countries; and providing a
framework of economic and monetary stability in· which the changes can be
brought about. These are also the subjects which we could usefully consider in
greater depth during the discussion which will follow. I am going to start it now
by developing the theme of relations with the Third World to which the
Community attaches particular importance.
Recommending that there should be a club of Western industrialized
countries setting an example of solidarity and responsibility obviously does not
mean that we should take refuge in a defensive policy, let alone a policy of
confrontation, vis-a-vis the developing countries. Club solidarity and discipline
shoul_d_ be seen as a means of facilitating the ordered and mutually acceptable
transitiOn towards a new international division of labor in which the developing
countries are to play a much bigger role. '
. The. Co~munity, for its part, must continue its policy of encouraging the
hberahzat10n of trade with the developing countries, which already absorb
more than 36 per cent of its exports. It must expand its markets in the Third
World if it is to sustain its growth in the coming years. It cannot therefore
afford to relapse into a new conservatism; it has to accept the structural
changes which the inclusion of the developing countries in the international
division of labor entails. For the Community, it is a question of controlling the
pace at which the changes take place, of influencing their nature and of
adapting to them.
As for the pace of change, the Community, like its partners, has the classic
68
instruments of trade defense at its disposal; a selective safeguard clause would
be.cot: particular importance if it could be agreed in the multilateral trade
negotiations. The Community will take more care than in the past to see that
the competing products to which it opens its market reflect normal conditions
of competition.
Through its commerical policy, its cooperation policy, and its export and
investment aids, the Community can influence the forms which industrialization
takes in the developing countries. In the long term it is in the Community's
interest to encourage forms of autonomous industrialization in the developing
countries which are designed to meet the needs of large domestic markets.
There is no reason why the Community should encourage the proliferation in
the Third World of huge exporting industries working for multinational
concerns trying to attack the Community market.
A great effort will have to be made to inform the public and get it to accept
the need for structural changes in our countries despite the economic crisis.
The Commission hopes that the measures needed to adjust to structural
changes in the Community will be prepared by concertation at European level
between representatives of industry, trade and the trade unions as well as
between governments.
*
* *
In presenting his paper to the conference, the author referred to the crisis in
the industrialized world and asked if there had ever been a situation where
action was more obviously required. We were all in favor of the market
economy - the EEC was organized around the idea of living with a bigger
market - but in this crisis the market alone had not managed to act as a
balancing factor, for various reasons. If we fell into protectionism again, it
would be the end of an era, and probably the end of the EEC.
One of the structural elements of the crisis was the technological revolution,
which would create enormous employmentproblems. Nine million young
people would be coming out of European universitites with nothing to do and
no idea of their future. The Community could not live with structural
unemployment of that magnitude.
The whole concept of the EEC was based on restructuring the economies of
individual states, but even if that were accomplished one had to fit into the
overall global adjustment that was taking place. In any case, the first task for
the EEC was to try to put its own house in order.
We could not expect to achieve adaptation and restructuring of industry at
the present low level of growth, so we had to .seek to reestablish a degree of
69
growth in the economy as a whole, despite the current state of monetary
instability. Then we had to buy time for certain industrial sectors with
particular adjustment problems, and to try to work out a quid pro quo whereby
the time allowed for adaptation was limited. It would be up to the industry to
make the best use of that time before it expired.
If it wanted to support such a program, the EEC had the power- legally,
financially, politically - to guarantee its effectiveness. Three elements had to
be taken into consideration:
(!) The developing countries were an essential element of the growth policy
of the industrialized world. How could we insure that this policy aided the
LDCs in a permanent way, and did not simply gear their development to
exporting goods to the industrialized countries, with no beneficial fallout at
horne?
(2) The eastern bloc countries were profiting from the aid we were giving to
the LDCs, because the latter were buying their low technology industry from
East Europe, paid through the transfer of resources from the West. This made
no common sense politically.
(3) Japan was the weak point in our antiprotectionist crusade. If either
Europe or the U.S. concluded a product agreement with Japan, then the other
was right there with a "me too" request.
The author concluded that unless we prepared an action program to meet
this structural crisis, the state would be forced more and more into
"temporary" interventions. We would still give lip service to the free market
while espousing ad hoc protectionism. The development of such a discrepancy
between the rule of law and the way it was implemented - between le pays
reel and le pays legal - was always a dangerous thing for a free society.
*
* *
DISCUSSION
(I) The role of the state in structural adaptation. A German participant
pointed out that one's attitude toward the issue of government intervention to
promote structural change was likely to be affected by the characteristics of his
own country. Germany, for example, which exported a large percentage of its
production, was constrained to adjust without state intervention, and this
process was facilitated by the existence of worker's codeterrnination and the
decentralization of decision-making and risk-taking.
Several speakers from various countries felt strongly that the leading role in
structural change should not be taken by national governments (or by the
European Community). It was an illusion to think that they could stimulate the
70
adjusqnent process. History indicated that they would be more likely to delay
it in order to make it socially acceptable, which was after all one of the
functions of politicians. .
A Briton said that to believe the EEC Commission could succeed m
restructuring European industry would be to allow optimism to triumph over
experience. A better initial goal than industrial adjustment, he suggested,
would be to seek an improved balance in economic relations among nations. It
would not be easy to achieve that, but the speaker recommended a pragma~ic,
ad hoc approach to special problems rather than comprehensive
state-sponsored programs. This could be called "calculated free trade" or, in
Raymond Barre's words, "organized liberalism"
A Canadian participant preferred the old description "muddling through,"
and she wondered if it was still adequate. But she did not underestimate the
impact that government intervention - especially in the envirome~tal area -
might have on productivity, growth and the real rate of return on m~estment.
There was a difficult trade-off between efficiency and these other social goals,
and it was not clear who could make the choices.
If we rejected the ad hoc approach, a Dutch speaker asked, who coul?
propose a better alternative? Indicative planning had certain.ly not. borne frmt
where it had been tried. Participants from Germany, the Umted Kmgdom and
the U.S. cited examples of state planning or intervention which had had
deleterious effects on free markets (Japan and steel, the U.S. and energy), or
had given disappointing overall results (France, Ita!~). . .
In the view of a Portuguese speaker, government mterventJOn - at least m
the devefopetl countries - tended to reduce rather than accelera~e .the pace of
structural adjustment. This was usually done through trade restncuons, and 1t
was time to change the GATT rules to make it clear that use of the safeguard
clause should be only temporary.
An Icelandic speaker remarked that the state was ill-equipped to determine
the best use of resources, and that the free market ("relieved of its
imperfections") would be the most efficient vehicle for structural adjustment.
But democratic governments were unable to tolerate unemployment, so that
transitory state relief might be needed. An American also stressed the state's
responsibility to act, not as an employer, but as a guarantor of ernployn:ent.
He felt that the Humphrey-Hawkins Bill was necessary to spur the pnvate
sector in times of slow-down.
While few participants advocated an expanded state role, many seemed to
agree with a Belgian who regarded it as inevitable. It was reiterated that ~he
cost of doing nothing would be infinitely greater than the cost of domg
something, and it was implied that incentives a~d _adjustmen~ assistance would
have to come from public authorities. The conviCtiOn was wtdespeard, though,
that state intervention should aim only to "buy time".
Thus several speakers supported an American who hoped that our
71
governments could distinguish between (a) taking the necessary, but finite, time
to accomodate structural adaptation, and (b) measures such as artificial pricing,
subsidies and distorting government procurement decisions, which tended to be
permanent. In any case, the speaker advocated putting the cards of national
intervention on an international table, where we could see them and argue
rationally about their costs. Another American, though, was skeptical about the
possibility of costing out actual interventionist policies, which he compared to
opening a "can of worms". Rather than trying to agree on a general set of
principles, he would have preferred a more limited, sectoral approach, which
he called "organized muddling through".
On the other hand, some participants felt that intergovernmental institutions
could play an important role in facilitating structural adaptation in an era when
so much of industry was multinational. An International speaker, for example,
proposed the creation of an international industrial reconversion fund under the
auspices of the OECD or the UN. A Belgian participant lent support to this
line of thought when he suggested that neither national governments nor trade
unions had sufficient countervailing power to deal with multinational business.
An American intervention pointed to the need for positive international
coordination, and not simply negative steps such as the reduction of trade
barriers. Such positive cooperation was difficult to achieve, though, in the
absence of a consensus about what constituted good demand management
policy.
(2) Structural change and economic growth. A German speaker - while
conceding that strategies for achieving structural adjustment ought to be
flexible - argued that increasing the scope of governmental activity was not
the best answer. State intervention to promote demand was bound, he said, to
lead to an ever-growing share of the less-productive public sector of the
economy. This not only contributed to lower growth rates, but actually
hindered the restructuring process. In the Federal Republic, for example,
public expenditure as a share of GNP had climbed from 37 to 48 per cen~
between 1970 and 1977. In the same period, the share of public spending
devoted to investment had declined from 20 to i1 per cent.
Efficiency and rapid growth no longer seemed as important in affluent
societies as distributional equity and economic security. But, as two U.S.
speakers pointed out, efficiency and growth were needed to achieve that equity
and security. Another paradox was that growth required adjustment, but
adjustment was particularly difficult in times of low growth and high
unemployment.
A Greek participant alluded to the different viewpoint of countries which
were only half way to reaching a level of material well-being for all their
citizens. They did not want to stop growing, but they found it difficult to get
back on the path once they had slowed down. They looked to the highly
72
developed countries to devise an order of things which would meet their
prebH~ms, and they particularly hoped not to be the victims of protectionist
measures while they were trying to catch up. The Greeks were looking forward
to the opportunity which their accession to the EEC would give them to
contribute to the solution of common social and economic problems.
Even in affluent societies, there were large numbers of people still seeking an
improved standard of living, and an American participant claimed that a policy
of slow growth, or no growth, was totally unacceptable to the U.S. labor
movement - morally, politically and economically. There were many unfilled
needs in such fields as housing, transportation, schooling and health care, and
we should devote our efforts to creating economies of full employment around
the world.
Two International speakers counselled against "doom and gloom" about
growth. We should aim for moderate, not rapid, growth without inflation, and
we had the economic instruments to achieve it.
An American speaker observed that much of the discussion had assumed a
continuing economic slow-down, and the impossibility of a resumption of
growth attitudes which he felt were related to the energy problem. But it
was important to realize that technological advances could greatly improve the
way we ran our world and used our resources. If we· were to write new
economic rules - for example, calling for more government intervention -
which interfered with this process of advancing technology, we might make the
energy crisis much more severe than it needed to be over the next several
decades.
The electr.Qnics industry, for instance, was now making available greatly
improved logic and memory in large quantities and at low cost. Even if the
industrial world had to get by in the year 2000 with just the same level of
energy it consumed today, chances were we could still generate the same
increase in GNP per capita if we allowed the mechanisms to evolve to take
advantage of our new technological power.
Obviously we would not then be living in exactly the same way. We would
probably not be driving big automobiles or travelling in the same fashion. But
we already possessed the kind of technological tools which could change the
world. The speaker cited two small examples of this revolution. One was the
development of the pocket calculator. An old fashioned slide rule had sold for
$16.50 in 1931. Its much more powerful electronic counterpart was available
today for $15 in 1978 dollars. Another indication was the purchase of more
than 100,000 home hobby computer kits in the U.S. during the past few years.
The speaker concluded by saying that we should try to avoid the self-fulfilling
pessimistic forecast which assumed that man had run out of ways to solve his
problems.
(3) Implications for employment, and the role of labor. An American said
73
that, in the past, unemployment had been related roughly to the business cycle,
but it was now more of a structural problem, related to technological and
demographic changes. Many analysts foresaw increasing competition for
decreasing opportunities, and were worried that planners in both the public and
private sectors were not taking this into account.
A Canadian intervention alluded specifically to the decreased mobility of an
aging labor force; changing attitudes toward work, as seen in pathologically
high rates of labor turnover; and the gap between the educational compostition
of the labor supply and the projected occupational composition of demand.
As structural change was bound to have serious implications for
employment, several participants urged that labor be well represented, along
with government and industry, on tripartite commissions set up to deal with
industrial adaptation. It was pointed out, however, that countries like the
Netherlands, which had had extensive experience witli tripartite commisssions,
often found that conflicting interests had kept them from arriving at any useful
consensus. An Austrian speaker regretted that the trade unions had "almost
tragically" turned away from their international beginnings in the nineteenth
century to become as protectionist as any businessmen.
An intractable difficulty continued to be presented by differences in labor
rates around the world. In the steel industry, for instance, an American
speaker observed that wages ranged from eighty-four cents an hour in Korea,
to seven dollars in Japan, to $13-14 in the U.S. It was easy to call this a classic
case in which competition should run its course as a discipline. But there were
minimal differences in technology and efficiency, and the risk was that wage
scales would become deeply imbedded and support consumer purchasing
power and a standard of living. Differences in raw material and delivery costs
were of course ameliorating factors, but there remained a problem to be
worked out in multinational negotiations:
Several participants argued that full employment at decent wages should be
accorded a top priority. An Austrian speaker, while agreeing that this was a!l
important goal for social stability in the West, pointed out that wages had
become an autonomous variable rather than a dependent one, as they had been
in most of our economic models. This meant that other variables had become
dependent- employment, growth, balance of payments, structural change. We
tended to refer to these latter as "political and economic aims", but we had to
recognize that they could be only relative, not absolute, if wage rates were to
be autonomous.
An Italian participant referred to the high level of unemployment in Europe
and the weakness of industrial sectors such as the motor car business, which
had been losing ground to· Japanese competition for several years. In such an
environment, he asked if it would not be appropriate for the European
Commission, national governments, industry and trade union leaders to try to
work out for some period of time a shorter work week of between, say, 34 and
74
38 hours. Other participants reckoned that chances were slim of reaching such
an agreement. Unless the level of their income were maintained, workers
wo11Hf not approve it. And if incomes were maintained despite shorter hours,
this would amount to an unprecedented increase in wage rates. An American
speaker said that this idea would not be welcome in the U.S., as workers were
"not interested in sharing poverty."
(4) Trade policy. According to an Icelandic participant, the force most
responsbile for postwar economic growth had been the free trade policy with
the lowering of tariff barriers. It was alarming to see their place being taken by
other forms of protectionism, including subsidies. Other speakers thought that
non-tariff barriers were so widespread that "free trade" had become merely a
slogan with no reality. If we could not eliminate production subsidies, we
should at least recognize their existence.
Several participants agreed with a French speaker that the only way to
preserve the market system was to accept for at least a transitory period a
degree of interference with the free market ("organization," "orderly
marketing agreements," "concertation"). Others emphasized the importance of
keeping government intervention at a minimum, while working constantly to
correct the imperfections of the free market system. Perhaps the most helpful
thing governments could do to facilitate restructuring would be to fix a
framework for trade.
The outcome of the current multilateral trade negotiations was of crucial
importance. An American speaker explained that, becasue of the manner in
which Congress set the terms of negotiation, its members had perhaps fastened
unrealisticall.y high hopes on the outcome of the Geneva negotiations. Most
congressmen had an open mind on the trade question, but if they perceived
Geneva to be a failure, they might conclude that the U.S. could not hope to
control its trade destiny, and thus be inclined to slip back into protectionism. A
Briton responded that Europeans, too, wanted the Geneva talks to succeed,
but that this would require a more realistic appreciation of each others' trade
policies than was sometimes displayed by the U.S.
This speaker went on to point out that the Eastern European countries
presented a special problem: the unequal trading relationship between market
and state trading systems. Roughly speaking, they bought from us what they
wanted and paid by selling us what they wanted, usually manufactures than we
did not need. An American suggested that the only way we would get anything
for our economic/technological strengths in the East was by interfering in the
market and attaching strings to our contracts.
The situation was the opposite in the North-South relationship, and several
speakers said that we should take a longer-range view there and seek to
increase both aid and investment in the Third World. A Belgian advocated a
constant flow of transfers at the rate of one-half to one per cent of our GNPs,
75
but not on a "helter-skelter" basis.
An American participant, who was supported by a Canadian, thought that we
had to find new methods for financing investment in the Third World, which
was potentially a great engine of growth for us all. He suggested somehow
tapping the immense flow of money involved in international trade, travel and
shipping. This would be more reliable than having to go back to our
parliaments for annual foreign aid appropriations - a task made difficult by
widespread public ignorance and apathy~ At home, for example, the U.S. was
often pictured as a "pitiful giant ... a sucker ... a soft touch", but in 1976
American had registered a $15 billion surplus in the export of job-producing
manufactured goods. Unfortunately, the business community had done a
"miserable job" in educating the voters about the American trade position.
Another American commented that the economic development of the Third
World was bedevilled by the myth that private capital was politically intrusive,
while government capital was not. This led to an irrational catering to senseless
whims.
The thesis was advanced by a Frenchman that international trade had grown
out of all proportion to world production, and had to be reduced. This could be
accomplished by (a) outright protectionism, (b) limitation of trade to
homogenous areas at the same level of economic maturity, and/or (c)
negotiation and concertation. The speaker deplor-ed, in any case, the war-like
atmosphere of trade negotiations, and the use of battlefield figures of speech. If
cooperation was to be beneficial, it had to be understood that there would be
no "winners" or "losers."
(5) The need for monetary stability. A British participant said that, while the
alliance might be fairly strong militarily and politically, a look at our financial
situation would lead the proverbial Martian to doubt the existence of any
alliance at all. The single most lamentable demonstration of our failure to
cooperate had been in our uncoordinated response to the oil price increase.
The speaker did not favor confrontation, but some kind of unified reaction had
been essential. One measure of our monetary chaos had been the ten-fold
expansion of the Eurocurrency market over the last four years, from $60 billion
to an estimated $660 billion. (This "international short loan fund", as it had
been called, had stood at only $1 billion in 1930!) The resolution of this
monetary disorder was the single most important problem facing the alliance in
the speaker's opinion. He was backed by Belgian and Swiss interventions,
which referred to the unstabilizing effect on trade and investment of monetary
instability.
An American, however, saw no need to panic over international monetary
disorder. We were tending, he thought, to blame the messenger (i.e., recent
exchange rate changes) rather than the source of the message (deficient energy
and economic' policies).
76
A Portuguese participant called for a new approach to balance of payments
adjustment problems. Many smaller countries still had to cope with
"structural" deficits which made compliance with IMF restrictions difficult. On
the other side, some countries continued to enjoy "structural surpluses". Some
means of transitory accomodation was required.
A Canadian speaker said that the chief structural problem we faced was
"stagflation" unemployment accompanied by monetary excess. This was
the predictable result of designing an economic engine with only one gear:
"forward." There was no "reverse", and hardly any "neutral." Inflationary
forces were continuing to gather strength and threatening to corrode the moral
fabric of our societies. The most important Western currency - the U.S.
dollar- had declined in buying power from $1.00 in 1948 to 39 cents today.
So far our only response internationally had been to call on other
governments, who had exercised rather more discipline in managing their
economies, to join us in finding the lowest common denominator of efficiency.
Correcting this condition was the most important political and economic task
facing the West. The first step should be to say so, and to admit that we could
not go on distributing IIO per cent of the pie, as it were.
We were tempted to blame inflation on the OPEC oil price rise, but that had
simply projected into the present something that had been lying in wait for us
in the future. Our freedom of movement had been impeded by the coexistence
of inflation and unemployment. Whether we chose to reflate or to dampen
down, the wrong result seemed to appear immediately. The speaker drew the
analogy of a football field, saying that in the old days we had kicked the ball up
and down the field between the ends of inflation and unemployment. But now
the goal p~ts had come together and the field had practically disappeared.
Unless we soon recognized that we could not indefinitely run huge national
deficits financed by the printing press, the speaker saw little hope for
revitalizing world trade and investment.
*
* *
77
III. CURRENT PROBLEMS IN
EUROPEAN-AMERICAN RELATIONS
Discussion of this topic was opened by a Briton, who referred to some of the
recent matters which had left America's European friends disappointed,
worried and confused: the question of the dollar~,the lackadaisical attitude of
the administration toward the Congress both on the tax credit last year and the
proposed tax cut this year (which was not solely of domestic interest); the
spectacle of the Treasury Secretary of the most profligate consumer of energy
unnecessarily "jawboning" Western Europe's most virtuous economy; passing
the buck on the neutron bomb issue - admittedly overblown to the German
coalition government; failure to extract any price from the Russians, Cubans
and East Germans for their activities in the Horn of Africa; the
administration's retreat before Congressional pressure on the matter of World
Bank salaries and lending policies; and the inept remarks by President Carter in
Europe on the subject of defense and the undisciplined comments of Andrew
Young about Africa.
The speaker likened the transatlantic relationship to that of a loving family,
where accumulated misunderstandings could nevertheless bring on frustration
and hostility. He sought to draw some morals from that litany of troubles:
(1) It should be remembered that Europe itselr was slow to make up its own
mind on major economic and defense issues.
(2) Europe's own decision-making process was national; if often "beggared
description as a good ally".
(3) The U.S. had to make its own decisions, and Europeans were foolish to
assume otherwise (although they could hope their views would be taken..into
account).
(4) But new American administrations coming into orfice would do well to
acknowledge that things were not as easy as they seemed when one was in
oppostion. The European allies looked for continuity, not grand new theories.
It was not the lack of change that had disappointed them so much about the
Carter administration as the fact that there had been so much preaching
beforehand.
(5) There was a curious confluence in the uneasiness over the Carter foreign
policy, in that both friends and enemies were saying the same thing about the
lack of continuity and the remoteness from the realities of power. The naive
expectation that the Soviet bureaucracy could be by-passed had probably done
more to set back SALT than any of the substantive issues involved.
(6) The real power of the presidency was surprisingly slim, especially since it
had been undermined by Vietnam and Watergate.
(7) A certain discipline was needed over administration pronouncements.
Foreign policy could not be made by successive press conferences or television
broadcasts.
79
An American participant, referring to some of the comments of the previous
speaker, offered a comprehensive analysis of the situation in which the new
U.S. administration found itself.
First of all, it was important to see President Carter in his political context.
He had been elected to provide not more but better government And yet many
Americans, while not really wanting more government, had come to expect and
even to need it as a result of the massive social welfare programs developed
over the past decade.
Secondly, a relatively passive society had unwittingly elected a president
who was by nature an activist, an initiator. He was instinctively inclined
toward structural change, as was evident from his energy program and other
domestic proposals, as well as his foreign policy (e.g., SALT, the Middle
East).
Finally, the U.S. Congress was now more powerful than ever, but less well
led than at most times. Generous staff budgets allowed each senator and
representative to build a sort of mini-cabinet, and many of them fancied that
they knew as much as the President and his Cabinet. In short, the Congress
was by and large better educated than before, more assertive and less
disciplined. All of this contributed to the problems of shaping national policy
and generating support.
The European-American relationship was now at a unique juncture. For the
first time, we faced a serious challenge outside the alliance - in the unfolding
situation in Africa - which impinged on the security and well-being of both
America and Europe in a way that previous out-of-area crises had not (Korea,
Cuba, Vietnam). What might at first have been construed as a peripheral,
selective challenge now looked like a challenge to all of us, and this gave us an
opportunity to review the nature of the alliance and its larger purposes.
True, we had not extracted from the Russians a price for their aggressive
behavior in Africa, but to do that we would have had to cooperate on defining
our objectives and fashioning a shared response. The upcoming NATO summi~
would gvie us a chance to reaffirm the political thrust of the alliance and to
agree on longer-term concrete aims. The neutron bomb issue had shown that
the internal political difficulties in our respective countries needed to be aired
more directly and openly.
The speaker went on to outline what he felt were the essential purposes of
the Carter administration's foreign policy:
(!) The point of departure was cooperation with U.S. allies, and that group
was being deliberately widened to include countries such as Venezuela, Brazil,
Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, India, Iran, and perhaps Indonesia.
(2) Stabilization of the US-USSR strategic relationship was being sought
through an expanded network of negotiations, but detente would have to be
comprehensive and reciprocal, not selective or unilateral.
(3) Interest was being expressed in cautious but explicit fashion in links with
80
Eastern European countries, notably Roumania, Hungary and Poland.
(4) The U.S. was emphasizing the importance of its presence in the Far
East: with Japan as the principal anchor but with a "security frame" stretching
from Korea to Malaysia. If the process of normalizing relations with China
could not be accelerated, the Americans hoped at least to deepen the
consultative aspect of the relationship.
(5) The aim of Southern African policy was to make it possible to resolve
the racial conflict there without its becoming an ideological or big-power
conflict. This meant trying to maintain a relationship with relatively moderate
African countries by a strong commitment to the Anglo-American plan as the
standard to be reached, hoping at the same time for peaceful change in which
the black majority could coexist with the white. minority. The internal
settlement in Rhodesia was therefore viewed as a positive first step. Beyond
that, it had to be made clear to some concerned African countries that reliance
on Soviet-Cuban blackmail was counterproductive.
(6) The traditional pattern of a regional U.S. policy toward Latin America
had been abandoned, and relations with countries there would become much
like those in other parts of the world. Some components needed to be bilateral,
but others might be regional or global. The Panama Canal treaties exemplified
this de-regionalization, and were part of an effort to put relationships to the
South on a more mature and constructive basis.
(8) In the military area, a three-pronged approach was intended to maintain
strategic deterrence, achieve conventional balance, and develop a rapid global
deployment force.
(9) Finally, the administration had sought to emphasize basic moral values.
Not only w.as this important in enlisting support for its foreign policy, but it
was also a way to identify the West with certain transcendental human
aspirations. This would do more, then, than simply serve American national
interests: it would promote the historical relevance of the West to the world at
large.
Further discussion touched on these topics:
A. Southern Africa. British speakers deplored the rather grudging initial
reaction in some quarters to the proposed Rhodesian settlement. Mr. Smith and
three African leaders with impeccable patriotic records had agreed in principle
on majority rule by free elections and universal suffrage, and it would be
extremely regrettable if that settlement were prejudiced simply because it had
not included Mr. Nkomo or Mr. Mugabe, who had virtually no popular
electoral support. An International participant suggested that the intercession
of Rhodesian trade union leaders might facilitate a settlement in that country.
Britons also expressed concern about U.S. policy toward South Africa. It
was sometimes forgotten that the white South African was not a European or
81
an American, but a member of a "tribe", as it were, whose ancestors had been
in that country hundreds of years ago, and whose skin color could be regarded
as accidental. Just at the moment when these people were beginning to realize
that they had to make some fundamental changes in their approach, American
and British officials chose to "make tough noises publicly", which had the
predictable effect of stiffening their attitude. (It was reported that a Nationalist
minister in Pretoria had suggested jokingly that a statue be erected to Andrew
Young, for having "accomplished more for my party than anyone else in South
African history.")
If a situation were to develop where South Africa, as a result of "going it
alone" in Namibia, brought upon itself mandatory economic sanctions, who
would stand up and veto such sanctions, and what would the consequences be
for Europe?
It could be assumed that none of us would endorse apartheid, but there were
many countries in the world whose behavior on human rights was worse than
South Africa's.
B. Allied intervention elsewhere in Africa was mooted by several
participants. An American speaker said the U.S. restraint about a military
commitment to Africa should not be taken as a sign of weakness. The Cuban
presence there was deplorable, but the U.S. had to use its resources
selectively, where they were useful and not just marginal. The African area
was admittedly of strategic importance, but a lesson learned in Vietman was
that there had to be an adequate political base to bear the weight of U.S.
power. The speaker conceded that he might feel differently if he thought the
Soviets were establishing a permanent position in Africa.
A Briton guessed that, even if a U.S. president wanted to commit troops to
Africa today, American public opinion would not allow it. But one could
welcome the expressed U.S. intent to "coopt" European participation outside
the NATO theatre as a way around this.
C. Human rights could in some cases be better assured in an atmosphere
without the "cold war spirit", according to a Dane. He referred specifically to
the repatriation of families from East Germany t9 the Federal Republic, and
accused the U.S. of having given the other side at Belgrade an excuse for a
hard, negative approach. He reminded the Americans that they, too, were
sometimes forced to espouse the human rights concept selectively (e.g., not in
Iran), and urged them not to hypocritically pretend otherwise.
An International speaker was grateful to President Carter for having put the
human rights issue on the agenda of U.S. policy, and said that we had to be
alert to violations in many countries.
D. On the issue of nuclear nonproliferation, some rapprochement was
visible between what had seemed the irreconcilable viewpoints of the U.S. and
some of its European allies and Japan. But a Swiss participant worried that two
factors might retard progress: (1) the Americans and Canadians could afford a
82
more relaxed approach to nuclear development, given their more abundant
~nergy resources; and (2) the philosophy underlying U.S. nonproliferation
policy seemed formed by the far-reaching concerns about a multi-nuclear world
that a responsible superpower would understandably have.
E. Some of the peculiarities of U.S. politics were mentioned by an American
participant. The presidency, far from being "imperial", was inherently a weak
office. Its power lay in persuasion, and the Carter administration tended
toward rhetoric. (But the speaker saw no evidence to support the claim that the
U.S. or any Western country - had become ungovernable.)
The President, as the more liberal candidate of the more liberal party, had
been elected by a narrow margin, which meant that his most crucial votes had
come from the most conservative voters in the most conservative region. This
had built an awkward tension into the way the administration had to deal with
the country.
The Democratic party held a lopsided maJOnty in the Congress, and the
average congressman enjoyed today a 62 per cent approval rating among his
constituents - some 20 per cent ahead of the President. If these self-confident
legislators now seemed determined to participate more actively in shaping
policy, it was perhaps because some of their leading members felt that their
having deferred to previous administrations on foreign affairs issues had not
served them, their constituents, or their countrv well.
In winding up the discussion, another American participant said that one
should not underestimate President Carter's persistance and staying power, or
the probable long-term effects of the work he had initiated. The Panama Canal
treaties had_after all been approved, and one could expect an energy bill and
progress on aMiddle East settlement. The speaker concluded by predicting an
increasingly constructive U.S. role in promoting an international framework
that would be responsive to changed conditions.
*
* *
In closing the meeting, the Chairman, Lord Home, expressed the gratitude of
all the participants to those whose help had contributed to the success of the
conference: the American members of the Steering Committee, led by Mr.
Heinz, who had acted as hosts; the authors of the working papers; the
secretariat; interpreters; and the staff of the Henry Chauncey Conference
Center.
An American participant, speaking for all those who attended the meeting,
thanked Lord Home for having guided the discussions in such a commendable
way.
83
