......
00
~~
sm
-
......
0
:::c
mr
(ii
me
s
Zl>>
:::!
m
z
::D
)>
,,-1
C)
Cl
-<
mm
cnm
......
::D
CD
:IJ
)>
G')
O:>
c,J
me
~s
·mO
z
-I
m
CD
m
r-
r-
0
'i-,,
BILDERBERG MEETINGS
CHATEAU MONTEBELLO
CONFERENCE
13 - 15 May 1983
NOT FOR QUOTATION
CONTENTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS ....................................................................... 5
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................... 11
I. EAST-WEST RELATIONS: CONTAINMENT, DETENTE
OR CONFRONTATION
American Working Paper ...................................................................13
Discussion ........................................................................................24
II. ISSUES IN MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS FOR GROWTH
IN THE WORLD ECONOMY
A. PROTECTIONISM AND EMPLOYMENT
French Working Paper .......... .............................................................35
American Working Paper ................. ............................-..._._,_.................38
Discussion ........................................................................................42
B. RISKS IN BANKING AND FINANCE
International Working Paper ......................................................... ......52
American Working Paper ...................................................................57
Discussion ........... .............................................................................62
III. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS ................................................68
IV. CLOSING REMARKS ......................................................................75
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
CHAIRMAN:
WALTER SCHEEL*
Former President of the Federal Republic of Germany
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR EUROPE AND CANADA:
VICTOR HALBERSTADT*
Professor of Public Finance, Leyden University
HONORARY SECRETARY-GENERAL FOR THE UNITED STATES:
THEODORE L. ELIOT, JR.*
Dean, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University
HONORARY TREASURER:
WILLEM F. DUISENBERG*
President, De Nederlandsche Bank N.V.
IT
DEN
USA
AUS
USA
USA
POR
FR
IT
USA
INT
NETH
TUR
USA
TUR
CAN
ICE
NOR
UMBERTO AGNELLI
TAGE ANDERSEN
DWAYNE 0. ANDREAS
HANNES ANDROSCH*
HANS H. ANGERMUELLER
GEORGE W. BALL**
FRANCISCO PINTO BALSEMAO
RAYMOND BARRE
PIERO BASSETTI
JACK F. BENNETT*
GEORGES BERTHOIN
ERNST H. VAN DER BEUGEL**
SELAHATTIN BEYAZIT*
S'EWERYN BIALER
M. NURI BIRGI
LISE BISSONETTE
BJORN BJARNASON
HALVDAN BJ0RUM
Chairman, FIAT Auto S.p.A.; Vice-
Chairman and Managing Director IFI
(Istituto Finanziaro Industriale)
Managing Director and Chief
· Executive, Den Danske Bank
Chairman & Chief Executive Officer,
Archer-Daniels-Midland Company
Chairman of the Management Board,
Creditanstalt-Bankverein
Vice Chairman, Citibank, N.A
Former Undersecretary of State
Prime Minister ad Interim
Former Prime Minister; l\teinber of the
National Assembly
President, Bassetti S.p.A.;
Chairman of Chamber of Commerce
Senior Vice President & Director,
EXXON Corporation
European Chairman, The Trilateral
Commission
Professor of International
Relations, Leyden University; Director
of Companies
Director of Companies
Director, Research Institute on
International Change, Columbia
University
Former Ambassador to NATO
Editor-in-Chief, Le Devoir
Political Journalist, Morgunbladid
Chairman of the Board, A/S Elektrisk
Bureau
5
CAN CONRAD M. BLACK Chairman, Argus Corporation, Ltd. AUS PETER JANKOWITSCH Deputy Secretary General for Foreign
NOR ORO HARLEM BRUNDTLAND Parliamentary Leader, Labour Party Affairs
USA WILLIAM P. BUNDY** Editor-in-Chief, Foreign Affairs BEL DANIEL E. JANSSEN* Chairman, Federation of Belgian
ORE COSTA CARRAS* Member of the Board, Union of Greek Enterprises; Chairman Executive
Shipowners Committee, U.C.B., S.A.
UK LORD CARRINGTON Former Foreign Minister; Leader USA VERNON E. JORDAN, JR.* Partner, Akin, Gump, Strauss, Hauer
Conservative Party, House of Lords & Feld; Former President, National
SPA JAIME CARVAJAL y URQUIJO Chairman of the Board of Directors, Urban League
Banco Urquijo USA DAYID KEARNS Chairman, Xerox Corporation
FIN FREDRIK CASTREN President and Chief Executive Officer, USA HENRY A. KISSINGER* Former Secretary of State
Kymi Kymmene Oy; Chairman of the UK ANDREW KNIGHT* Editor, The Economist
Confederation of Finnish Industries BEL BARON LAMBERT* Chairman, Groupe Bruxelles Lambert,
SPA JUAN LUIS CEBRIAN Editor-in-Chief, El Pais S.A.
DEN HENNING CHRISTOPHERSEN Deputy Prime Minister and Minister FRG OTTO L. GRAF LAMBSDORFF Minister of Economic Affairs
of Finance INT ALEXANDRE LAMFALUSSY Assistant General Manager, Bank for
INT A. W. CLAUSEN President, The World Bank International Settlements
USA KENNETH W. DAM Deputy Secretary of State CAN GILLES LAMONTAGNE Minister of Defense
INT VICOMTE ETIENNE DAVIGNON Vice President, Commission of the INT EMILE VAN LENNEP Secretary-General, OECD
European Communities BEL ANDRE LEYSEN Chairman of the Board, AGFA-
USA JAMES DOBBINS Deputy Assistant Secretary of State GEVAERT Group
USA THOMAS R. DONAHUE Secretary-Treasurer, AFL-CIO USA WINSTON LORD* President, The Council on Foreign
(American Federation of Labor and Relations, Inc.
Congress of Industrial Organizations) NETH RUUD F.M. LUBBERS Prime Minister
USA ELIZABETH DREW Journalist INT JOSEPH M.A.H. LUNS Secretary-General, NATO
SWE KJELL-0LOF FELDT Minister of Finance SWI FRANZ LOTOLF* General Manager and Member of the
SWE ANDERS FERM Ambassador, Permanent Mission of Executive Board, Swiss Bank
Sweden to the United Nations Corporation
USA MURRAY H. FINLEY* President, Amalgamated Clothing & CAN DONALD S. MACDONALD* Senior Partner, McCarthy & McCarthy
Textile Workers Union CAN ALLAN J. MACEACHEN Deputy Prime Minister and
USA CHARLES GETCHELL* Partner, Gray & Wendell (Attorneys- Secretary of State for External Affairs
at-Law) USA BRUCE K. MACLAURY* President, The Brookings Institution
POR BERNARDINO GOMES Vice Chairman, Foundation for Inter- USA DAYID MAHONEY Chairman of the Board, Norton Simon
national Relations Inc.
FR ALAIN GOMEZ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, FR JACQUES MAISONROUGE Chairman of the Board, I.B.M. World
Thomson Group Trade Corporation
CAN ANTHONY G.S. GRIFFIN** Director of Companies POR ROGERIO MARTINS Chairman, Simopre; Former
USA HENRY ANATOLE GRUNWALD Editor-in-Chief, TIME, Inc. Secretary of State for Industry
SWE STEN GUSTAFSSON* Managing Director, SAAB-SCANIA AB CAN LEIGHTON ·w. McCARTHY President, McCarthy Securities Ltd.
USA ARTHUR A. HARTMAN U.S. Ambassador to the U.S.S.R. USA R. DANIEL MCMICHAEL Administrative Agent, Scaife Family
SWI HANS HECKMANN General Manager, Union Bank of Charitable Trusts
Switzerland FRG ALOIS MERTES Minister of State, Ministry of
USA HENRY J. HEINZ II** Chairman, H.J. Heinz Company; Foreign Affairs
President, American Friends of FR THIERRY DE MONTBRIAL* Director, French Institute of Inter-
Bilderberg, Inc. national Relations; Professor of
FRG ALFRED HERRHAUSEN* Managing Director, Deutsche Bank A.G. Economics, Ecole Polytechnique
USA STANLEY HOFFMANN Chairman, Center for European Studies, IT MARIO MONTI* Professor of Monetary Theory and
Harvard University Policy, Univeristy of Bocconi,
USA ROBERT HORMATS Vice President, Goldman Sachs & Milan; President, SUERF
Company CAN WILLIAM D. MULHOLLAND Chairman and Chief Executive Officer,
BEL JOZEF HOUTHUYS President, Confederation of the Bank of Montreal
Christian Unions DEN NIELS N0RLUND Editor-in-Chief, Berlingske Tidende
6 7
------~-~--·""·-----------~~-.,..,,.,..,...,,..---~- , •··-,-p-~---,..,,_~,....,·~-,_.~~w:-'-'n"""""
SWE CLAS-ERIK ODHNER Economist at the Swedish Trade Union SPA JUAN A. YANEZ-BARNUEVO Director, Department of International
Confederation Affairs at the Office of the Prime
NETH COEN J. OORT* Member of the Board, Algemene Bank Minister
Nederland N.V. IT PAOLO ZANNONI* Director, Department Political
IRE ANTHONY J.F. O'REILLY President and Chief Executive Officer, Analysis, FIAT S.p.A.
H.J. Heinz Company
GRE JOHN D. PALEOCRASSAS Member of Parliament; Former Minister
of Coordination; Secretary-General of IN ATTENDANCE:
NEA Democratic Party
USA RICHARD PERLE Assistant Secretary of Defense for
International Security Policy CAN TOM AXWORTHY Principal Secretary to the Prime
CAN ALFRED POWIS Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Minister
Noranda Mines Ltd. CAN JOSEPH CARON Secretariat of Privy Council Office
SWI RAYMOND PROBST Secretary of State, Federal Depart- I
(Foreign and Defense Policy)
ment of Foreign Affairs FRG HENNECKE GRAF VON BAS- Assistant to Mr. Scheel
CAN JACQUES RASTOUL Executive Director, Canadian SOWITZ
Institute of International Affairs FRG HANS-HENNING BLOMEYER Head, Office of Mr. Mertes
USA JOHN P. ROCHE Professor, Fletcher School of Law
FRG VLF BOGE Head, Office of Mr. Scheel
and Diplomacy, Tufts University
USA DAVID ROCKEFELLER** Chairman, Chase Manhattan Bank ! INT MICHAEL DALLAS Head, Office of General Rogers
International Advisory Committee CAN ROBERT FOWLER Assistant Secretary to the Cabinet
INT BERNARD W. ROGERS Supreme Allied Commander Europe
i (Foreign and Defense Policy)
UK LORD ROLL OF IPSDEN** Chairman, S.G. Warburg & Co. Ltd. POR JOSE P. LUIZ GOMES Diplomatic Advisor to Prime Minister
UK EVELYN DE ROTHSCHILD Chairman, N.M. Rothschild & Sons Ltd. ! ad interim Balsemao
FRG VOLKER ROHE Deputy Leader, Parliamentary Party l SWE KAI HAMMERICH Senior Vice President, SAAB SCANIA AB
j
CDU/CSU; Spokesman on Foreign and j
FRG THOMAS HERTZ Head, Office of Graf Lambsdorff
Security Policy ! NETH ANNE HOOGENDOORN Executive Secretary, Bilderberg Meetings
UK SIR JOHN SAINSBURY* Chairman, J. Sainsbury PLC
!
NETH WILLEM E. SCHERPEN- Chairman of the Board of Managing
!
TUR BAK! ILKIN Personal Assistant to Mr. Tiirkmen
HUIJSEN ROM Directors, Nederlandsche Midden- CAN TED JOHNSON Executive Assistant to the Prime
standsbank N.V.
l Minister
FRG HELMUT SCHMIDT Former Chancellor of the Federal CAN KENZIE MACKINNON Executive Assistant to the Secretary
Republic of Germany
! --- of State for External Affairs
FR ANTOINE SEILLIERE* Director-General, Compagnie Generale CAN JIM MITCHELL Department of External Affairs
d'lndustrie et de Participations
!
NOR ANDERS C. SJAASTAD Minister of Defense
I
(Policy Analysis)
FRG THEO SOMMER* Publisher, Die Zeit USA CHARLES W. MULLER President, Murden & Co.
AUS JOSEF TAUS Managing Partner, Constantia i CAN MICHAEL PHILLIPS Senior Departmental Assistant to the
Industrieverwaltungsges. m.b.H. t Secretary of State for External
CAN C.G.E. THERIAULT Vice-Chief of the Defense Staff i Affairs
CAN PIERRE ELLIOTT TRUDEAU Prime Minister (
FRG REINHARDT STURMER Assistant to Mr. Schmidt
l
TUR ILTER TORKMEN Minister of Foreign Affairs
CAN BERNARD C. THILLAYE Director, Strategic Policy Planning,
USA PAUL A. VOLCKER Chairman, Board of Governors, The
Federal Reserve System
Department of National Defense
NOR NIELS WERRING, JR.* Senior Partner, Wilh. Wilhelmsen USA GRANT F. WINTHROP Joint Rapporteur, Bilderberg Meetings
SWE HANS WERTHEN Chairman, Ericsson and Electrolux AUS GEORG ZIMMER-LEHMANN Managing Director, Creditanstalt-
Group Bankverein
FRG OTTO WOLFF VON Chairman of the Board of Management,
AMERONGEN** Otto Wolff A.G.; Chairman, German
Federation of Chambers of Industry
and Commerce
8 9
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS:
AUS Austria
BEL Belgium
CAN Canada
DEN Denmark
FIN Finland
FR France
FRO Federal Republic of Germany
ORE Greece
ICE Iceland
INT International
IRE Ireland
* Member of the Steering Committee
** Member of the Advisory Group
10
IT
NETH
NOR
POR
SPA
SWE
SWI
TUR
UK
USA
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
Unites States of America
INTRODUCTION
This report was prepared by Charles Getchell and Grant F. Winthrop, joint
rapporteurs. The various individual interventions summarized in the "Discussion"
sections have been grouped according to subject matter, and do not necessarily
follow the exact chronological order of the discussions.
~"" ' \
* * * * *
The thirty-first Bilderberg Meeting was held at the Chateau Montebello, Province
of Quebec, Canada, on May 13, 14 and 15, 1983, under the chairmanship of Mr.
Walter Scheel.
There were 112 participan~s from 18 Western European countries, the United
States, Canada, and several international organizations. They represented a variety
of fields: government and politics, industry, trade unions, diplomacy, the press, the
military services, banking, the law, transportation, education, and institutes spec-
ialized in national and international studies.
All participants spoke in a personal capacity, without in any way committing the
organization or government to which they belonged. To enable participants to speak
frankly, the discussions were confidential, with no reporting being allowed.
The agenda was as follows:
I. East- West Relations: Containment, Detente or Confrontation
II. Issues in Medium-Term Prospects for Growth
in the World Economy
In addition to this formal agenda, there was a discussion at the final session of
current events of particular importance to the Atlantic alliance.
In opening the conference, the Chairman alluded to several subjects with which
the participating countries had been concerned during the preceding year, including
the long-anticipated change in the leadership of the Soviet Union, the continuing
arms race, the Madrid conference on the Helsinki accords, and the worsening plight
of the poor countrit!S.
All of these matters touched directly on the problem of maintaining peace in the
world. The fact that there had been no war in Europe since 1945 suggested that
our policy there, under the leadership of the U.S., had been the right one. Over
the years, Europe had regained its strength and self-confidence, and this had raised
the problem of how best to coordinate joint action. An ideal partnership was hard
to achieve - not so much because of faulty communication, which was easily
remedied, but because of a frequent lack of transatlantic understanding. Americans
and Europeans labored under prefabricated notions about one another, and about
themselves, and the Bilderberg Meetings had for many years served the useful
purpose of providing detailed information and insight into interests and motivations,
priorities and assessments, on both sides of the Atlantic.
11
I. EAST-WEST RELATIONS: CONTAINMENT, DETENTE,
OR CONFRONTATION
* * * *
"The Soviet Union And The West In The 1980's:
Containment, Detente Or Confrontation"
Working Paper Prepared by Seweryn Bia/er,
Ruggles Professor of Political Science and Director,
Research Institute on International Chttnie, Columbia University
As background for the discussion of East-West relations in the 1980's, this paper
(1) will argue that all three types of relations will and should be present; (2) will
summarize the principal dilemmas in Soviet (a) domestic and (b) foreign policy-
making at the point of Andropov's succession; and (3) will consider the prospects
for constructive influence on Soviet international conduct in this decade.
1.
Taking into consideration the nature and goals of Soviet-Western relations, it is
highly probable that containment, detente and confrontation will all characterize
Soviet-Western and particularly Soviet-American relations in the 1980's. No one of
these approaches will· dominate. Indeed, I would argue that all three should be
present as deliberate and coordinated policies of the Western Alliance.
The need to manage and regulate East-West conflict and cooperation has increased
dramatically with the escalating dangers of increasingly powerful and accurate
nuclear weapons and an unceasing arms race. It is probably the first time in
history-and the direct result of the nuclear revolution-that two contending alliance
systems separated by such deep divisions and sharp conflicts have exhibited such a
relatively high level of conflict management and cooperation. In conditions of
nuclear revolution, strategic parity, and mutual assured destruction, detente between
West and East in one form or another is simply unavoidable.
The scope, intensity and forms of detente relations between East and West may
differ over time, but detente as a relatively stable and ma11y-sided relation between
East and West is necessary in the remaining decades of the twentieth century if
both the Soviet Union and the Western Alliance wish to avoid a highly dangerous
runaway arms race and the potentially destabilizing and unpredictable consequences
of conflict, as well as to promote cooperation in areas where their interests overlap.
Avoidance of nuclear war, however, does not exhaust the needs and goals of the
Western Alliance. These include as well, for the Western Alliance and especially
for the U.S., the prevention of Soviet global expansion, the survival of independent
and democratic systems in the West, and orderly and evolutionary change in Third
World countries. A major dilemma for the Western Alliance is how to arrest the
multi-directional Soviet expansionism while at the same time minimizing the chances
of nuclear escalation. If the policy of detente renders the competition more stable
and thereby less dangerous, the policy of containing the Soviet Union is no less
necessary and central. Indeed, detente makes sense when it contains the expansion
of Soviet power. The policy of containment, its limitations, scope and central
regional foci are of course subject to various interpretations within the Western
Alliance. The policy itself, however, implemented with determination and skill, is
essential to our survival.
13
To contain Soviet power successfully can be done only by increasing substantially
the costs and risks to the Soviets of the kind of international conduct we witnessed
from 1975 to 1979. The Soviet Union, taking advantage of nuclear parity and the
fear of nuclear escalation, will continue to exploit targets of opportunity in the
Third World. We may be certain that in the 1980's the Soviet Union will be strongly
tempted to make use of direct and indirect military intervention in Third World
turmoil as it seeks to enhance its global power position. The Western Alliance and
particularly the U.S. have no choice but to make known their vital interests outside
Europe and to prepare a credible response to Soviet expansion whenever those vital
interests are threatened. For this response to be credible and therefore effective,
the U.S. and Western Europe must be prepared for political, economic and military
confrontation with the Soviet union or its satellites. The global if selective con-
tainment of Soviet power can be achieved only if the threat of East- West confron-
tation is credible.
Detente, containment and confrontation as policies of the Western Alliance are
not mutually exclusive. Their particular mix will depend as much on agreement
within the Alliance and on differing attitudes within Western countries and partic-
ularly the U.S. as it depends on Soviet international conduct. It is the latter,
however, that is my principal concern.
The Western powers and especially the U.S. tend to regard the Soviet Union as
the principal obstacle to the realization of their foreign policy goals and indeed the
principal threat to their very existence. This evaluation is supported by the unceasing
Soviet military buildup over two decades that in almost every category has moved
far beyond what the West sees as reasonable defense needs. It is supported also
by the pattern of growing Soviet expansionism in the 1970's and the unrelenting
quest for greater global power and influence. If Western analysts dispute the weight
of single elements in the overall pattern of Soviet expansionism, they do not dispute
its sources.
To begin, the Soviet Union, like many states before it, is in an ascending stage
of its great power ambitions and has only recently acquired capacities that are more
or less congruous with those ambitions. Secondly, Soviet international conduct
reflects the ideology of Soviet elites. This ideology should be understood not as a
set of doctrinal dogmas which directly dictate action, but as a culture, as tendencies
and patterns of thought and belief, that shape the mind-set of policymakers and
proceed from the fusion of the most general doctrinal precepts with Soviet and
Russian historical experience.
These two elements rarely conflict, but rather their mutual reinforcement adds
virulence to .Soviet international ambitions and expectations. Soviet military and
foreign policy takes its direction from them and from the capacity to pursue them.
This is so regwdless of the specific policies of Western powers. The international
strategic behavior of the Soviets may be unchanging over long periods of time-
this does not mean, incidentally, that it cannot be changed-while their .tactical
behavior in the service of the strategy is quite flexible.
Soviet military and foreign policy exhibits primary and extreme concern with the
security of homeland and empire and only secondarily with the projection of power
abroad for purposes of gaining international influence and power commensurate in
their view with their military might. Soviet military expenditures never suffice to
make Soviet leaders secure. The leaders in fact pursue the unattainable goal of
total security. It is unattainable first because the nuclear age excludes it and second
because it contains an internal contradiction, for Soviet security travels only in
tandem with the insecurity of its adversaries, a sure route to cyclical military buildup.
14
The Soviets believe that strategic parity with the U.S. should translate into visible
gains for Soviet influence and power in the Third World. The key term in Soviet
vocabulary and goals is "political equality" with the U.S. With regard to foreign
policy it is not always clear what the term "equality" connotes. Is the model the
optimistic and highly active U.S. of the 1950's and 1960's, or the sober U.S. of
the late 1970's and early 1980's? I do not doubt that the earlier model of American
policies and stature informs the Soviet goal of equality in the 1970's and 1980's.
Soviet· foreign policymakers in this respect seek two goals: to reach a position
that in the words of Brezhnev and Gromyko will "make impossible the solution
of any international problem without Soviet participation" and to pursue a policy
with regard to regional conflicts and civil wars that will extend Soviet power to
control or influence decisively the policies and internal development of a growing
number of states. Since the only foreign policy resource the Soviets possess in
abundance to achieve these two goals is their military might, their intervention in
regional conflicts and civil wars is a particular threat to the goals of stability and
evolutionary change pursued by most Western powers. The danger is heightened by
the fact that the two super-powers are obviously out of phase with one another at
this stage of their international development and ambitions. American policies are
as clearly defensive as Soviet policies are offensive.
2.
As Western democracies deliberate the direction of their own policies towards
the Soviet Union, they cannot safely avoid thorough evaluation of the prospective
policies and performance of the new Kremlin leadership. For some time now, I
have been developing the proposition that the 1980's will see the pursuit of external
expansion by an internally declining Soviet power. ("The Harsh Decade: The Soviet
Union in the 1980s," Foreign Affairs, Summer 1981; "Reagan and Russia," Foreign
Affairs, Winter 1982/83; "The Andropov Succession," The New York Review of
Books, February 3, 1983.) The Western observer whose principal concern is Soviet
foreign policy must evaluate the extent of the actual and anticipated decline and
the likely effect of the internal situation on Soviet international goals and policies.
(a)
Only a very few times in the past has the Soviet Union faced such critical decisions
primarily in the domestic area but also regarding foreign policy. The situation is
vastly complicated by the coincidence of urgent social and political pressures for
reform of the Soviet system and policies with the particularly vulnerable period of
succession that will inevitably replace within a relatively short time not only the
top leader but a significant number of aged officials at the top and middle echelons
of all functional bureaucracies. To postpone or neglect these pressures by dint of
inertia or political commitments and continue the drift of Brezhnev's last years will
only accelerate the decay. Experience argues, however, that the new Soviet leaders
will not willingly undertake any risky internal systemic change or drastic\departures
in foreign policy. Most disturbing to the leadership is the prospect that regardless
of what they choose to do, no policies can achieve rapid improvement in a situation
that in many respects is worse than at any time in the post-Stalin period.
The key to the unhealthy situation is of course the economy. Recent studies have
concluded that the technological gap between Soviet and American industry remains
as large today as it was when Stalin died in 1953. The decline of the Soviet rate
of growth to about two per cent a year, the exhaustion of available mass new labor
inputs, the lack of cheap raw materials, and the dramatically increased pressures
15
on investment resources spell the end of extensive growth, the only method of
growth known to the Soviets from Stalin's first five-year plan until today. Today's
problems are qualitatively different from those of the past. Economic performance
can be improved only by means of intensive factors of growth-higher labor
productivity, better diffusion of modern technology, and rapid improvement of a
chronically neglected infrastructure. Unfortunately for the Soviet leaders, their
system of planning, management and incentives is utterly unprepared and unwilling
to switch to new intensive methods. Their inability to guarantee the population a
respectable level of food consumption and sufficient industrial goods acts as a
barrier to higher productivity of labor and management.
The social consequences of economic decline present the new Soviet leaders with
the likelihood that the long industrial peace achieved thanks to Brezhnev's abillity
to increase the workers' real income from the 1960's to the late 1970's will erode.
The leaders cannot predict how workers will respond either to the stagnation and
decline of real wages that set in late in the 1970's and must continue through this
decade or to the decline of intergenerational social mobility that must accompany
the decrease in industrial growth, reduction of expenditures for education, and
preferential access of the middle and upper middle class to the main source of
upward mobility, higher education.
Finally, Soviet leaders may well face pressures for greater political, economic and
cultural autonomy from within the non-Russian nations of the Soviet Union, about
half the entire population. If the government under Brezhnev successfully managed
the "internal empire" by a skillful combination of coercion, bribery and cooptation,
the government of his successor will surely be hampered in this regard by the effects
of economic conditions in the 1980's, not the least of which is a demographic trend
which locates the bulk of the available new labor pool in Moslem areas.
Andropov has begun to consolidate his authority more rapidly than either of his
predecessors. It seems he will have a high degree of autonomy in initiating and
implementing a plan to improve economic performance. Today his power base rests
mainly in the KGB, but he will come to control effectively the Soviet political
elite-the professional party apparatus. All indications suggest that Andropov can
formulate his political directions and economic decisions without decisive restraints
from either the party 'apparatus or the professional military whose role in key
internal and external policymaking has in the past been greatly exaggerated by the
West. The principal question is whether Andropov will undertake major economic
reforms. What we know about the Soviet system, about Andropov, and about his
first months in office allows us to speculate that some policies in this area are
already certain, some are very likely, and some are very unlikely.
It is certain that in the short or intermediate range Andropov will pursue a policy
designed to elicit greater social, political and economic discipline from all strata of
society. Already underway is a well advertised campaign in this regard which includes
greater candor in admitting to the public the pessimistic economic prognosis and
the expectation of inevitable austerity; greater visibility of an active, concerned new
leadership in contrast to the paralysis of the old; and a forceful effort by means
of coercive measures, inspections, demands for accountability, etc., to improve
dramatically-the discipline of workers and of the bureaucracy at all levels.
It is very likely the new leadership will undertake a major reform of agriculture,
the most critical area for ensuring political and social stability. The reform may
follow either the principle of greater privatization as in China or greater managerial
freedom and flexibility as in Hungary. Since peasants have long ceased to threaten
the Soviet system, they, along with their managers, can be given without risk more
16
I
l
i
!
I
{
l
extensive economic rights in exchange for higher production. The main difficulty
in agrarian reform will come from lower party bureaucrats whose way of life and
reason for existence it will severely undermine.
It is very unlikely that Andropov will be willing or able to effect a radical
structural change in the economic system. Formidable obstacles preclude its satis-
factory implementation, and Andropov will have to· be content with marginal if
important structural changes and with advantageous revisions of budgetary allo-
cations. (No Soviet official or economist, it seems, considers the Hungarian economic
model suitable for entirely different Soviet conditions.)
Thus Andropov will pursue in the political area a "law and order" policy and
a higher level of authoritarianism and in the economic area a serious effort to
improve economic performance through reform. The combination may well yield a
marginal improvement without, halting the secular trend of economic decline. It will
probably do little to impede the attendant social decline, the most blatant and
alarming manifestations of which include widespread alcoholism, corruption and
lack of a work ethic. Nor will it relieve the pervasive cultural pessimism that
increasingly pierces the curtain of official optimism.
Abundant evidence indicates that in the 1980's the political and social stability
of the Soviet Union will be severely tried, the Soviet economic situation will be
more critical than at any time since Stalin's death, and the manifest decline of the
Soviet empire will accelerate. To leap from this evidence to predictions of a
catastrophic systemic crisis (the present fashion in the West and especially in the
Reagan entourage) is profoundly erroneous and opens the way to judgmental errors
that can severely erode the prospects for managing the East-West competition. It
is most unlikely that severe economic stress will provoke either political or economic
collapse. It is unrealistic to act as if drastic escalation of costs in a new arms race
will inhibit Soviet military growth. The Soviet Union is not now, nor will it be
during the next decade, in the throes of a genuine systemic crisis.
Will the general domestic decline, the "muddling down" of economic growth,
and the corrosive effects ·of social corruption be sufficient to force Soviet leaders
to concentrate on internal over external goals or to impair their effectiveness in the
international arena?-My best estimate is that they will not. The Soviet Union retains
key foreign policy resources that may be sorely undercut but will remain no less
potent ingredients of an activist foreign policy. The Soviet political system boasts
enormous unused reserves of political and social stability that suffice to survive the
deepest difficulties. Unbridled Russian nationalism remains an effective device to
mobilize support for the regime. The Soviet economy has reached a level of
production that even in conditions of declining growth can support an active foreign
policy. The size of the Soviet military machine is so large and its modernization
so advanced that even with lower growth in the 1980's it will still constitute a
formidable foreign policy resource.
The Soviet military faces two major, though far from catastrophic, problems in
the 1980's-one economic, the other demographic. The economic problem is not
guns versus butter but rather investment in the industrial plant versus direct ex-
penditures for guns-that is to say, between the need to develop and modernize
the Soviet industrial plant that provides the backbone of future military strength
versus the growth in weapons production and direct expenditures for the upkeep
of the armed forces. The demographic problem consists in the assured dominance
of non-Russian, non-Slavic draftees into the armed forces in the 1980's, a likely
cause of social tension and impaired military proficiency. Yet both problems are
far from heralding a substantial decline in the defensive or offensive strength of
17
the Soviet military as an instrument of Soviet foreign policy.
The entire direction of Soviet military and foreign policy over the successful
Brezhnev decades also militates against a fundamental reorientation of Soviet pol-
icymakers to internal questions. Indeed, the bleak internal prospects could well
compel Soviet leaders to seek more accessible and durable successes in the inter-
national arena. Moreover, during the next few years, foreign policy will certainly
become more significant as a legitimizing element of Soviet rule in general and of
party rule within the establishment in particular. At the same time, domestic
difficulties can create strong pressures for Soviet leaders to engage in serious arms
limitation and reduction talks with the West. They will certainly make even more
imperative the importation of foreign technology. But even if such considerations
act to limit the range and scale of Soviet adventures abroad, they cannot in the
last analysis alter the basically activist and global Soviet foreign policy, so deeply
rooted, as we have seen, in the domestic environment.
(b)
Andropov inherits a foreign policy characterized by lack of direction or cohesion.
For the last three years, Soviet foreign policy has preferred "carrots" to "sticks."
One important if not central reason for this retrenchment was the change in
America's policy line during Mr. Carter's last year and Mr. Reagan's first two
years. The Soviets hiive avoided testing Mr. Reagan as they seek to fathom what
lies behind his rhetoric and the resurgence of radical conservatism in the U.S. Other
reasons include the early onset of the succession struggle together with the decline
of Brezhnev's ability to rule; the temporary overextension in Ethiopia, Afghanistan·
and especially Poland; and the desire to preserve detente with Western Europe and
especially Germany as the detente with the U.S. began to unravel. This last con-
sideration took on special meaning as the Soviet Union worked to prevent the
deployment of intermediate nuclear forces in Europe. Even had these last three
years offered more tempting targets for low-risk Soviet expansion, I believe the
Soviet leaders would still have chosen the low profile in foreign policy.
Following this period of relative passivity, Andropov will surely seek to define a
comprehensive and coherent general line, to establish clear priorities and orderly
relations among the chosen goals and elements of policy. His choices will of course
be affected significantly by Western and American policies; by the state of relations-
between the U.S. and its European allies, especially the Federal Republic of Ger-
many; and by America's ability to localize the inevitable regional conflicts and civil
wars in the Third World or to render prohibitive the costs of massive Soviet
intervention in them. Putting aside those unpredictable variables, however, one can
identify some tendencies likely to characterize Soviet foreign policy in the near and
middle future.
In the short run, the process of succession itself dictates the basic tendencies of
foreign policy. First, there is the need to insulate the unconsolidated leadership
preoccupied with domestic problems from foreign challenges. The new leader is
thus more open to initiatives for regulating and improving his country's relations
with its principal adversaries. In relations with the U.S. and the Western Alliance,
the central axis of Soviet foreign policy, peace issues will predominate over threats.
Second, the new leader will try to interrupt the bureaucratic inertia of his
predecessor and dissociate himself from Brezhnev's failures. He will seek normal-
ization of relations with the Peoples' Republic of China; he may seek improvement
of relations with Japan; he could conceivably be encouraged by astute Western
efforts to explore ways to extricate Soviet troops from Afghanistan while preserving
18
t
J
f
I
1
1
I
I
I
l)
Soviet security interests and face.
Third, the new leadership at this vulnerable time will work to preserve what it
considers vital international positions and interests. The principal position is Poland
whose domination and political stability Andropov will pursue at any cost. The
principal interests are the inherited balance of military power-strategic, theater
and conventional-which will be preserved at almost .any cost and the detente with
Western Europe and particularly Germany which represents today the cornerstone
of Soviet foreign policy.
With regard to the balance of military power, one should stress that this succession
is the first when the Soviet Union operates from a position of strategic parity and
theater nuclear and conventional superiority. It is the first time in Soviet (and
Russian) history when the Soviet Union is as strong as its key adversaries (and
should, therefore, feel safe). Accumulated military strength gives the new leader
control over an awesome power enjoyed by neither of his two predecessors at the
start of their rule. The key question of the succession is whether this enormous
military might, which the Soviets are determined to maintain, will serve purposes
of blackmail and offense or whether it will make the leadership more amenable to
new and drastic arms control and reduction.
Apart from the basic tendencies in Soviet policy dictated by the requirements of
succession, there are three specific problem areas which must be addressed by the
new leaders either immediately or directly after the consolidation of power. An-
dropov cannot long avoid substituting for the drift of Brezhnev's last years a central
policy line concerning the East European situation, relations with the U.S. and the
Western Alliance, and Third World targets of opportunity.
The Soviet "external empire" has commenced its decline. The bloc already places
heavy burdens on the Soviet Union in economic, military and political terms. In
the 1980's the economic difficulties of bloc countries must increase; growth will
decline drastically; and the unavoidable austerity programs may yet again spark
social and political unrest. The Soviet Union is already cutting subsidies to its
"allies" (Poland in particular), and it seems that it has no alternative but to force
them (including Cuba) to rely more substantially on their own very limited resources.
As for the military situation, Soviet contingency planners probably calculate that
the size of Soviet.forces needed to keep East Europe subjugated in case of war
already exceeds the size of elite units in Warsaw Pact countries that could be trusted
to participate reliably, effectively and offensively in a Soviet strike against Western
Europe. Politically, the Soviet Union will monitor the general situation and the
policies of client governments very closely and compel rapid and decisive responses
to any symptoms of the "Polish disease." Indeed, the situation in Eastern Europe
has become more and more an embarrassment which costs the Soviets much of the
influence they retain among Communist parties abroad while endangering their
detente with Western Europe.
The basic Soviet approach to Eastern Europe will not be abandoned, however
unsatisfactory it is in solving the crisis. Soviet security requires the domination of
Eastern Europe just as the retention of these principal Soviet spoils of World War
II constitutes a basic legitimizing element for the Soviet party and leadership among
the elites and the population at large. The decisive preoccupation of Soviet leaders
will be to preserve at any cost the political stability of Eastern Europe without at
the same time contributing significantly to such stability from the economic point
of view. If East European regimes cannot hope in the 1980's to strengthen their
legitimacy through satisfactory economic performance, their only alternative is to
pursue it through anti-Soviet, nationalistic policies. The East European stalemate
19
will persist in the 1980's in an ever harsher economic climate. It promises many
dangers for the Soviet Union.
The second area where Andropov must formulate a coherent policy line concerns
relations with the U.S. and the Western Alliance. The major questions are whether
the Soviet Union can restore any semblance of detente with the U.S. while Mr.
Reagan holds office, whether the 1984 American presidential election offers any
realistic prospect for restoration of even a modest detente, and, if not, what general
line will replace this policy that had promised them so much in the 1970's and
delivered so little. Unfortunately for Andropov, there seems to be no substitute for
a U.S.-Soviet detente that would confine competition to areas short of confrontation
and foster some cooperation in areas where interests of the two superpowers overlap.
For it is America and only America that has the resources and the will to alter the
East-West military balance with or without Europe, as it has also the ability and
unilateral capacity to accept the existing balance and negotiate serious arms control
or reduction. It is America and only America that is committed to political and
military globalism and to the erection of barriers against Soviet global expansion.
The Soviet foreign policy establishment, it would seem, attaches central importance
to Soviet-American relations-even more so today, if that is possible, than in the
immediate past. In periods like the present, when relations with the U.S. are unlikely
to improve, it advocates a very active policy towards Western Europe as the second-
best policy, the most promising alternative. The foreign policy establishment tends
to divide, however, on strategic and tactical objectives concerning Western Europe.
However, neither those who would court Europe mainly in order to influence
American policies through European pressure nor those who would improve West
European relations primarily to weaken the Western Alliance have any illusions
about how much is to be gained from the West Europeans and how far differences
between the U.S. and its West European allies can be exploited.
Andropov has not yet decided what can still be achieved with the Reagan
administration, what changes in American conduct can be expected before the 1984
election, and how to relate long-range Soviet goals to detente and relations with
Western Europe, especially Germany. For the rest of 1983, it would appear, the
central issue will remain INF. The issue has enormous long-range implications and
may, depending on the outcome, determine the formulation of Andropov's general
line towards the West.
Andropov is developing a maxi-mini strategy concerning INF. His maximum
strategy is to prevent deployment thanks to Germany's refusal. Should this strategy
succeed-in my opinion it represents a Soviet hope rather than an expectation-the
Atlantic Alliance will experience its greatest crisis, one with unpredictable political,
economic and military consequences in Europe and especially in the U.S. While
marginal in military terms, INF is far from marginal in political terms. Andropov's
minimum strategy is to use the issue to undermine the alliance; and should the
Soviets see that deployment cannot be stopped by Germany's rejection, they may
present new proposals for a more equitable balance of intermediate-range missiles
in Europe. Such proposals could lead to postponement of deployment and further
negotiations on this issue and the related START.
Regardless of the outcome with INF, I believe Andropov will pursue his "peace
offensive" and detente with Western Europe until he sees what emerges from the
1984 presidential election. By then, presumably, he will have consolidated his own
power and thus be in a position to make important decisions on arms control and
reduction as well as to negotiate compromise solutions on issues that engender
conflict with the U.S.. Should President Reagan gain a second term, Andropov will
20
i
j
i
l
again face today's dilemmas. At such a point the tertsion-without-danger of today
will become the "tension-with-danger" of tomorrow in a fluid and unpredictable
situation which in my opinion will see the triumph of Soviet tactics over strategy-
that is, the pursuit of tangible gains in the Third World regardless of the conse-
quences for Soviet-American relations.
The third area that will require a central policy line is the Third World. One
should regard the ambitious Soviet activity of the 1975-79 period neither as the
only possible or likely pattern of Soviet conduct nor as a transitory aberration that
ran a course not to be repeated. Andropov will certainly continue military assistance
and military involvement as opportunities present themselves in the 1980's. His
success will depend on the extent of his commitments and the determination of his
opponents.
Soviet policies in the Third World vacillate, in Professor Ulam's apt phrase,
between those of the "specula,tor" and those of the "rentier." The former accepts
high visibility, high risk and high investment in the expectation of dramatic rewards.
The latter prefers low visibility, low risk and minimal costs for more sure and
modest rewards. In the short run I expect Andropov to be a "rentier." In the
intermediate range I expect speculation to appeal as irresistibly to him as to his
predecessor. Andropov will succumb more easily to temptation if the West European
powers exhibit disinterest and insensitivity to the consequences of Soviet adventures
in the Third World and if the U.S. proves unable to commit resources to such
change in the Third World as could defuse regional conflicts and civil wars.
Aside from limits on Soviet foreign policy resources that can be expended in the
Third World, Andropov will surely face tough decisions in exploiting Third World
opportunities, especially given the harder line expounded recently by the U.S. The
risk that Soviet actions will produce confrontation with the U.S.-which the Soviets
do not want-will counsel the restraint of a "rentier." Moreover, foreign adventures
will endanger progress along the central axis of their foreign policy-relations with
the U.S.. As long as relations between the superpowers remain paralyzed, this
consideration makes little difference. But when genuine prospects appear for im-
proved relations and negotiations begin in earnest on key military issues, Soviet
leaders will haye serious choices to make.
In sum, Soviet~1'1anning of foreign policy in the intermediate and long range
must confront basic incompatibilities among Soviet interests. An assertive policy of
Soviet expansion in the Third World is incompatible with reduction of tension and
avoidance of confrontation with the U.S.. The insatiable Soviet appetite for larger
weapons programs and greater military strength conflicts with desires to forestall a
new and costly arms spiral, to negotiate arms control measures, and to separate
the question of military balance and arms control from their political and economic
relations with the U.S.
3.
In the nuclear era there is no choice for either the U.S. or Western Europe but
to negotiate with the Soviet Union on a broad range of issues and to strive for the
dependable management of inevitable competition and conflict. Rather the question
is whether the Western Alliance can influence the policies of the Soviet Union and,
in particular, whether it can influence the choice of options open to the new Soviet
leaders. My answer would be a qualified yes. Since any important action of the
West clearly affects Soviet policy, however, the real question is whether our influence
reflects deliberate effort as distinct from unintended consequence and whether such
21
deliberate effort can be elaborated and sustained in the democratic environment of
our own policymaking. In the last analysis our influence will depend in part on
the choice of our objectives with regard to Soviet policy and in part on our strength,
unity, steadfastness and flexibility.
It is utterly utopian to believe that our influence on Soviet policies can lead to
fundamental systemic change in the Soviet Union, a durable reorientation of Soviet
policymakers from external to internal priorities, or an abandonment of any major
arms buildup that Soviet leaders deem essential to the security of their country,
their empire and their global stature. We cannot, moreover, significantly influence
either the overall ambitious direction of Soviet foreign policy or the outcome of
any alleged contest between alleged Soviet "hawks" and "doves." What we can
and should try to influence with regard to the Soviets are the content of their
specific military and foreign policies, their readiness to exploit foreign temptations,
and the degree of moderation or extremism in their overall international conduct.
This may not seem like much; but it is the most we can hope for; and, in the
dangerous conditions of escalating nuclear armaments and world turmoil, even this
modest influence may be a condition of our survival.
The two central goals of Western policies toward the Soviet Union are to prevent
Soviet expansion and to achieve an equitable balance of military power. It is
misleading, therefore, to focus our attention, as is often done when discussing East-
West relat'ions, on the narrow formulation of questions: Can a Soviet-American
detente be restored? Should the West European detente with the Soviet Union
continue given its potential for disrupting the Western Alliance? The bundle of
policies, ideas and expectations we call "detente" is neither good nor bad in itself.
The real question is how effectively it serves our two main goals vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union.
On this score, the detente of 1970's vintage did not pass the test of effectiveness,
at least from the American point of view. Detente became in the U.S. a symbol
of America's lack of will and of the failure of the Western Alliance to preserve its
unity and to influence constructively the international conduct of the Soviet Union.
The word acquired a negative emotive meaning going well beyond the actual
suppositions and assumptions on which it rested. Let me therefore avoid this term
and speak rather about the substance, forms and instruments of policies which have
as their goals the preservation or restoration of the East-West military balance, ~
prevention of Soviet expansion, and regulation of the East-West conflict. Let us
examine the many lessons we have learned from our experience in the 1970's and
early 1980's as they bear on our present situation.
First, the internal strength of the U.S. and West European countries is as
important in formulating and implementing effective policies with regard to the
Soviet Union as their external strength. Mr. Kissinger's policy towards the Soviet
Union during the early and mid-1970's was not wrong in itself. The expectations
of what it could achieve, at what price, and how quickly were grossly exaggerated,
however. That the policy collapsed was not the fault of either the policy or its
chief architect but of the conditions which at that time prevailed in the United
States and to some extent survive today-the post-Vietnam malaise, the depressed
levels of military spending, the deleterious effects of Watergate on the American
political system, particularly its executive branch.
Second, the unity of the Western Alliance is essential in formulating policy towards
the Soviet Union, especially as regards the policy instruments chosen to influence
Soviet international conduct. For America, the quest for unity is a frustrating
experience. When the U.S. moves closer to the Soviet Union, its European allies
22
fear aSoviet-American "deal" or Soviet-American "condominium." Wheri the U.S.
moves away from the Soviet Union, its European allies fear that Europe will be
dragged into confrontation with the Soviet Union or that the risk is heightened
that war will be fought on European soil.
Third, the pendulum of American policies towards the Soviet Union tends to
swing from one extreme to another and leaves for both the Soviet Union and
Western Europe a disconcerting and accurate impression of unpredictability. Indeed,
the AmericaIJ,.. political system and national character militate against the pursuit of
a steady and steadfast policy towards the Soviet Union beyond, at best, the four-
year tenure of a president. To formulate and implement a comprehensive, consistent
and well-calibrated policy towards the Soviet Union is especially difficult in the
U.S.. Potent forces work against it: sensationalist media, a greatly weakened party
system and tradition of bipartisan foreign policy, the tendency of the political public
to view the Soviet Union in simplistic either-or terms rather than as an adversary
with whom one both competes and cooperates.
Fourth, the nature and range of insrruments that were developed to influence
Soviet foreign policies during the early and mid-1970's are quite broad. They include
the escalation of the costs and risks of Soviet expansion, the manipulation of the
Soviet fear of confrontation with the U.S., the preservation of a just balance of
military power, the offer of rewards in economic, political and status fields, etc.
No combination of those instruments and the policies they serve will solve mirac-
ulously our conflict with the Soviet Union, however. There are no "quick fixes."
The conflict can be regulated only through flexible and effective use of those
instruments as disincentives and incentives. Here a key lesson of the 1970's and
early 1980's is that only when disincentives are credible, strong and continuous can
incentives have any effect. But only when incentives are offered will disincentives
have major effects. The success of the skillful combination of incentives and
disincentives will depend on reasoned agreement among the Allies to coordinate
their use and in the last analysis on the internal political, economic and military
strength of the democracies.
In the 1980's, the key question is not what the new Soviet leader's foreign policies
will be. It is rather what those of the Western Alliance will be. What realistic goals
should the Western Alliance pursue? To the end of this century and probably even
beyond, democratic nations have no choice but to face the conflict with the Soviet
Union while at the same time striving to cooperate in the mutual interest. Let us
hope that this conflict will retreat from the dangerous threshold of nuclear escalation
and confrontation and that a united Western Alliance can wait out the expansionist
stage of Soviet development. Until this stage of Soviet national life passes, the U.S.
and the Western Alliance have no choice but to pursue a policy of "Containment,
Detente and Confrontation" towards the Soviet Union.
* *
*
23
DISCUSSION
Discussion of this agenda item was introduced by a panel of participants who
commented in some detail on various aspects of the subject and suggested some
lines which the discussion might follow. The panel consisted of Seweryn Bialer,
Henry A. Kissinger, Helmut Schmidt and, for the afternoon sessicn, Pierre Elliott
Trudeau. Walter Scheel and George W. Ball acted as chairm~n. The remarks of
the panelists have been incorporated below in the summaries of each sub-topic.
Developments in the Soviet Union and its policies. An American observed that
the Soviet Union faced in the coming years major decisions in its domestic and
international affairs. This was so because of the confluence of several important
events and trends, including the succession of new leadership, a severe economic
crisis, the collapse of detente, the overextension of Soviet foreign policy, and the
volatile situation in Eastern Europe.
Though the Soviet economy had advanced during the past twenty years, it faced
a set of difficulties that required new, untried solutions. Growth had declined in
every sector of the economy, the technological gap between the Soviet Union and
the West was as great as ever, and Soviet agriculture was in crisis after four
successive bad harvests and the failure of previous regimes to make effective
investments in agriculture.
Soviet society, accustomed to a standard of living that had improved steadily
from the time of Stalin's death until the mid-1970's, now faced a stagnating standard
of living. The effects of this could be seen in the widespread corruption and
declining work ethic among the industrial working class. Declining expectations had
also given rise to political apathy. ·
In the military sphere, the Soviet Union faced a conflict between the demands
of military leaders and the desires of the Communist party leaders. The former
favored continuing high direct expenditures for weapons, while the latter supported
long-term investments in the industrial-military sphere. The rapid growth of non-
Russian ethnic groups also presented the military with a problem. And the growing
role of the military in foreign policy was a potential difficulty for the political
leadership.
The Soviet Union faced a general decline of their Eastern European empire in
economic, political, and military terms. The Eastern European nations faced a harsh
decade, with the prospect of cuts in Soviet subsidies giving rise to economic
hardships, which in turn could be expected to yield social and political unrest.
In the field of foreign policy, the Soviet Union found its resources seriously
overextended. It had little except military aid to offer. In their relations with the
U.S., Soviet leaders had not found a substitute for detente. Their foreign policy
had undergone a "general unravelling", with an emphasis on short-term goals at
the expense of intermediate and long-term ones.
But, the speaker stressed, in spite of the challenges facing the Soviet Union, it
was unlikely that major systemic change would take place. The price of change in
the industrial area in the form of decentralization was potentially higher than doing
nothing or making only minor adjustments. Military expenditures were unlikely to
decrease in favor of other production because of the military's central role in foreign
policy and its status as the system's internal showpiece. Likewise no important
change in the Soviet Union's policy toward its Eastern European satellites could be
expected, for not only was that empire a security concern, but it was also a
"legitimizing force" for Soviet ruling elites, and they could be expected to remain
totally committed to it. In foreign policy, the Soviet Union was still ascending as
24
a great power arid its amibitions would not decrease with a change in leadership.
With respect to the military challenge from the West, the Soviets would certainly
meet it, regardless of cost.
Though sweeping, systemic changes could thus be discounted, subtle change had
already begun under Andropov. These changes were not apparent to the general
population, but the Soviet elites were well aware of _the slow, methodical changes
Andropov was carrying out. These changes included major personnel shifts, with
the new leader removing many of his predecessor's people from office and replacing
them with ,his own appointees, many of whom were younger men. Andropov was
also transforming the central party apparatus into the main instrument of long
range planning, rather than the overseer of.the affairs of state. With respect to the
military establishment, he had obtained for himself the post of head of the defense
council and was creating an independent defense council staff. In the agricultural
and industrial areas, there was, evidence that Andropov had initiated some reforms,
though not major ones.
As to Eastern Europe, the speaker predicted that Andropov would closely monitor
political and economic events in order to prevent a situation from getting out of
hand. He would insist on a commitment to political orthodoxy in Eastern Europe,
and would attempt to intergrate those countries' policies with Soviet policy.
In foreign policy, the emphasis would be on the carrot instead of the stick, on
peace offensive rather than military build-up. But at the same time, the Soviets
would be determined to permit no change in the military balance with the West.
In the short term, the Soviet leadership would be awaiting the outcome of the 1984
U.S. elections before settling on longer range foreign policy development.
In summary, the speaker felt that despite its current problems, the Soviet Union
was not disintegrating nor was it on the verge of bankruptcy. It had major reserves
of stability to draw upon, including the low expectations of citizens who had not
experienced the postwar era of rising expectations; the tool of repression; political
apathy; and Russian control over the internal empire. Finally, they had going for
them traditional Russian nationalism. In short, the Soviets were experiencing a
"crisis of effectiveness, not of survival."
A German sp~aker agreed that the Soviet Union would meet the Western challenge
no matter what the-·cost. He pointed out that the Soviet leadership had a major
advantage in the capacity of the Russian people to suffer. They could tell their
people that, in order to preserve the peace, they would have to sacrifice some of
their standard of living. In order to meet the threat from the West, they would
have to lower their expectations. The speaker had no doubt the Soviet leaders could
successfully play this card.
But how durable was this capacity to suffer, wondered a Greek participant. It
was a factor for stability among the Slavic peoples, but not among the faster-
growing Asian components of the Soviet population. This demographic problem
would be potentially explosive for the USSR.
Several speakers referred to emerging Sino-Soviet rapprochement. Some felt it
was a matter of concern for the West, but others saw China as a continuing long-
term problem for the Soviet Union, in spite of any short-term thawing of relations.
It was generally agreed that economic difficulties presented the Russians with one
of their greatest challenges. They had all the West's problems on top of a system
that did not work. An American observed that Soviet leaders were faced with the
necessity of making changes in their system without ''losing their Marxist virginity.''
It was unlikely that Andropov, whom the speaker viewed as an interim leader,
would make fundamental changes, but there was a danger that internal problems
25
could affect his foreign policy. Did he want a period of calm on the outside ,in
order to deal with his internal problems, or did he want foreign policy issues to
draw peoples' attention from problems at home? The West needed time to see how
events in the USSR would develop.
The other major challenge in the view of many speakers was the situation in
Eastern Europe. A German participant pointed out that what the Soviets used to
see as a "belt of security" had become a "belt of insecurity." They had a growing
problem of instability in their sphere of influence. A Belgian wondered if the Soviet
Union could count on its Eastern European allies in a conventional war. An
American agreed, saying that Poland, especially, was not only an economic and
political problem, but also a military problem for Soviet contingency planning. The
Polish situation had changed the central front of NATO. Poland was, for all
practical purposes, not a member of the Warsaw Pact. The Soviets, who viewed
earlier events in Hungary and Czechoslovakia as accidents, had good reason to
worry that there was instead a trend developing in East European countries.
But a Turkish speaker warned against any illusions. The Western alliance had to
be aware of the essential stability and coherence of Soviet policies. Their economy,
however weak it might be, was resilient enough to sustain adequate military power
in relation to the West. The Soviets were very clear about priorities. These were,
first, to preserve and maintain their great power status, and, second, to keep their
political and ideological hold over Eastern Europe. Finally, their obsession with
security was not likely to moderate.
What should Western strategy be? While there was little disagreement about the
challenges and difficulties facing the Soviet Union, several speakers warned that we
should look to the state of the NATO alliance. While we could take some comfort
from the weaknesses and difficulties facing the Soviets, we were not without our
own problems. An International participant spoke of the "weakness, hesitation,
and disarray" in NATO, which Moscow no doubt found encouraging. From the
Soviet standpoint, he continued, Western countries were "permissive and lacked
discipline.''
It was true, a Briton argued, that the West had its own set of problems, especially
economic ones, but we were basically strong. Our problems were more cyclical than
systemic. But another British speaker wondered if a society that had either high
inflation or high interest rates, that could not get them both down simultaneously,
and that relied for economic stability on one of the most unstable regions of the
world did not have ·a systemic problem, at least as viewed from the Soviet perspective.
Many speakers stressed the need for unity in the alliance. But a Portuguese asked
if that were not a very difficult objective to achieve. It was impossible, he felt, to
view Europe and North America as a whole. Their interests, situations, and views
were vastly different. But, said a Belgian, the Soviets were masters at exploiting
disunity in Europe and within the alliance, so unity had to be a high priority.
Unity in the alliance meant a unified strategy in dealing with the Soviet Union.
An American view held that the alliance faced a complicated situation in which it
was dealing with a nation that was an "ideological· opponent with whom we
nonetheless were compelled to coexist." We had to oppose that nation's expan-
sionism but also demonstrate that we did not seek confrontation. We had to defend
our interests but realize that our capacity to change domestic institutions in a
totalitarian system was limited.
The task of the alliance, continued the American, was to defend against a common
threat and to achieve common objectives. The alliance faced difficulty in East-West
relations and in global strategy because both of the purposes for which it existed
26
I
I
~
I
~
l
were under pressure simultaneously. There was no agreement on the nature of the
threat nor on the common objectives we sought to achieve..
Another American agreed that, while the policies followed by the West would
surely influence the choices made by Soviet leaders, it would be a mistake for the
alliance to think it could, or should, have as a goal to influence internal developments
in the USSR. We should be clear that our goal was containment of Russian
expansionism by any means necessary, including military force, if our vital interests
were thre~tened. A reintegration of alliance foreign policy along these lines was
called for.
A French speaker stressed that the Soviet Union should see the alliance as
"determined, but also cooperative." We.should not seek to frighten the Soviets
with harsh rhetoric, but we should define and follow a global strategy. The Soviet
Union was an expansionary power, and we needed to state clearly that we would
stop any moves to create imbalances in the world. But at the same time we had
to reassure the Soviets that we were not out to threaten their security, or their
economic or social development.
The time for the anti-communism of the 1950's had long since passed, one
American said. We had to make clear we were not fighting the Soviet system, even
though we did not like it, but rather the expansion of that system. An International
speaker agreed, urging that we not appear to be on an anti-communist crusade,
but simply determined to protect our way of life and our institutions. The proper
prescription, said a German, was a "cooperative kind of security rather than an
antagonistic kind." ,
Another German argued that the realistic goals of the alliance should be to defend
itself by adequate political and military means and to deter the adversary from
waging war and aggression; and at the same time to instigate the adversary's interest
in partial political, military, and economic cooperation, especially in arms limitation
and reduction. It was predictable that the Soviets would achieve nuclear parity with
the West. The need now was to seek stabilization of peace through a stabilized
military balance. Beginning in 1967, the alliance had pursued this kind of dual
strategy, combining elements of cooperation, competition, containment, and conflict-
readiness. This concept, which had taken 20 years to develop, was still valid but
had been overshadowed and all but shattered by the most recent two U.S. admin-
istrations.
The speaker proceeded to trace the evolution of "Western grand strategy."
(1) After World War II, there had been a brief period defined essentially by the
U.S. in terms of the Marshall Plan and a renunciation of nuclear weapons. The
Soviets did not participate in the Marshall Plan and rejected nuclear renunciation.
Stalin instead consolidated Russian rule over the states of Eastern Europe, threatened
Berlin, and laid the foundation for the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
(2) The Russians had thereby provoked the second phase of grand strategy, that
of the doctrine of massive nuclear retaliation and the concept of a global system
of anti-Soviet alliances.
(3) The third phase was already in development during the second phase, going
back to 1956 when the so-called "three wise men" asked for political consolidation
of the alliance beyond the military field and demanded consultation among the
allies in decision-making. President Kennedy had acknowledged those demands five
years later in his "two-pillar" speech. During the 1960's the foreseeable Soviet
nuclear parity had led to the 1967 abandonment of the strategy of massive retaliation
and the adoption of the current strategy of flexible response and forward defense.
This third phase was the most fruitful, yielding the test-ban, non-proliferation,
27
ABM, and strategic arms limitation treaties. These stabilized the balance in Europe
and the equilibrium in the area of intercontinental missiles. They signified a partial
security partnership between the two strategic nuclear powers.
Since 1976, Western grand strategy had gradually been withering away, with the
East-West relationship on the decline. Both superpowers had lost their "mutual
confidence in the calculability of the other side," which had existed within limits
until the end of the Nixon-Ford-Kissinger era. Starting with the Carter administra-
tion, the consistency and continuity of Western grand strategy had been lost. The
attempt by the current U.S. administration to apply economic sanctions against
America's closest allies was indicative of the state of decay. There had been a
whole succession of unilateral actions by the U.S., from the Olympic boycott to
the grain embargo to the space warfare speech.
It was true that Soviet mistakes and violations had contributed to these devel-
opments. The Soviet "double complex of inferiority and security" with regard to
global relations and world peace was dangerous and had caused a speeding up of
the arms race. The Russians had involved themselves in the Middle East, Africa,
Central America, had invaded Afghanistan, encouraged Vietnamese imperialism,
and had taken advantage of the omission of Euro-strategic missiles from SALT by
devising and deploying the SS-20, a weapon designed to divide Europe and the
U.S. in time of crisis. Soviet actions had thus made the military component of
Western· grand strategy crucial.
NATO's military strategy. An International speaker reviewed the specific objec-
tives of the current military strategy of the alliance. The two basic objectives of
Western security arrangements were (1) to have a credible deterrent to overt aggres-
sion as well as political intimidation, which could result from the Soviet perception
that we were unable to defend ourselves; and (2) to negotiate arms reduction accords
and control measures for all categories of forces and arms.
We needed to give the Soviets incentives to negotiate seriously, and this required
that, politically, we be viewed as cohesive and united, and, militarily, as able and
willing to implement our deterrent strategy of flexible response. This was a valid
strategy, but only if adequate forces existed for each leg of the triad. At the time
of the adoption of the flexible response strategy, the West had had nuclear supe-
riority in both the strategic and theatre fields and was confident that qualitative
improvements could overcome Soviet numerical conventional superiority. But we
had been surpassed in all three categories. Our forces improved each year, but the
gap between them and the Warsaw Pact continued to widen.
The speaker was satisfied that we were on the right path toward redressing the
nuclear imbalance, but, on the conventional side, the nations of the West had been
derelict in meeting their commitments to force improvements. As a result, we had
"mortgaged our defense to the nuclear response." Under present conditions, the
commander of Western forces in Europe would have to request use of nuclear
weapons fairly soon after an attack by the Soviet forces. We had "bought ourselves
a short conventional war" because we lacked the manpower, ammunition, and pre-
positioned material to sustain ourselves conventionally.
But, the International participant continued, the situation could be restored. As
a defensive alliance, we did not need to match Warsaw Pact forces one for one.
The alternative to the "short nuclear fuse" was to provide the alliance with the
capacity to frustrate a conventional attack without resorting 'to nuclear weapons.
We needed to motivate and train our soldiers, modernize our ships and aircraft,
and make use of the emerging technology which would enable us to hit targets
deep behind enemy lines, such as choke points, bridgeheads, command and control
28
headquarters, etc. We required not just new manned aircraft, which were becoming
increasingly vulnerable to air defense, but surface-to-surface and air-to-surface
missiles. To reach these goals, the Western nations would have to meet the targeted
four per cent real increase in military spending from 1983 to 1988.
With a modern and strong conventional capacity, the speaker concluded, we
would raise the nuclear threshold and force upon tb.e Soviets the option of either
withdrawjug or being the first to escalate to nuclear weapons. Yet NATO strategy
should riot give up the first-use option, nor nuclear weapons themselves. It was
crucial that we retain a "full spectrum" of nuclear weapons with the option to be
the first to use them. This did not mean that we should not pursue a program of
reducing the number of nuclear weapons on European soil, as we had been doing.
A German participant felt that military strategy could be boiled down to six basic
principles: deterrence; credibility of deterrence in the adversary's eyes; adequacy of
defense if conflict should break out; continuous revaluation of adequacy to meet
changing conditions; equilibrium, or balance of power so that both sides might
have confidence; and acceptability at home. This last principle was perhaps our
greatest challenge, as the NATO nations faced an increasing deficit in credibility
with their politics.
The speaker agreed that it was necessary for the West to be able roughly to
match the Soviet forces in the conventional field. This was true to a large extent
because, under the principle of acceptability, the first use of nuclear weapons in
response to a conventional attack would, as the decade went on, become increasingly
unacceptable to Western public opinion. But, he felt, conventional equilibrium could
not be achieved merely by spending money. The key ingredient needed was soldiers,
properly motivated, trained, and educated. Only secondarily did we need to spend
money on material, aircraft, weapons, etc. Those countries that believed they could
build a strong conventional defense without conscription were deluding themselves.
In West Germany, the Chancellor had the ability to call up 1.3 million men in a
matter of days. Western strategists tended to forget this formidable force, whose
existence rendered Warsaw Pact ground forces not greatly superior to NATO's.
Indeed, while there were certain shortcomings in the alliance's conventional capa-
bility, Soviet snper,iority was much exaggerated. The Soviets had concentrated most
of their build-up at sea, and still their fleet was inferior. They enjoyed some
advantage in air power, largely because the West had put too much emphasis on
the nuclear side of its air defense.
Soviet nuclear superiority was similarly exaggerated. Both sides still had adequate
armaments to assure mutual destruction. In the strategic area, both sides still had
assured destruction by second strike, with many windows of vulnerability. Only in
the field of Euro-strategic missiles had the Soviets gained clear advantage, and this
was an imbalance that had to be "put right" at the INF talks in Geneva.
An American agreed that reliance on nuclear weapons would eventually lead to
a "political, military, and psychological dead end." But renunciation of first use
of them, whether tacit or explicit, would lead to a "psychological disarmament"
of the West. No level of conventional build-up could insure against the Soviet
temptation to use nuclear blackmail. The West should not use nuclear weapons
lightly, but it would be dangerous to adopt no first use as an operating principle.
Conventional build-up was appropriate, but it had to be viewed in perspective.
Rarely, if ever, in history had a deterrent balance of conventional forces been
achieved. Wars had been occurring for hundreds of years between countries who
assessed their military balance as equal. And countries which turned out to have
inferior numbers, as Germany did in two world wars, were able to achieve great
29
successes. The speaker warned that a stated policy of no first use would make war,
even nuclear war, more likely. All wars had occurred where there were no nuclear
weapons. It would be a mistake for the West to imply it would rather be defeated
in a conventional war than start a nuclear one. No matter what we had declared,
it was not likely we would ever accept a conventional defeat without resorting to
nuclear weapons.
An International participant pointed out that the nuclear arsenal had preserved
the peace for 30 years. The credibility of that deterrent would be weakened if the
element of uncertainty were removed. It was important to remember that the alliance
was defensive, and would not use any weapon first; it would only respond to an
attack.
In the event of an attack by conventional means, wondered a Canadian, was not
the presence of tactical nuclear weapons on the battlefield a temptation to use
them? An International speaker responded that use of any nuclear weapon, whether
initially or otherwise, required political authority. There was no predelegation on
the use of nuclear weapons to the military commanders.
Another perspective was offered by a Swede, who said that it made little difference
from the neutral point of view who used nuclear weapons first. It would be as
deadly for all concerned. While the superpowers could shape the world, the neutrals
had to try to live with the situation.
The age of nuclear weapons, said an American, confronted Western leaders with
two contradictory tasks. First, we had to not talk recklessly about using them.
Second, we had to elaborate "some scheme for their use that was not automatically
destructive of all civilization." No one in high office with some control over nuclear.
weapons could accept that the only strategy was mass destruction. Other options
had to be put forward. Conventional build-up was fine, but it had to stop short
of renunciation of the nuclear arsenal. We had to relate our build-up to our mission,
to define the purpose of our strategy. A bipartisan statement defining objectives
and missions was needed in order to take the subject of defense out of the "endless
debate between those who argued that we should have any weapon technologically
possible and those who opposed any build-up on the grounds that we already had
enough.''
A Canadian agreed that it was possible to consider using nuclear weapons which
would do less than wipe out humanity, as an exchange of ICBM's probably would,
and which could be targeted to hit non-civilian targets. But this would be a tough
sell to our publics. There was "a delicate balance between deterrence and reassur-
ance," argued an American. It appeared that NATO's chief concern had shifted
from crisis stability to war fighting, and this scared people. The implication that
there could be victory in a protracted nuclear conflict or that there were alternatives
to massive destruction did not make sense to many people.
The role of public opinion. A German emphasized that public opinion would be
decisive in carrying out alliance strategy. Democracies would not be able to maintain
military strategies that were not accepted by their people. More people today
questioned the credibility of the alliance than defended it, as the debates over
nuclear freeze, no first use, and MX and INF deployment suggested. If we lacked
credibility at home, we might not be given the means to implement strategy by our
parliaments.
An American agreed, saying it was wrong to look at domestic realities as a
nuisance or constraint; they were rather a vital ingredient in any intelligent strategy.
To set intelligent objectives, we first had to read the realities correctly, starting
with the domestic ones.
30
•
It was a Portuguese speaker's opinion that we had to be mindful of the successor
generation. Without taking it into consideration, we could not plan future defense
strategies. Peace movements represented a significant segment of the population in
most NATO countries, and they had great influence. Would they disappear ulti-
mately, as such movements had in, the past, or would their influence grow?
A Canadian found it frustrating that peace movements had begun to flourish at
a time when the alliance was striving to meet the threat to peace posed by the
build-up o'f Soviet armaments. Leaders found that their policies were often put
forward to a populace that did not understand them, and often in a demagogic
environment where peace movement spokesmen escaped the real issues by ''invoking
moral values." We were living in an immoral world, and we could not make
decisions based on individual moral principles. We had to consider our adversary's
morals. It was hard t'o get people to understand this, and that, perhaps, was a
failure of political leadership'.
But leaders had to meet the challenge, said a German. We had to pursue arms
control and disarmament in a serious and credible way, but not as ends in themselves.
For we had "overmilitarized the problem of peace." We needed to explain the
political threat from the Soviet Union, which people in Europe, and in West
Germany especially, had forgotten. States were not in conflict because they were
armed, but because they had different interests and political concerns. There was
a political influence race going on, which the Soviets were determined to win. There
was the danger not just of war, but of an "overwhelming political hegemony" over
Europe by the Soviets, who were working to create a climate of "preventive good
behavior" in the Federal Repubfic. People who had not lived through the two
Berlin crises did not realize this. The political threat had to be explained to the
younger generation.
An American acknowledged that it was one of the roles of political leaders to
lead public opinion, but how far was debatable. It was possible for leaders to dwell
too much on public opinion. A Briton agreed, arguing that the military consider-
ations of Western security should be the determining factor of whatever 'strategy
we adopted. But we had to properly assess those considerations and present them
to our publics ~·w_iJh clarity and calmness and an understanding of their nervousness
about nuclear weapons."
Another American saw a danger that too much worry about public opinion
allowed the most extreme, least reasonable forces to have a sort of veto over policies
that would otherwise be properly pursued. A compatriot agreed, arguing that on
too many matters of vital importance, the first assessment made was what could
be sold domestically rather than what was necessary. There was a real risk for
leaders in following public opinion. If in following public opinion, a leader's policy
led to disaster, he would not be forgiven by his public, even though he sought to
carry out its wishes. In the late 1930's Neville Chamberlain had taken the most
popular course and, as a consequence, had been politically ruined. One could not
ignore public opinion completely, nor should one be driven by it completely.
The INF negotiations. There was general agreement that educating and informing
public opinion was vital to the ongoing INF talks. We needed to stick to the
double-track decision, a German insisted, and to make an intense effort to come
to a mutually satisfactory compromise. If some deployment of Euro-missiles was
necessary in the end, the public would have to be convinced that the "utmost,
sincere, and sustained effort to reach a compromise" had been made, and that it
was due to the Soviet Union's intransigence that negotiations to obviate deployment
had failed.
31
I I
The need to be perceived by our publics as taking the negotiations seriously was
agreed on by all speakers. That perception so far was not widespread. A Dutch
participant said that while his government would have preferred negotiation on the
threat of deployment rather than a decision to deploy if negotiations failed, it was
prepared for some deployment to take place. Nevertheless, a very large proportion
of the Dutch people did not think the negotiations were being taken seriously.
Similarly, in West Germany, pointed out a speaker from that country, a significant
segment of the people would always oppose deployment. A 56 per cent vote for
the Kohl government did not mean that 56 per cent of the population favored
deployment. There would be riots and demonstrations at the time of deployment,
he warned, which would present a major challenge to the West German government.
A fellow German agreed, saying that Europe was in for a "hot autumn," and that
the countries hosting the new weapons would have to be prepared for civil diso-
bedience. It would not help much to try to educate people, as the "arcana of
strategic thinkers" was far beyond most people's comprehension, especially the
young. The more we tried to educate them, the more scared they would get.
It was true, said an American, that domestic considerations complicated the INF
negotiations. The best course for the West to follow would be to define a "generous,
reasonable position" and stick to it. Our problem was that we ran the risk of being
accused of inflexibility. But if the Russians viewed the U.S. as feeling obliged to
break every deadlock with a new proposal, they would never have an incentive to
accept any proposal.
The INF problem, continued the speaker, was not so difficult intellectually, but
it was very difficult politically. The challenge was to determine if there was any
number of Soviet weapons for which the West should accept zero deployment. If
there was not, what number could we treat as equivalent? Equivalence did not have
to be defined in exact numerical terms, but we needed to come forward with a
number and stick to it.
A German speaker traced the historical development of the INF negotiations-
the failure of the Carter administration to include Euro-strategic weapons in the
SALT talks, the basis of the December 1979 double-track decision, and the eventual
agreement of Brezhnev to negotiate. What would ultimately be deployed would be
decided on the basis of the negotiations. The zero option had never been a realistic
proposal. A compromise had to be found between the Russians' position of zero
for the West and 350 for themselves, and the Western position of zero for both
sides.
An American viewed the deployment of Euro-missiles with alarm, suggesting that
it would be followed by a new round of Soviet deployment. Where would the cycle
stop? Another American believed the Soviets would deploy new SS-20 missiles in
East Germany, aimed at West Germany, and in the northeast corner of the Soviet
Union, aimed at the northern tier of U.S. cities.
Challenges outside the NA TO area. It was an American concern that NATO
lacked a framework to deal with challenges in the Third World. We had a "con-
ceptual matrix for discussion of arms control and military strategy," but we had
"neither mechanisms nor concepts for issues outside the NATO area." It was true
that the alliance had no legal obligation to operate outside of its area, but countries
did not defend each other because of legal obligations but because their perceptions
of national and international interests compelled them to act.
As in our military strategy, we had to define our goals and objectives. Were we
resisting the fact or the method of change? Was there something in the world we
would never permit to happen? What would we resist in the name of security? If
32
we could not answer these questions, we could not state positive goals.
The next war was more likely to result from a crisis not sought by either the
West or the Soviet Union, and which they could not or did not wish to control,
than it was likely to result from an attack. in Europe. Such a crisis in the Arabian
Gulf area was a good possibility before the end of the decade. The reaction of the
Middle Eastern countries to the Western capacity to protect its interests around the
world would be curcial. (In the same way, it was not a trivial matter how Mexico,
Colombia, and· Venezuela perceived America's ability to define and protect its
interests in Central America.) When the Gulf countries came to their moment of
crisis, their perception of how the U.S. and its allies had performed elsewhere and
our ability to achieve stated objectives would _be vitally important. The NATO
nations had to have some means of defining their goals and dealing with each other
in a long-range manner and not simply in the framework of the. exigencies of
domestic politics. ,
A British participant endorsed this view, saying that the "irresolution of the
West" was a matter of grave concern. If the West looked irresolute in Central
America or the Middle East, its problems would be that much worse. Moderate
men could not survive if they did not get understanding and help from the West
in military, political, and economic terms. The danger was not just from the Soviet
Union, but from the more extreme elements in their own countries who would seek
to persuade the electorates that moderation would not pay.
Soviet achievements in the Third World, in a Turk's view, were not so much the
result of successful Russian policies as of "erroneous policies" of the West. The
Soviets had made many miscalculations;as Afghanistan showed. The West should
take advantage of Soviet mistakes, an Austrian said, and formulate a credible Third
World strategy. There was a large window of opportunity for the West in view of
the disarray in non-aligned countries. But more than an imitation of Soviet strategy,
which was based on military assistance, was required. A concerted economic strategy
was called for. At the same time, said a Frenchman, we should be mindful that
the "Marxist explanation of history" was quite attractive to many Third World
countries, and we should try to get over our tendency to forget the ideological
dimension.
A participant from the~etherlands was less inclined to favor any sort of Western
intervention, arguing that it often pushed a Third World country into open Com-
munist arms. Other speakers were critical of the U.S. tendency to view all Communist
governments as in the Soviet camp. The response of one American was that once
a country had gone Communist, it was difficult to prevent a Soviet orientation, or
even Soviet bases in that country. It was a legitimate aim of the U.S. to try to
prevent the rise of Communism in certain countries.
Our policy with respect to Third World areas, advised another American, should
be to reach an agreement with the Soviets as to what were the rules of the game.
We should draw the line at military intervention by the Soviets, a line they could
not cross with impunity. But we had to learn to take preventive measures in areas
where crises did not yet exist.
Another area of potential trouble for the West was the financial crisis in the
Third World. This particularly troubled an American who did not share the view
of many financial experts that the crisis had been overcome. The problem of debt
in Third World countries could lead to radicalization, with countries renouncing
the debt problem as simply a financial matter. We had to prevent Third World
countries from imposing debt settlements on us "by means of radical domestic
change." This would have the dangerous result of rewarding domestic radicalization
33
and would encourage those countries to think the way to deal with the West was
to impose conditions on us by blackmail. The debt problem had to be solved as a
development problem, and that was the responsibility of every country in the alliance.
If we did not live up to that responsibility, we would face a balance of power shift
as significant as any of NATO's more traditional concerns.
Conclusions. A German participant pointed out that, in spite of all the questioning
and self-examination, the NATO partners should not lose sight of the fact that
their alliance had preserved peace for three and a half decades for all its members
and territories. It continued to be "one of the most successful alliances in modern
times." It had demonstrated many times its ability to adapt and adjust to changing
conditions and situations. By no means was the alliance "shrinking to its knees."
An American speaker urged that in our negotiations with the Soviet Union we
convey to them a "sober definition" of what the purpose of the exercise was. Their
asset was persistence. They "stuck to their positions and harvested the fruits of
our impatience."
Our need was to define for ourselves our objectives and to create an international
structure less driven by domestic considerations. In view of our capabilities and
our tasks, there was no reason why we should not be the group of nations creating
the emerging world order. Our course would be determined by our effectiveness.
* *
*
34
II. ISSUES IN MEDIUM-TERM PROSPECTS FOR
GROWTH IN THE WORLD ECONOMY
* * * *
A. PROTECTIONISM AND EMPLOYMENT
"The Future of World. Trade"
Working Paper Prepared by Raymond Barre,
Former Prime Minister of France, Member of the National Assembly
I.
Over the past 30 years, world trade has been a major factor in the growth of
the international economy. Its steady expansion has contributed towards the pros-
perity of the nations, whereas the drop in world trade made the Great Slump of
the thirties even worse. Between 1948 and 1973, world trade grew at an annual
rate of 8 per cent, while world production was rising at the rate of 5 per cent.
At the present time, world trade is passing through a very difficult period.
- A recent survey by GATT shows that the volume of trade fell by 2 per cent
in 1982. In dollar terms, international trade declined by 6 per cent compared with
1981 under the combined impact of this fall in volume and the rise in the value
of the dollar. An increase of 1 per cent in the volume of trade in agricultural
products, although well below the 4 per cent increase recorded in 1981, was the
only positive feature of the world trade picture last year.
- Despite all the efforts over the past 20 years to promote freer international
trade - efforts that have been kept up since the first oil shock in 1974 - and to
prevent any resort to protectionism, there is now growing pressure for restrictions
on freedom of trade as a result of the economic recession and the rise in unem-
ployment. The weekly review "The Economist" pointed out on 3 April 1982 that
25 per cent of world-trade is now carried on through barter agreements, 25 per
cent is the result of internal transactions within multinational corporations, and a
further quarter is subject to quotas or agreements for the "voluntary" limitation
of exports; which means that trade carried on through the machinery of the market
only accounts for 25 per cent of the whole. This quarter of world trade is exercising
a growing attraction as its share shrinks.
- The disintegration of the international monetary system and the introduction
of floating exchange rates have, in recent years, stimulated protectionist pressures
because the instability of exchange rates and their over-reaction to the forces at
work in the currency markets have set off defensive reactions among producers and
consumers alike, curtailed incentives to long-term investment, placed a premium on
speculative short-term investments and had a depressing effect on international
business.
The overvaluation of the pound sterling and the dollar, together with the un-
dervaluation of the yen, are probably more important factors in the evolution of
world trade patterns than tariff or non-tariff barriers, however inadvisable those
may be.
- The problem of the indebtedness of the developing countries also hampers the
growth of world trade. Yawning balance-of-payments gaps and the cost of servicing
their debts may force these countries to cut down their imports and protect their
35
r -
domestic markets, while trying to give an artificial stimulus to their exports. The
stability of the international economy may be seriously threatened by the trend of
all countries to import less and export more. The whole world would thereby be
caught up in a vicious circle of deflation and depression.
II.
When beset by problems such as these, is it possible to maintain free trade policies
in the industrialized countries and to encourage them in the developing countries?
A negative reply is provided by the "Cambridge school", which argues that the
liberalization of international trade since the end of the Second World War has led
to unemployment and prevented the efficient use of the economic resources of all
the countries concerned. The economists of this school propose their own formula
of "controlled trade" on a world-wide scale. They contend that protectionism is
necessary both to industrialize the developing countries and to safeguard the aging
industries of the declining economies. They also take the line that free trade
nowadays is a myth: OPEC controls the price of oil, Japanese industry is heavily
subsidized, and the U.S. obstructs imports of steel and cars. They accordingly urge
that states should impose uniform tariffs sufficiently high to prevent any rise in
imports and to enable substantial resources to be allocated to the development of
national industries. Lastly, they recommend the conclusion of an international
agreement on a new set of tariffs and "voluntary export restrictions."
These arguments find a ready audience, in both the industrialized and the de-
veloping countries, among politicians and trade union leaders who are worried by
the level of unemployment and hope to lower it by restricting imports.
III.
Historical experience shows that all periods of economic stagnation or recession
have given renewed impetus to protectionism; it also shows that protectionism has
never been a cure for recession, but a force for economic contraction, a fall in
overall economic productivity, the misallocation of economic resources and a re-
duction in living standards. In today's world, where trade liberalization has provided
a powerful stimulus to economic development and industrial growth, the raising of
trade barriers would be a step backwards. It is essential, therefore that the indus-
trialized countries and the developing countries alike should strive, in their own
interest, to maintain a world free-trade system. But such an objective can only be
achieved through a joint effort by all the countries concerned.
(1) It is plain that a world economic upturn would be the best way of ensuring
that many countries do not resort to protectionist measures, because it would lead
to trade expansion.
The upturn that has been apparent in the U.S. since the beginning of the year
is an encouraging sign. But it is essential that it should develop into sustained
expansion, which will depend in the main on lower real interest rates in the U.S.
and, as a result, throughout the world. Only a fall in real interest rates can provide
the necessary impetus to investment and the resumption of growth. The spread of
the American recovery throughout the world will depend on the proper management
of the other leading economies, especially the Federal Republic of Germany and
Japan.
(2) The best way to avert protectionism and expand international trade will be
through a return to greater international monetary stability. Nobody nowadays will
36
dispute the adverse effects of the floating exchange rate system. Obviously, the time
is not yet ripe for a return to a fixed but adjustable system, akin to the one
provided for in the Bretton Woods agreements. But two major steps forward could
be taken without delay:
_ The leading countries in international monetary relations could adopt an
exchange rate policy as part of their general economic policy. Recent experience
has shown..tbat exchange rates cannot s!mply be left to market forces, and that of
any effective policy of growth and stability requires action to be taken to influence
the exchange rate through monetary policy, budgetary policy and appropriate in-
tervention by the central bank.
_ The main central banks could co-ordinate their currency operations, not in
order to maintain unrealistic exchange rates, but to prevent excessive fluctuations.
There is nothing, except dogmatic theory, to prevent intervention along these lines,
which the central banks should carry out pragmatically. The de facto stabilization
of exchange rates might pave the way for a more ambitious regulation of the
international monetary system once differences between rates of inflation have been
narrowed sufficiently.
(3) As long as the recovery does not gather momentum and make itself felt more
widely, I think it would be dangerous to contemplate fresh world-wide negotiations
aimed at freeing trade. The important thing is to maintain the current degree of
free trade. Looked at from this standpoint, the ministerial conference of GATT in
November 1982 should not be regardelil as a failure. The results certainly fell short
of the illusory expectations that had been raised, but they are important even so,
if set in the context of the current world economic situation. It is important that
the contracting parties should have undertaken "to reduce trade frictions, to control
protectionist pressure, to avoid the use of export subsidies incompatible with Article
16 of the GATT and to promote the liberalization and expansion of trade."
The Conference laid down an even more ambitious program than was announced:
improvements in the safeguard system; specific problems in trade in agricultural
products; and the elimination or liberalization of quantitative restrictions.
Lastly, the C9nference decided to review the problems arising out of trade in
services and to decide by 1984 whether an international agreement on services would
be opportune. This foreshadows a new stage in world trading relations. If the whole
world economic pattern is to be changed so that the countries of the Third World
can develop the industries they need for their industrialization and secure access to
the markets of the industrialized countries, the services sector, which is playing an
increasingly prominent role in the industrialized countries, must be able to play an
active part in international trade.
(4) The long-term solution to the problem of the indebtedness of the developing
countries will depend on the latter's ability to export more to the creditor countries.
We are faced with a classic example of the problem of "international transfers."
In order to cope with it, the short-term loans granted to the developing countries
must be converted into long-term loans, the interest rates on the loans must be
reduced and the debtor countries must be able, over the long term, to repay their
debts in real terms.
(5) In the trading relations between the developed and developing countries, it is
obvious that uncontrolled free trade is no more the answer than protectionism. If
we are to avoid strains and breakdowns during the process of adjustment that will
be required in both groups of countries, there must be machinery for producing
an "orderly growth of trade", in other words:
37
- multilateral agreements enabling the developing countries to expand their
exports regularly without causing sudden, intolerable harm to the industries or
economies of the developed countries, and giving the industrialized countries time
to carry out the necessary structural adjustments;
- the progressive relinquishment by the developing countries, as they industrialize,
of the protective devices shielding their domestic markets and of the subsidies they
grant to their exports; this is essential to ensure that the industrialized countries
are not saddled with a lasting, unilateral handicap.
(6) The case of Japan should not be underestimated because of the small share
of its domestic market acquired by foreign manufactured goods. Leaving aside the
"voluntary" limitation of exports, which can only be a passing phase, growing
participation by Japan in the international trade system will depend on the opening
up of its domestic market and proper management of the yen within an orderly
system of international monetary relationships.
* *
*
"The Prospects for Full Employment"
Working Paper Prepared by Thomas R. Donahue, Secretary-Treasurer,
American Federation of Labor & Congress of Industrial Organizations
I wish I could share in the optimism that some pundits· and politicians have been
expressing about the prospects for world economic recovery. But to the extent that
much of that optimism is based on the notion that the ''invisible hand" is about
to perform magic while we and our governments sit and watch, I think it is badly
misplaced. In the view of the AFL-CIO, the signs of economic recovery are sparse,
tentative and fragile. For the working people of all of our countries, recovery is
all but invisible. Unemployment remains the most urgent threat to social stability
throughout the world, as it has been for three years.
In the U.S., by the most conservative count, 11 1/2 million people are looking
for jobs that do not exist. More than double that number in other OECD countries
raises the total to 34 million in the advanced industrialized nations. The Trade
Union Advisory Committee to the OECD estimates that unemployment in the OECD
countries will rise to 40 million in early 1984. That is not just one number in a
set of economic indicators that will be automatically adjusted or offset by changes
in other numbers, such as the Dow Jones averages or the closing figures on stock
exchanges anywhere. In fact, however, a good portion of the current problems in
our economies was caused by treating the unemployment figure as if it were just
one more economic indicator - a "lagging indicator," at that.
The monetarists who prescribed a stiff dose of unemployment as a cure for
inflation, and the politicians who took their advice, have infected the Western
nations and the world at large with a virulent social disease, which affects working
people first and most seriously, but then spreads its disease-effects throughout
society.
In the U.S., the fact that April's unemployment figures were, at first glance, no
worse than those of March, brought a great deal of self-congratulation from
administration spokesmen. And yet those figures showed that unemployment is
growing among adult males, the heads of families. In all countries, mass unem-
38
ployment falls, like war, most heavily on the young. In March, the latest figures
showed at least one out of four persons under the age of 25 in the European
Common Market was without work, without any economic or social function to
perform. It ranged from 15 per cent in West Germany to 35 per cent in the
Netherlands. In my country, unemployment among the young is no less catastrophic.
Overall, it is 21 per cent. For young blacks, it stands above 50 per cent, and that
figure is matched or exceeded among whole populations in less developed countries.
To disinherit, the young, to deny them the opportunity to start families and
establish a s;cure and respected role in the life of the community and the nation,
is not the way to ensure the future of civilization. If we are ever going to have a
world of stable, productive, self-reliant citizens who value order and respect the
rights of others, full employment has to become the primary economic goal of
every society. The prospects for that full ·employment seem dim and distant even
in the long term. In the medium term, we see no hope for full employment, if
current policies are maintained. '
In the U.S., the rate of work force growth will slow in the 1980's, and will
about match the growth of the work force in the European nations. In the U.S.,
that growth will raise our 1980 work force of 106 million worker's to 122 million
in 1990. As that total work force grows, all of the industrial nations see their
industrial base shrinking with the shift of some goods-producing employment to
the less developed countries and the continuing automation and robotization of
what will remain. At the same time, we see some growth in employment in the
service industries or information industries. In-the U.S., there has been an overall
shift in employment of seven per cent from goods-producing to service industries.
In 1970, 34 per cent total employment was in goods-producing industries and 66
per cent in services. By 1990, we will have only 27 per cent of our work force in
goods-producing industries and 73 per cent in services.
Job shrinkage continues, so far unabated, in our manufacturing industries, with
no prospect for returns to pre-recession levels. American and multi/national em-
ployers continue to move manufacturing processes from the U.S. in search of the
lower wages of the less developed countries. Robotization, only in its infancy in
the U.S., will claim about 300,000 jobs by 1990, with a potential for replacing
three million worker's in- the U.S. metal working industry in the following 10 to 20
years. No one has yet accurately estimated the impact of automation on the growing
office-clerical employment, though one French study estimates a 30 per cent re-
duction in white-collar employment flowing from office automation - with the use
of word-processors and mini-computers.
The so-called high-tech industries do not hold promise for mass employment in
· the industrial nations. Indeed, the movement of production jobs in high-tech in-
dustries to low-wage countries is already developing. High-tech does hold some
promise for employment of scientists and engineers and computer analysts and
programmers, but not for less-skilled employment.
Consequently, what we see ahead in the U.S. in the short and medium term is
continuing high unemployment into 1990, even if one assumes a general economic
recovery by that time. Further, as lower-paid service industry employment grows
and the higher-paid manufacturing employment shrinks, the entire wage base of a
, nation is lowered with consequent effects on standard of living, on consumption
patterns and on tax revenues to the government.
These conditions are, in varying degrees, being played out in most of the industrial
nations. If they are to be addressed, we will need not only a general economic
recovery and restoration of employment, but as soon as our economy can accept
39
it, there will be the need to reduce working hours without loss of income, and to
create and maintain government employment programs to take up the slack.
We all recognize that it is no longer possible or desirable, if it ever was, for any
one nation or group of nations to force their way to economic growth or full
employment at the expense of other nations. World recovery depends on world
cooperation. Any recovery program has to flow from negotiations among all coun-
tries (regardless of their economic position) within existing frameworks, such as the
OECD, and be extended as rapidly as possible to every country willing to join in
the effort. Instead of maneuvering for immediate individual advantage, these coun-
tries must strive for common progress and attack directly the sources, rather than
the symptoms, of economic imbalance.
Banks and international credit agencies, including the International Monetary
Fund, have to stop disrupting world trade by treating each client country as if it
existed in a vacuum and could solve all of its problems by promoting exports,
excluding imports and disregarding the interests of other nations. There must be
immediate negotiations to reduce real interest rates in order to reduce their role in
determining currency values and the flow of capital. The international monetary
system must be stabilized to create a climate for open multilateral trade and
productive long-term investment. The IMF must reclaim and regain from private
banks its powers of surveillance over exchange rates and exchange markets.
There must be an end to unchecked beggar-thy-neighbor mercantilism on the part
of nations that use trade as a weapon to capture the markets and destroy the
industries and jobs of other nations. On all sides, we have to learn to look at and
talk about the world as it is, without cloaking our intentions in dishonest slogans·
and pious catch-phrases. Calling exclusionary export enclaves "free-trade zones,"
instead of protectionist zones, and subsidizing business at the taxpayer's expense in
"free enterprise zones" shows nothing but contempt for the intelligence of the
people. The. pretense that governments subsidize exports purely as a generous
kindness to the consumers of other lands will not continue to arouse gratitude once
those consumers find that the result is unemployment. A persistent national tradition
of manipulating currency exchange rates to advantage exports ought not be allowed
to masquerade as a "free market response." The voice which calls for protection
of workers' employment ought not be scorned as "neo-protectionism" while the
voice which dictates an export penetration strategy designed to wipe out the last
five per cent of a nation's domestic production in a particular product is allowed
to pass as "good business. "
For our part, as American trade unionists, we intend to persist down two related
roads. We will call for and be fully prepared to practice fair trade among nations.
For so long as there is no fair trade, we will struggle to protect our jobs and our
interests against those who seek to take advantage of us. Nonetheless, we believe
that trade among nations, developed and developing alike, has to be made into an
engine of mutual growth. There must be recognition that nations must include both
producers and consumers, 'and that producers and consumers are the same people.
In this world, consumers are, and must be, producers as well, or there will be no
consumers, no markets and no production at all. That's the fundamental economic
reason why full employment should be the paramount goal of all our countries,
separately and collectively, but there are other reasons that transcend economics.
In a series of social encyclicals over the last century, four great Popes have
argued for recognition of man's position at the center of the economic order -
with that order serving man, not vice versa. In the latest of these encyclicals, "On
Human Work," Pope John Paul II has developed the thought of the earlier Popes
40
to its logical and theological conclusion by declaring that human work is a key -
"probably the essential. k~y" - to the whole ~ocial question, and by establishing
the principle of the pnonty of labor over capital as a postulate of the order of
social morality. "There is dignity in work," Pope John Paul says, "and work must
provide fulfillment as a human bei.ng. It must be arranged s? t?at it is not only
worthy of man, but also so that 1t corresponds to man's d1gmty, expresses this
dignity, and, \ncreases it."
In that way, the Pope formulated a plain fact of which I think working people
have been conscious through the ages: the fact that work, in and of itself, is much
more than an economic function. It is the central human activity through which
each person shapes, develops and defines himself as an individual and as a member
of the human community. In the section on unemployment, Pope John Paul flatly
declares that the role of national governments and international agencies "is to act
against unemployment, which in all cases is an evil and which, when it reaches a
certain level, can become a real social disaster." Such a disaster has plagued this
world of ours for too many years, and it is time that our governments awakened
to their duty, as Pope John Paul spells out that duty.
"The state," he notes, "must conduct a just labor policy," in which "the objective
rights of the workers are fully respected. The attainment of the worker's rights
cannot however be doomed to be merely a result of economic systems which on a
larger or smaller scale are guided chiefly by the criterion of maximum profit. On
the contrary, it is respect for the objective rights of the worker that must constitute
the adequate and fundamental criterion for shaping the whole economy, both on
the level of the individual society and state and within the whole of the world
economic policy and of the systems of international relationships that derive from
it."
In the human enterprise with work as its center, Pope John Paul declares, trade
unions are not only legitimate and necessary, they are "indispensable." Over the
last century, some of the goals of a just labor policy have been realized and achieved
through collective bargaining and legislative activity, with our unions, always, at
the center of the struggle. That struggle is far from finished, but the nature of that
struggle - the strugile to establish and continually reaffirm man's dignity - is
visible throughout the world, most clearly, perhaps, in Poland.
Who would dare to say that the struggle that unites the Catholic Church and
the trade unionists of Solidarity in common cause against the monolithic, totalitarian
power of the state is more economic or more political than moral? The immediate
human goals of Solidarity and the universal values of the Church blend into a
seamless pattern from which neither element can be separated without doing violence
to both. Both act to affirm human dignity. In that spirit, the AFL-CIO and the
international trade union movement call upon the decision makers of banking,
industry and government to reconsider what their responsibilities really are. Their
roles need to be re-examined in terms of what contributions they can make to the
advancement of human life and human dignity in the world - what they can do
in pursuance of a full employment economy structured to serve man as its first
priority.
If the economic structure is to be revised to give priority to human life and work
over capital, how many and far-reaching are the changes required of national policy
and corporate policy? Is it not required that the corporate balance sheet give at
least as much attention to the number and quality of jobs it has provided as it
does to the profits it has provided? If the worker is to be the center of corporate
planning and thought, is it not a moral wrong to allow particular facilities to
41
deteriorate through inadequate reinvestment, and to close those facilities and throw
hundreds or thousands out of work? Is it not necessary to give greater attention
to safety and health than to increased production, where that increase is achieved
by diluting those measures? ls it not necessary for the transnational corporation to
be a force for social improvement in Third World nations, recognizing and enhancing
the human dignity of its employees, rather than exploiting and perpetuating an
underdeveloped wage system?
In national policy, is it not necessary for government, once and for all, to enforce
social policies that acknowledge the legitimacy and the necessity of worker organ-
izations, and occupational safety and health policies that acknowledge the worker's
right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, in the most fundamental terms?
Is it not necessary, if the human potential is to be developed to its highest level,
for all nations to establish, maintain and continually improve minimum standards
of education, health care, nutrition and housing, and to provide the training,
encouragement and opportunity that every human being needs to realize his humanity
through productive work? ls it not necessary for government to take counsel, in
concert with industry and labor, on ways to maximize opportunity, productivity
and social and economic stability, rather than manipulating the tax structure to
reward the one and punish the other? Is it not necessary to agree that government
is the employer of last resort and that national government must develop and use
international mechanisms which will guarantee full employment? Is it not necessary
to measure trade effects not alone in trade balances but in job placement or
displacement balances?
We have so long talked in the short-hand of economic symbols that we have not
only made man and employment secondary to monetary values, but we are now
speaking of a recovery in which the restoration of workers to jobs becomes the
last measure, and to the extent that unemployment persists, we will redefine it so
as to make our economic symbolism more acceptable. The goal of all nations must
be a full employment society in which each person has the opportunity for education,
training and decent employment which will create the possibility not just to have
more but to be more. That is a goal for our time; a goal to be sought by all who
feel the obligation to foster human dignity, with or without theological imperatives.
That is the goal and the program of workers and their unions in my country and
throughout the world. I am most grateful for the opportunity to set it before you.
* *
*
DISCUSSION
The discussion of this part of this agenda item was led by Donald S. Macdonald
as chairman and Raymond Barre and Thomas R. Donahue, authors of working
documents, as panelists.
A French participant began by referring to the close links between unemployment
and trade policies, and the difficulty of fighting unemployment and resisting pro-
tectionism at the same time. The problem of unemployment was now so great that
many people were trying to solve it at any cost, including resort to artificial
stimulants. Fortunately, though, our governments had so far avoided damaging
protectionist measures. The situation was now better than in the early '70s, after
the first oil shock, with the useful OECD trade pledge having been renewed every
42
year since 1974. People recognized that protectionism was a short-term remedy with
high long-term financial and structural costs in distorting the allocation of resources.
"Textbook"· free trade was admittedly non-existent, but protectionism had histor-
ically had an inverse relation to economic activity, prosperity and rising standards
of living. Examples of protectionism could be found in every part of the world,
but the speaker would not give in to "catastrophic views." We had to recognize
the adva1gllges of specialization over autarky, and to resist the artificial creation
or maintenance of jobs by protectionist devices.
Until the economic recovery had accelerated, though, and unemployment declined,
it would be dangerous to move too fast toward dismantling existing trade restrictions.
A more realistic goal would be to try to maintain the present level of free trade
while allowing time for necessary structural adaptation. The underlying problem of
American steel, for example, was not dumping, but an antiquated industry faced
with Japanese competition that was more efficiently managed. As such industries
adapted, subsidies could be phased out progressively, and we had to make clear
our intention to do so. But in Europe and the U.S. the rigidity of wages and the
relative immobility of resources made quick adaptation impossible. To "abandon
ourselves to market forces and uncontrolled free trade" in a time of recession and
high unemployment would be to invite serious political problems and reactive
breakdowns. For these reasons, the author advocated the collective management of
orderly.growth in world trade, and the "adoption of mutually acceptable rules of
the game'' - not to counter fundamental economic trends but to allow time for
the sustainable adaptation of structures.
An American speaker began by quoting the following statement which Lane
Kirkland, president of the AFL-CIO, had recently given to a press conference:
I think I may use this occasion to announce my conversion to the principles
of Adam Smith and David Ricardo and John Stuart Mill. I think the arguments
for free trade are so convincing that it would be nice if we had some, and we
ought to really do something about it. So I am thinking of drafting a bill that
would be introduced in the next Congress - it will be called the "Free Trade,
Anti-Protectionism and Anti-Hypocrisy Act of 1983." And it will go something
like this: _
Whereas, certain practices distort the free flow of commerce and diminish the
wealth of nations, deprive consumers of the benefits of comparative advantage,
and are otherwise contrary to national policy, now;
There/ore, first, it shall henceforth be illegal for any American corporation or
person to engage in a transaction involving a product of which any portion is
required to be manufactured abroad because of the existence in another country
of a domestic content statute;
Secondly, it shall henceforth be illegal to engage in a barter transaction with
a state-trading monopoly - that will be knqwn as the Donald Kendall and
Armand Hammer clause;
Third, it shall henceforth be illegal to engage in a transaction involving any
product or commodity for which any part of the price or terms is subsidized,
directly or indirectly, by the state;
Fourth, it shall be illegal to engage in any transaction involving a commodity
the price or supply of which is controlled by an international cartel.
Fifth, it shall be illegal to engage in any transaction involving the use of a
currency of which the exchange rate is managed or manipulated by a state.
We'll have some definitions. We'll say, inasmuch as discussion of this subject
has been poisoned by word pollutiort, certain terminology must be made standard.
43
For example, those entities now known as "free trade zones," that is to say
locations in certain territories where goods are produced under a restriction that
none of them can be imported into the domestic market of the country where
they are produced shall hereinafter be known as "protectionist zones."
On the enforcement part, the bill will say - and this may require a Consi-
titutional amendment; Inasmuch as it is commonly understood by those well
versed in these matters, that considerations of human values and human rights
and human standards ought not to be treated as relevant in determining the flow
of commerce or a criteria affecting economic transactions between nations -
this is to say, that all values are fungible - now, therefore: as means of
enforcement, any punitive measures· practiced by any trading nation in the world,
shall be available for the enforcement of this statute.
Therefore, for the first offense, the perpetrator shall have his right hand
severed at the wrist. For the second offense, five years at hard labor at the
prevailing wage in a Mexican asbestos plant. And for the third offense, as soon
as any necessary treaty arrangements can be contrived, the offender shall be
sentenced to ten years in the Gulag.
One added proviso: any person who, after the enactment of this statute,
advocates, condones, engages in, or conspires to engage in the violation of any
of these provisions, who is thereafter apprehended in the act of making a free
trade speech to the Council on Foreign Relations, to the Aspen Insitute, to
Bilderberg, to Ditchley, or to any other such forum, national or international,
shall have his tongue extracted by heated tongs.
The speaker went on to challenge anyone to find "free trade" anywhere in the
world today. The doctrine of comparative advantage was all well and good, but
Ricardo's definition of it was far from the present system of subsidized loans and
state capitalism. "Comparative advantage" now meant that advantage which accrued
to the country whose work force would work for the lowest wage. "Free trade"
had come to mean "access to your markets," and license to pursue mercantilist
policies. The action of the Japanese in taking the last five per cent of the U.S.
motorcycle industry was an "absolutely outlandish piece of mercantilism," unworthy
of any responsible business community. As for the automobile industry, Japanese
cars accounted for 22 per cent of U.S. domestic car sales, compared with 2.6 per
cent in France, 10 in Germany, 11 in the U.K., and one-tenth of one per cent in
Italy. The American economy was the most open in the world, and this had had
a heavy impact on employment in the U.S. We had to develop a sensible way to
manage international trade collectively, while avoiding cliches and shibboleths. The
U.S., in particular, needed an industrial policy aimed at growth in employment. If
there was indeed no free trade, we should at least seek orderly growth through fair
trade. Despite all our complaints, we had nevertheless achieved a level of civility
between Europe and North America - and within the OECD in general, except
for Japan - in our attempts to manage trade. Our aim should be to bring the
Japanese up to that level of civility; for the past decade there had been no reality
in our discussions with them. They simply did not understand the negotiating process
and what our relations with each other ought to be.
A French participant intervened to suggest that the relatively limited success of
Japanese autos in Europe, compared to America, was due not so much to govern-
ment intervention - of which there had admittedly been some - as to the fact
that the European cars were already fuel efficient when gasoline prices rose. Good
products would always sell well, he said, if the public were left free to make the
choices.
44
An Italian participant commented that the Japanese had responded well to the
necessities of industrial society. They had committed themselves· to large investments
and had a productive labor force. But their "good behavior" did not carry over
into the trade field, where they were taking advantage of being highly industrialized
but not highly socialized. A Belgian added that the unrealistic currency relationship
between the yen and the dollar served the protectionist purposes of the Japanese.
A Germa.q participant alluded to two broad complaints. One - heard particularly
from Americans - was that the European Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) was
protectionist; the other, that the French were all for strengthening free trade within
the European Community (EC), while using the political identity and economic
development of the EC to enhance protectionism vis-a-vis other countries, notably
Japan and the U.S. Responding to the first criticism, a French man pointed out
that the U.S. enjoyed a $7 billion surplus in agricultural trade with the EC. If the
effect of the CAP were indeed' protectionist, the result would be an EC surplus or
equilibrium in agricultural trade, not a large deficit. Admittedly, the CAP was
costly, but it was not more protectionist than other policies. If it was a question
of cutting the Community's budget - for instance to reduce the UK's contribution
- then one should look at the country which enjoyed the greatest financial benefit
from the CAP: the Netherlands.
On the second point, the speaker said that in the international trade rounds,
France had never acted to raise trade barriers against the U.S. and Japan. In return,
his country had urged the Japanese to fix targets for progressive increases in their
imports of foreign goods, but they had always refused.
A Dutch speaker intervened here with three comments. First, there was no sensible
reason why the CAP had to grow more expensive each year. Second, the Dutch
problem with the Japanese was not their exports to the Netherlands, but their
reluctance to open their market to Dutch products. Why not "play hard" with the
Japanese the same way we did with the Russians in the arms talks? Finally, the
speaker did not agree that we could not do better now than maintain the present
level of free trade. There were special opportunities for more and freer trade, such
as between the Atlantic countries and the Third World.
An International p~rticipant questioned the credibility of "new rules of the game"
negotiated during a time of crisis. None of our countries had been very successful
at managing industrial adjustments. We needed still more time for that - even if
we were not sure just what to do with it. But what sort of counterpart could we
offer in terms of a discipline to be collectively agreed, sanctioned and monitored?
High technology developments were likely to increase tensions among the indus-
trialized countries (e.g., the proposed U.S. legislation integrating notions of extra-
territoriality into the control of sensitive technology transfers). It would be hard to
monitor such controls, and in this and other areas we needed an informal group
to deal with the inapplicability of outmoded rules - not a "super-GATT" or an
"inner-GATT," but at least a forum where industrial nations could talk about the
fundamental new elements for which we had not yet codified or conceived of rules.
We could not "muddle around" much longer.
A Frenchman agreed that the high technology revolution brought with it a risk
of the rebirth of protectionism, despite our best efforts to prevent it. Countries
which were hard put to improve efficiency - as in Europe - would seek protection
from the more efficient - the Americans and the Asians. Vast investments in
training would be needed to close that efficiency gap, and in the meantime we
would have to guard against a "protectionist reflex."
45
An Austrian speaker feared that a rebirth of protectionism would threaten the
very survival of the economies of the smaller industrial countries such as his own,
which exported some 40 per cent of its GNP. Prosperity there was achieved only
by a constant search for new customers and markets abroad.
Germany faced the same challenge, according to a speaker from the Federal
Republic. "If we don't export, we starve." Competition was essential to whet
international competitiveness, which was why the speaker was so opposed to trade
restrictions and import barriers. He was rather dubious about the claim that the
U.S. was the most "open economy," and he wondered if the comparative quality
of German and Japanese motorcycles, for instance, did not explain why the last
five per cent of the U.S. market in the hands of domestic producers was threatened.
Apropos of the proposal of the French author, the speaker did not see how we
could envisage the "collective management of trade," "organized liberalism," or
any such notion of "avoiding uncontrolled free trade" and still adhere to the
GATT. That would be the route to bilateralism and the undermining of our whole
multilateral framework. It was up to the politicians to explain to public opinion
the need to avoid protectionism.
An American participant said that he, too, was uneasy about phrases like "orderly
growth" and "managed trade,'' especially if that implied new organizations to do
the managing. The purpose of existing international organizations in the financial
field had· been to oversee free capital and exchange markets; the trend in recent
years had been toward removing deviations. The burden of proof should lie on any
proponent of a deviation from free markets. After all, what standards could one
substitute? "Fair?" "Just?" "Organized?" Those were not really standards; no
one knew what they meant. The American author had seemed to read Lane
Kirkland's "anti-hypocrisy" proposals as justifying further deviations from free
markets because some already existed. The speaker sensed an unhelpful "theolog-
ical" overtone in the discussion of this subject.
A Danish participant argued that we should not wait for the economic recovery
to gather further momentum before taking concerted action to dismantle existing
protectionist measures, such as subsidies and manipulated exchange rates. The
experience of the 1950s and '60s had shown a close link between the liberalization
imposed on Europe by the U.S. and strong economic growth. The dismantling of
barriers had fostered structural change, investment, technical innovation and com-
petitiveness. We had got rid of the traditional barriers like tariffs and quotas, but
had added new subsidies to preserve old-fashioned industries for the wrong purposes.
On the subject of so-called "temporary subsidies," a German intervention quoted
the maxim "C'est le provisoire qui dure."
A number of interventions mentioned the effect of exchange rates on trade
patterns. An American said that foreign exchange misalignments had a major
distorting effect on trade, and gave rise to protectionism. A Belgian felt that
unrealistic exchange relationships - notably the dollar/yen - woulc,i not be righted
until the U.S. adopted a sounder fiscal policy. A French speaker alluded to the
consequences for the world trading system of very unstable floating rates. We were
not yet ready to return to fixed parities, he said, but cooperation would be beneficial
to reduce the scope of fluctuation. The over-reacting, or over-shooting, was very
destabilizing for trade.
A Spaniard, on the other hand, thought that floating rates were not, in and of
themselves, a source of instability. It was the shortcomings of economic policy that
caused the distortions in world trade. Given those distortions, the maintenance of
fixed parities might have made things worse. We had recently seen in Argentina,
46
Mexico and Chile the damaging consequences of an absence of exchange rate
flexibility.
An Italian speaker wondered whether the proposed "collective management" of
trade could not be handled informally but effectively by the relatively small number
of multinational companies who accounted for an estimated 25-30 per cent of
international trade. There was a strong anti-protectionist sentiment among those
companies, and it would be easier to mobilize them than tci start a new international
institution involving 150 to 175 countries. An American speaker, though, pointed
to the lack of national identity of the multinationals. Their responsibility was simply
to their various host countries. How did they reconcile conflicting responsibilities?
A French man agreed that it would be sensible to use the multinationals, which
were indeed non-protectionist and which worked to optimize trade relations between
countries. But as far as international institutions were concerned it was not necessary
to start from scratch, as we already had devices and organizations such as the
GATT and the multifibre agreement. He went on to reiterate that he did not favor
bilateralism, and that his proposal for the orderly management of international
trade was a pragmatic one based on doubts about the efficacy of our technical
mechanisms. If we could maintain the target of free trade and phase out protectionist
measures, while finding technical devices for solving for a limited period our
problems with the less-developed countries, then we would contribute more to the
health of the international economy than would be achieved by attending conferences
and paying lip service to free trade. He was supported in this by an Austrian
speaker, who called for much closer cooperation in international economic and
monetary affairs to better manage our global interdependence.
An American participant discussed the background of protectionist forces in his
country, where pressure to subsidize exports had grown out of interest and exchange
rate levels attributable to the federal budget deficits. Another factor was that the
role of government and the importance of foreign trade - both as a percentage
of GNP - had grown dramatically in the U.S. over the past decade. One result
was that politicians had acquired the inclination, as well as the power, to keep
international trade developments from undercutting their domestic objectives. This
was doubly important _fil_nce the focus of government intervention had shifted from
tariffs and quotas in the '60s to the support of selected industrial sectors in the
'80s. We needed a more sophisticated approach, a modus vivendi among the
industrial democracies to ease economic transition. It would be unfortunate, for
example, if too many of our industries were to switch into the same new specialties.
A Greek participant started his intervention by observing that there were still
sectors characterized by free trade and the operation of supply and demand. Non-
Iiner shipping was one of these. To be sure, there were protectionist pressures, as
for cargo reservations, but no company or group had anything like monopoly
power. The speaker went on to argue that the American authors's case had dem-
onstrated that protectionism did not in fact help employment. The protectionism
of recent years had not only increased unemployment, but it had also aggravated
inflation by leading to dampening anti-inflationary measures earlier in the business
cycle than would otherwise have been the case. Thus it was in the interest of trade
unions to oppose protectionism.
How to deal with this relationship between protectionism and unemployment was
the subject of numerous interventions. An American speaker said that there was
no way to persuade an unemployed textile worker, for instance, that a reduction
of trade barriers was to his advantage. On the issue of "jobs vs. no jobs," workers
were for jobs, regardless of terminology. Some thirty million workers. were unem-
47
ployed in the OECD countries, a figure that was projected to' rise to 40 million.
In the U.S., workers and their employers were beginning to join forces to stem the
rising tide of imports. The issue of job creation ought to be at the top of our
agenda, and we needed the combined action of industry, labor and government for
retraining, technological innovation and transitional adjustment. Government had
to play a more direct role on a sectoral basis. If central banks were lenders of last
resort, why should not governments be employers of last resort? We could not look
indefinitely to the dole to prevent social disorder engendered by joblessness.
Two compatriots lent their support to this view. One said that the projected U.S.
unemployment rate of seven per cent into 1987 was intolerable. Not enough new
high technology jobs could be counted on, so a massive program of public works
was required. Another cited the example of middle-aged white men unemployed in
the U.S. for the first time in their lives. Their anger, fear and frustration were
sure to be registered at the ballot box in future elections.
Another American participant said that if free trade were the right course, and
if the resulting structural unemployment threatened to reach socially unacceptable
levels, then our governments would be bound to intervene - not to create ''make-
work" jobs, but to insure that needed work was done, such as retraining workers,
rebuilding transportation systems, and improving other public services.
A Belgian speaker called for concerted measures among the industrial countries
to combat unemployment, which was particularly devastating to young people on
the threshold of their careers. He hoped that the sacrifices now being made by
young workers would lead to tangible results.
Acknowledging that unemployment was a central problem today was easier than
agreeing on the right solution, as the discussion showed. A German speaker em-
phasized the importance of capital investment in industry, and said that the decisive
question was how to encourage it. Just as workers expected to be paid, so did the
other productive factor, capital. When profits declined, new capital expenditures
did too. But profitable companies were inclined to invest and to create and maintain
jobs. So the essential prerequisite for job creation was a sufficient financial reward
for invested capital. Had our industrial partners - including labor and governments
- taken account of this basic condition of the free market in our highly competitive
environment?
Apparently not, according to an American intervention. The speaker said that if
unemployment were to be solved on a sustainable basis, it would have to be
accomplished in a reasonably stable, non-inflationary way. The U.S. had been doing
fairly well with inflation, but satisfaction had to be tempered by the fact that this
had been accomplished in the trough of the biggest postwar recession. But what
would happen in the labor markets if the recovery proceeded? In the past 18
months, real wages for the employed had risen for the first time in five years.
There were recent indications, though, of restiveness among the auto workers -
not about jobs, but about wages. Their slogan was "Let's get it back, and more."
There was substantial unemployment in the industry, but the average hourly com-
pensation of auto workers was still some 60 per cent above the national average.
To cite a specific case, the recent Chrysler settlement had been forced to a higher
level by the Canadian strike. Airline machinists had secured wage increases of 32
per cent over the next three years, in a "contract straight out of the '70s." In the
speaker's opinion, these tendencies were counterproductive in terms of jobs. Many
union leaders seemed to understand this, but were the rank and file aware of the
inconsistency of their demands with the goal of full employment? Were their minds
open to such alternatives as profit-sharing and corporate board membership, and
48
to the need to reconsider the appropriateness of industry-wide bargaining?
An American responded that the restiveness of U.S. workers was attributable to
their perceptions as expressed through the democratic structure of their unions. The
burdens of the recession had not been equally borne in the U.S., and people could
not be persuaded indefinitely to accept inequitable sacrifices. Real wages were still
below the level of a decade ago, and labor hoped to recoup at least some of its
losses through future increases. Recent settlements might be seen by some as too
generous, but t'hey were after all the fruit of a generation of collective bargaining
experience. Labor was incapable of bludgeoning employers, and in fact it could be
said that union concessions had saved companies like Chrysler and Eastern Airlines.
There was a fundamentally hostile attitude of U.S. employers toward unions that
had to be changed. Labor was open to solutions such as profit-sharing and pro-
ductivity improvement, but probably not corporate board membership. The sug-
gestions, though, that industry-wicj.e bargaining was the culprit were not constructive.
Giving people jobs by expanding public works was not the answer, according to
a German participant. That would mean increased government deficits and higher
interest rates. Nor could we successfully reduce working hours without loss of
income, as had been suggested. That was bound to "catapult people out of jobs."
It was hard to say it, but labor had become too expensive. Minimum-wage un-
employment was a well-known phenomenon in the U.S., and the Federal Republic
was beginning to share that experience. Our economies would all benefit from more
deregulation, innovation and capital eitpenditure. But promoting private investment
in industry was difficult when government bonds yielded more than job-creating
investmen.ts. That anomaly needed to be corrected.
A Spaniard shared the concern about unemployment, but he objected to the
absence of practical, concrete proposals in the American paper. Reducing working
hours while maintaining income was surely "the quickest way to go broke." (It
was acknowledged in the discussion that weekly working hours had been substantially
reduced over the years, but speakers pointed out that incomes had been maintained
by increases in productivity.)
Unemployment in Belgium had been alleviated recently by a combination of
measures. A speak_er from that country described the program of their National
Employers' Associatioft; which involved extensive part-time work and special atten-
tion to jobs for the young - one out of four people under 25 being out of work.
This required close coordination between schools and business. Beyond such par-
ticular measures, more fundamental steps had to be taken to restore economic
health and full employment. The speaker mentioned lowering inflation and budget
deficits, correcting balance of payments disequilibria, and opposing protectionism.
The considerations were not merely financial, but human and moral as well.
A French participant remarked that one's prescription for unemployment depended
on one's analysis. An optimistic view was that it was basically a problem of
adjustment, of structural adaptation. But a more detached analysis might lead to
the rather pessimistic conclusion that 20th century technological developments had
inevitably reduced the place of humans in industry, as had happened to horses in
the last century. Another French speaker did not think that comparison apt. He
found himself somewhere between optimism and pessimism: unemployment would
eventually be resolved by the necessary adaptation, but it would take a long time.
A British participant agreed that the unemployment problem was structural in
nature, but he thought that technological developments could not have been the
major cause of our unprecedented level of 34 million unemployed. The deflationary
measures of the last few years had been more to blame - essential though they
49
may have been. We had learned that the classic methods of re-expanding the
economy ran a big risk of fueling inflation, especially in an economy like Britain's.
New thinking was badly needed in this area. To paraphrase Lincoln: "The Western
world will not long endure half employed and half on the dole."
A Frenchman commented on some of the statistics cited in the American working
paper. First of all, the prediction in the French report that the office work force
would decline by 30 per cent assumed a static volume of transactions. The more
reasonable interpretation, then, was that office productivity was likely to increase
by that 30 per cent. The speaker referred to two British banks which were the most
automated in the world. Their total employment had risen steadily over five recent
years because the volume of transactions had grown faster than productivity gains.
There was no obvious correlation, he said, between automation and unemployment.
Japan, with 50,000 robots, had an unemployment rate of 2.5 per cent, while the
U.S., with only 7,000 robots, had an unemployment rate of over 10 per cent. It
was fashionable to speak of high technology, but the "smokestack industries" would
still be with us, if only for strategic reasons. One could not imagine the U.S.
without automobile or steel industries, although they would of course be applying
new technologies. The Japanese steel industry had become the most automated in
the world. In 1981, it had the same number of workers as in 1968 - 260,000 -
but was producing three times as many tons per man as any other nation. Successful
structural adaptation required training for many years hence, so that workers would
never find themselves out of jobs for economic reasons. The educational system
had an important role to play in this, along with companies. Twenty per cent of
Japanese postgraduate students were in scientific and engineering fields, compared
to 5.9 per cent in the U.S. On the other hand, America produced more new lawyers
every year than there were practicing in all of Japan. A French speaker endorsed
the need for large investments in training to meet the high technology revolution.
Opposing robotization, according to an American, meant resisting the kind of
change which would lead to a reduced work week and a higher standard of living.
Shorter hours had historically been achieved by productivity gains. Labor had the
choice of taking those gains in the form of more leisure or higher wages. The
speaker could not see why shifts from manufacturing into service industries presented
a major problem - except for trade union organizers. If Americans had accepted
their former structure as frozen, they would have remained largely an agricultural
economy indefinitely.
An American participant felt that, even if many new jobs were created in high
technology fields, the adjustment would be painful to many workers. He went on
to say that the problems of unemployment, growth and trade were closely inter-
related, and that solution of the first two was a precondition for resolving most
trade issues. He was supported in this by Belgian, German and American speakers.
A number of participants then intervened to discuss the prospects for economic
recovery, structural change and growth.
A Dutchman pointed out that for many years growth had enabled business to
live with low margins, but that time was past. Our societies were now in what he
called a "regressive state," in which entrepreneurial activity did not happen so
easily. We reasoned backward, saying that economic activity had declined because
of high interest rates and slow growth, but the truth was that business hesitated to
make new investments when risks were high and profits low. It was essential to
"fight back," and the key was the training of young people, particularly in high
technology.
50
We should confess that we had not yet found the right way to solve our problems,
urged an Austrian. As the previous speaker had suggested, the postwar expansionist
period was over and we had lost the momentum for future growth. It seemed
unlikely that we would regain it in the near future, but would the necessary
adjustment take five, IO or 15 years? Our economic policies had to be thoroughly
re-thought, because if we did not Solve the unemployment problem we would face
momentous political consequences. And what was the ·incentive to make new in-
vestments if our industries were running at 60-65 per cent of capacity? In many
medium-sized companies, expansion plans had been shelved, and in larger companies
it took two to four years to develop new investment programs.
An American speaker discussed the momentum of the economic recovery in his
country, which he said was livelier than might have been expected. Industrial
production had risen five to six per cent over the last four months, with inventories
still being liquidated at a rapid vate. Involuntary liquidation would have to reverse
itself with the maintenance of demand. Moreover, sizable tax reductions were likely
to fuel consumer spending. But as the recovery accelerated, chances grew of a
major collision in the U.S. financial markets, and much turned on the budgetary
problem (which would be discussed at length in the next section).
A Belgian speaker shared this apprehension about a clash between the needs of
the public and private sectors which could stifle the recovery. Renewed economic
growth was essential, not only for employment and free trade, but also to enable
us to pay for our defense.
Signs of recovery were emerging less clearly in Europe, according to a participant
from the Netherlands, and it looked as if might be at best a cyclical recovery. The
recession would have achieved very little, at a high cost in unemployment and
damaged aspirations among the young. Deep-rooted systemic problems remained,
linked to the effects of the dramatic rise in the public sector in the 1970's. In many
countries it had reached unsustainably high levels, in the form of public expenditures,
taxes, transfer payments, social security and various entitlement programs. Despite
a decade of attempts at reform with the backing of a "public consensus," govern-
ment spending remained high and the market sector was shrivelling. Europeans were
witnessing the eros_ion of profits and the private capital base, bigger public budgets
and higher real interest rates. It seemed as if there was a crisis in our political
decision-making process, with the limited room for maneuver offered as an excuse
for doing nothing. The speaker was optimistic in the short run, but "deeply
pessimistic" about the longer term prospects for our economies.
An International participant reported on the political agreements reached at a
recent OECD ministerial meeting to help sustain the recovery which was now
undoubtedly underway. Action had to be taken on government budgets, especially
in the U.S., with its key link to world interest and exchange rates. This would ease
protectionist pressures. A climate had to be fostered to encourage private investment
and favor the growth of employment and demand. Distortions created over the last
few years had to be .relaxed or dismantled. Subsidies and other arrangements to
protect employment had been understandable at the time, but would prove damaging
if retained.
A Greek participant endorsed the prescription of reducing structural budget deficits
and real interest rates, and encouraging the flow of resources to areas where
productivity could be improved. But he also suggested that a major push for trade
and investment in the developing world would do much to revitalize our Western
economies. We should pay special attention to that part of the Third World which
was capable of applying existing technology and soon joining the developed world.
51
The speaker was joined by another Greek and a German in suggesting a kind of
"Marshall Plan" for the underdeveloped countries, involving a greater flow of
credit at lower interest rates, the encouragement of private investment, and de-
emphasis of military build-ups (which would promote the rule of law). In return,
the Third World countries would be in a better position to buy our capital goods
and to repay their debts. A Dutch speaker also saw the less-developed world as a
source of useful new activity for the depressed Western economies.
Another German, however, argued that Third World conditions were so different
from those in postwar Europe that proposals for a "Marshall Plan" were "totally
misleading" and bound to raise expectations that we could not fulfill.
A Portuguese participant saw the seeds of a major economic crisis in the continued
transfer of finance and technology to the LDCs. If the recipients exploited these
transfers successfully, they would export products in competition with Western
industry (as the Asians had done) and displace even more of our workers. If on
the other hand they failed, we would be stuck with more bad debts (as with some
of the Latin American countries). So trouble would be averted only if future
technology transfers were made within the framework of programs for the creation
of new technological industries in our own countries to absorb redundant workers.
Finally, this part of the discussion touched on the question of East-West trade,
which a French participant said was important not only for Europe, with its historic
Eastern trade '!inks, but also for the grain trade of the Americans. Moreover, the
subject had to be considered from a political as well as an economic point of view.
As an International· speaker pointed out, the East Europeans had not really
proved themselves capable of competing in our industrial markets, but a Dutchman
commented that there was no good reason not to promote trade between East and
West. An Austrian participant alluded to the fact that the drying up of credits in
the West was intensifying the dependence of the Eastern European countries on the
Soviet Union.
* *
*
B. RISKS IN BANKING AND FINANCE
"The Western Banking System and the International Debt
Situation: Facts, History, Prospects and Issues"
Working Paper Prepared by Alexandre Lamfalussy,
Assistant General Manager, Bank for International Settlements
Facts and figures
1. As can be seen from the attached table, the most striking feature of the
international financial scene between the first oil shock and mid-1982 was the active
participation of the industrial countries' commercial banks in balance-of-payments
financing. This was a new development: at the end of 1973, the gross claims of
the BIS reporting banks* on outside-area countries totalled no more than $75 .5
billion; moreover, their net creditor positions vis-a-vis groups of borrowing countries
were quite small: $4.5 billion vis-a-vis the group of non-oil LDCs and $5 billion
•up to 1977, the reporting area covers the G-10 countries, Switzerland and the branches of U.S. banks
in the offshore centers. From that year it covers also Austria, Denmark and Ireland.
52
vis-a-vis eastern Europe. Conversely, OPEC's net deposits with the banks amounted
to only $9.5 billion.
· 2. In strong contrast to developments up to 1973, between end-1973 and mid-
1982 banks' gross claims on outside-area countries rose from the initial $75.5 billion
to $513 billion. Of this total, gross claims on non-oil LDCs expanded from $32 to
$242 billion, those on eastern Europe from $9.5 to $54 billion, and those on the
group of smaller industrial countries from $23 to $104. billion. In even stronger
contrast, by mid-1982 all three groups of countries had become very large-scale net
borrowers from the banks: non-oil LDCs for $142 billion, eastern Europe for $42
billion, and the outside-area industrial countries for $56 billion.
These net borrowings provided balance-of-payments financing for all three deficit
areas. The aggregate estimated current-account deficit of the non-oil LDCs during
this period ($294 billion) was covered to the extent of 45 per cent by net banking
capital inflows ($132 billion). A 5imilar percentage of the aggregate deficit of the
smaller industrial countries was covered by bank credits, and an even higher one
of that of the socialist countries.
And this is not the whole story. There was also a substantial amount of balance-
of-payments financing within the reporting area (France, Italy, Belgium, Denmark,
Sweden), something which the table does not reveal.
3. On the resources side, the banks benefited from large OPEC deposits during
this period, although it should be emphasized (a) that for the period as a whole
the net deposits were relatively small ih relation to OPEC's accumulated current-
account surplus, and (b) that net banking capital outflows from the reporting area
(mainly from the U.S.) played a much bigger role in providing funds for international
financing than the direct recycling of OPEC surpluses.
4. As a result of these developments, western banking systems are now having
to confront the large-scale external debt-servicing problems that started emerging
in 1981-82 with an international exposure substantially higher than it had been ten
years earlier. Such exposure may be measured in different ways. External claims
have by now reached 30, 40, and in some cases even 50 per cent of total assets.
In the case of non-U.S. banks, assets and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies
(mainly in dollars) frequently account for between 20 and 40 per cent of the total
balance sheet. Last but.not least, claims on "problem countries" have become very
high in relation to equity, and indeed in many instances substantially exceed it.
The origins and current state of the international debt situation
5. There is now a fairly general consensus about the origins of the debt-servicing
problems, although views may differ as to the relative weights that should be
attributed to the various factors.
The story began with the first oil shock, which introduced in 1974-75 a new type
of major imbalance in the world payments system. There was a sharp increase in
the external financing need of the oil-importing countries, together with an equally
dramatic rise in the financial surplus of OPEC. At this stage, much to the relief
of almost everybody, banks stepped in as intermediaries: thus "recycling" began.
International bank lending, however, continued even after the digestion of the
first oil shock. While debt service ratios remained quite manageable until around
1976, a number of countries began to "overborrow'', especially from 1977-78
onwards-and by this I mean that their external debt was beginning to reach levels,
or at least was expanding at rates, that would have become unsustainable even
under favorable international economic and interest rate conditions. Depending on
one's particular viewpoint, this may be called mismanagement by the borrowing
53
country, or overlending by the banks. In fact, of course, supply has to meet
demand, or vice versa, for there to be a transaction. At any rate, the IMF was
"crowded out" from its business of conditional lending by the borrowers' market
for bank credits, and thus lost its clout.
Who bears the "responsibility" for this development? The relatively lax U.S.
monetary policy pursued until 1979? Negative real dollar interest rates until the
same year? Lack of control of international (and not only Euromarket) bank lending
by the authorities? Banks' unwillingness to assess country risks properly-despite
the availability of country bank debt figures on a quarterly basis since 1974? With
hindsight, we now know that probably all these influences bear some responsibility
for the emergence of overlending. But what would have been the alternative? Had
banks failed to enter the balance-of-payments business, the world economy would
have started to stagnate immediately after the first oil shock, or might even have
spiralled into a full-blown depression. It would have been nice to have had some
deficit financing, but no so much. Who could have said where to draw the line,
and who could have enforced a decision limiting the growth of international lending?
But ultimately stagnation did hit the industrial countries, hand in hand with very
high nominal and real interest rates, declining world trade and falling commodity
prices. As a result, debt service ratios worsened dramatically for all debtor countries,
and reached unsustainable levels even where there was no obvious mismanagement
of the borrowing country's domestic economy-where, for instance, the counterpart
of the current-account deficit was investment, even export-oriented investment, rather
than consumption.
Finally, political shocks-Poland, the Falklands war-suddenly brought it home
to the banks that sovereign debt was not risk-free, and this led to the "regionalization
syndrome". Banks stopped lending to whole groups of countries-first to eastern
Europe, then to Latin America-and even tried to get their money back whenever
this was feasible, thereby giving added impetus to the generalization of debt-servicing
problems.
6. There is also fairly general agreement that an international debt crisis has so
far been averted, by which I mean that the debt-servicing problems have been
sufficiently contained to prevent them from having a globally crippling influence
on the world financial system and on world trade. Several factors have operated
to bring this about: the emergency loans extended by the central banks through the
BIS to pre-finance conditional IMF lending; the swiftly negotiated, huge IMF loans
themselves; the change of attitude of the U.S. administration towards increasing
IMF quotas; the acceptance (and in some cases already effective implementation)
of drastic domestic adjustment policies by a number of borrowing countries; the
acceptance by the banks of de facto defaults, unilateral moratoria and protracted
rescheduling negotiations-and, in some major instances, even the granting of new
loans (admittedly under "suasion" by the IMF); last but not least, the sharp
reduction of nominal interest rates, which, thanks to floating rate arrangements,
are working themselves quickly through the system to alleviate the interest burden.
Prospects and policy issues
7. Prospects and the corresponding policy issues can be grouped under three
headings: (a) the short-term outlook, or how to keep the situation under control;
(b) medium-term prospects, or how to improve the world economic climate; and
(c) the longer-term "systemic" problems.
8. Our ability to keep the situation under control depends to a large extent on:
54
th~ IMF's ability to pursue its lending policy, which, in turn, is conditional
upon the swift implementation of the quota increases and (probably) also on other
resources being made available to the Fund, in addition to those that might be
forthcoming under the extended GAB. Specifically, this raises the question of market
borrowing by the Fund;
- the banks' continuing to keep steady nerves, despite the spread of standstills,
moratoria, r.estructurings and reschedulings. This means not only that they refrain
from triggering defaults, or from activating cross-default clauses, but also that they
do not withdraw from new international lending on a worldwide scale, since such
action could easily lengthen the list of "problem countries";
- the debtor countries' scrupulously adhering to the IMF's policy prescriptions
so as to avoid becoming ineligible for further Fund disbursements.
9. Most of these actions are, however, simply in the nature of a "holding
operation". More fundamental re!Yef can only come from developments in the world
economy such as to validate the adjustment efforts undertaken by the debtor
countries by helping them to improve their current-account positions. What is clearly
needed is an increase in the volume of LDC exports, an improvement in their terms
of trade, and a further decline in short-term dollar interest rates, since, despite the
sharp fall in nominal terms, real dollar rates have so far remained appallingly high.
Should no such favorable developments materialize, there is a serious risk that
financing packages put together under- the auspices of the Fund will fall short of
actual financing needs. Additional finance will not be easy to find-in other words,
deficit countries may be forced to undertake further adjustment measures. In the
absence of an improvement in the world economic climate, the only avenue open
to the LDCs to acheive the necessary balance-of-payments adjustment would be a
drastic cutback in imports. This would obviously have a depressive effect on the
industrial countries themselves (as the U.S. has learnt over the last ten months); at
the same time it could not be achieved without a substantial decline in real incomes
within the developing countries, at the risk of triggering serious domestic upheavals
as well as unforeseeable political reactions-also in the field of external debt
management.
Given the worldwide-pattern of current-account imbalances and of inflationary
constraints on growth, the revival of the world economy cannot take place other
than through the expansion of domestic demand in those large industrial countries
that (a) could afford to run a current-account deficit for some time (the U.S.) or
are in a comfortable balance-of-payments position (Japan, Germany, United King-
dom) and (b) have achieved considerable success in their fight against inflation (all
four of these countries). Is this expansion going to take place spontaneously, and
sufficiently quickly to alleviate the current-account position of the debtor countries?
Maybe; but if not, what could be done about it? And if it does take place, how
can it, with large structural U.S. budget deficits looming on the horizon, be prevented
from leading at best to a stabilization of U.S. real interest rates at their current
high level or, at worst, to an increase in these rates?
10. Even on the somewhat optimistic assumption that skillful financial man-
agement will keep the situation under control until such time as the business upswing
in the western industrial world brings more fundamental relief to the debtor coun-
tries, we still have to face a number of longer-term "systemic" problems, of which
I mention only two.
Firstly, there remains the "stock" problem of the maturity profile of the out-
standing bank debt. At end-June 1982, of the total external bank debt ($390 billion)
of the 24 most important debtor countries outside the BIS reporting area, 44 per
55
cent, i.e., $171 billion, was due to mature during the following twelve months.
Despite some large-scale reschedulings, my guess is that the share of short-term
claims has risen since then. A maturity profile of this kind is bound to exert a
destabilizing influence on the world economy by magnifying whatever "external"
shocks may occur in the future. A number of consolidation schemes, some of them
comprising elements of burden-sharing between debtors, creditors and western gov-
ernments, are being aired at present. We should be careful not to promote those
schemes that would make it even more difficult to solve the "flow" problem.
For there is, secondly, the "flow" problem, i.e., that of financing future current-
account deficits. An expansion of domestic demand in industrial countries may for
some time reduce external deficits in the rest of the world; with luck and good
management we may avoid a third oil shock and hence the re-emergence of oil
deficits; but the world economy ~annot function on the assumption of negligible
current-account imbalances. Such imbalances are bound to reappear as a reflection
of cyclical desynchronization, policy differences or "real" shocks, or simply because
there can be no transfer of real resources to developing countries without these
countries running persistent current-account deficits.
There are a number of tricky questions that come to mind in this context. Will
the banks be willing to participate on a sufficiently large scale in future balance-
of-payments financing? If so, how and on what terms? Should they participate?
What capital flows could conceivably replace bank financing? Is there not a danger
that the banks' reluctance to grant genuinely "financial" medium-term credits will
lead to bilateral exclusively tnrde-related financing deals with all the "real" dis-
tortions that such deals may imply? Or would this be a lesser evil than no financing
at all?
Position of banks reporting to the BIS vis-a-vis groups of
countries outside the reporting area*
(in billions of U.S. dollars)
OPEC
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
Accumulated current-
account position 1974-
1982 (first half)
Non-oil LDCs
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
Accumulated current-
account position 1974-
1982 (first half)
56
Outstanding credits and deposits Changes between
end-1973 end-June 1982 the two dates••
16.0
6.5
9.5
27.5
32.0
- 4.5
146.3
75.0
71.3
99.5
241.9
- 142.4
130.3
68.5
61.8
407.5
72.0
209.9
137.9
- 294.0
Developed countries outside
the reporting area
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
Accumulated current-
account position 1974-
1982 (first half)
Eastern Europe
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
Accumulated current-
account position 1974-
1982 (first half)
Unallocated
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
Total
(position of the reporting
area with inverted signs)
Deposits with banks
Credits from banks
Net
*Estimates by the BIS.
27.0
23.0
4.0
4.5
9.5
- 5.0
7.5
4.5
3.0
82.5
75.5
7.0
48.7
104.3
- 55.6
11.8
54.1
- 42.3
53.1
37.8
15.3
359.4
513.1
- 153.7
**(-) in the net position vis-a-vis banks equals net borrowings from banks during the period.
"International Banking Problems And
Medium-Term Growth Prospects"
Working Paper Prepared by Hans H. Angermueller,
Vice Chairman, Citibank, N.A.
21.2
81.3
- 60.1
- 153 .0
7.3
44.6
- 37.3
- 74.0
45.6
33.3
12.3
276.4
437.6
161.2
Since World War II the standard of living in virtually every nation of the world
has risen from year to year. Progress ana growth became the normal expectation.
There remained, of course, substantial differences in standards of living from country
to country an.'d, within larger countries, even from area to area; however, the
direction was toward constant improvement.
This trend of uninterrupted progress toward ultimate prosperity began to erode
in the early seventies. There were many causes: the welfare state grew faster than
productivity; high taxes reduced incentives; large governmental budget deficits per-
sisted and grew; interest rates, both nominal and "real," increased; and monetary
expansion and inflation rates began to escalate. But what transformed these mount-
ing structural problems into a crisis were the two oil shocks of 1974 and 1979.
57
The first shock (which increased the price of basic energy-oil at first, then gas-
by 300 per cent from its 1973 level) within a few years transferred about $200
billion from the Third World and industrialized nations to the OPEC countries.
Much of these funds found their way from the OPEC oil exporters back into the
world's commercial banking system, and that system, as was its function, channeled
them back to creditworthy borrowers in the Third World and industrialized countries.
This first "petrodollar recycling" process worked until, by 1978, spending initiatives
in the oil producing countries had returned the relative current account status of
the Third World and industrialized countries back to their pre-1974 levels. However,
a five-fold increase in a commodity as fundamental as energy added to world
inflation pressures.
During 1979-80, the second oil shock (which hiked the energy price up to 900
per cent of its 1973 level) transferred another $200 billion from the Third World
and industrialized countries to OPEC. Again, the commercial banking system un-
dertook a petrodollar recycling process, but by now several major industrialized
country governments (including Germany, Japan, Britain and the U.S.) had instituted
stringent policies to control the increasingly rampant inflation in their countries
while other industrialized countries (such as France, Italy and Denmark), as well
as a number of Third World countries, chose to defer corrective action and live
with relatively high inflation.
But for seven years, from the end of 1973 to the end of 1980, the Third World
countries, despite the higher cost of energy and rising internal rates of inflation,
managed to grow their export earnings at a compound annual rate of 20.6 per
cent! This rate of growth just about matched the 21.3 per cent compounded annual
growth rate of the long-term external debt incurred as a result of the petrodollar
recycling process. In other words, the Third World had, for the most part, put the
borrowed monies to good use.
However, as the anti-inflationary policies following the second oil shock took
hold, interest rates and unemployment rates in the industrialized countries rose to
unprecedented levels. The dilemma in pursuing decisive inflation control appears to
be that costs and benefits are not distributed equally over time. Costs are much
more immediate than benefits, and therefore have given rise to claims that policies
to increase unemployment are the mechanism to reduce inflation. But, of course,
such claims mistake the cause and effect. No policymaker ever sets out to increase
unemployment deliberately. However, policies to reduce inflation have invariably
resulted in involuntary unemployment, especially early in the inflation-fighting cycle.
On the other side of the coin, the benefits from low inflation have typically been
much slower to materialize. A quantum permanent reduction in inflation appears
to involve an approximate four-year cycle as we saw in Germany and Switzerland
in the early 1970's and in Britain more recently. As the Nobel Laureate Friedrich
von Hayek has said, the only time to fight inflation and recession is during the
prior expansion-in other words, patience and moderation in economic policies
during a recovery will go far toward reducing the probability of future inflation
and recessions. Unfortunately, however, the four-year curative cycle seldom seems
to coincide with the periods of political incumbencies, perhaps accounting for
frequent premature abandonment of anti-inflation measures.
The anti-inflationary measures initiated by the major industrialized countries in
the late 1970's resulted in a general recession which translated itself for the Third
World into (i) higher interest rates which increased the debt burden of the Third
World borrowers, and (ii) a 33 per cent drop in major commodity prices, the
backbone of many non-industrialized economies. Not surprisingly, the increased
58
dollar outflow of Third World countries and their reduced dollar inflows resulted
in a number of liquidity crises.
Today a major concern in the global marketplace relates to these liquidity crises
and their potential for retarding a world economic recovery. As austerity programs-
IMF-induced or otherwise-are implemented, one sees Third World import restraints
operating concurrently with their own export promotion. But clearly the world
economy, as a whole, cannot export more and, at the same time, import less. So
the present fe:l.r 'is that the world economy will become fragmented into insular
individual national economies threatening the economic progress of all.
Though such a fear at this time is quite valid, the focus on Third World country
austerity programs is misplaced. These programs are an effort to put individual
developing countries on a viable medium-term policy track, so they can rejoin the
rest of the world on a path of sustainable economic growth. So the import restraint
programs presently in effect will pave the way for faster expansion of these markets
in the future.
Yet, all pressure and incentives of the modern state, whether it is industrialized
or developing, work against the passive acceptance of cutthroat "foreign" com-
petition. In recent years, subtle barriers to imports and manipulation of exchange
rates have become the accepted way to protect local markets. Today the difficult
problem, at this rather sensitive point in the world's recovery, will be to have the
industrialized countries (who constitute, by far, the largest markets in the world)
keep their borders open for Third World imports, both manufactured and com-
modity, while the Third World countries temporarily close their borders to certain
industrialized country imports.
But the magnitude and near-term costs of such Third World import control
programs should not be overstated. Even after two decades of broadening economic
and financial linkages between the North and the South, the Third World remains
a relatively minor player in international trade (see Tables 1 and 2). The over-
Table 1: Matrix of World Trade, 1980
($ billions)
Oil Total
North Exporting Non-Oil All
Origin/Destination America EEC Japan LDCs LDCs Exports
North America 72.6 60.3 24.3 19.1 67.2 276.0
EEC 42.0 355.2 6.4 51.6 65.1 662.4
Japan 34.1 17.1 - 18.5 38.1 129.5
Oil exporting LDCs 61.2 90.9 51.0 3.8 59.0 298.0
Non-oil LDCs 64.1 57.1 24.9 17.4 53.8 253.6
Table 2: Matrix of World Trade in Manufactures, 1980
($ billions)
Oil Total
North Exporting Non-Oil All
Origin/Destination America EEC Japan LDCs LDCs Exports
North America 48.5 35.8 8.4 14.5 44.7 169.9
EEC 33.8 244.0 5.2 42.1 53.1 487.7
Japan 32.8 16.2 17.7 35.2 122.7
Oil exporting LDCs 0.2 1.8 0.1 N.A. N.A. 6.0
Non-oil LDCs 31.2 23.5 5.7 N.A. N.A. 99.2
Source: GATT, International Trade 1981182.
59
whelming proportion of world trade continues to take place among the industrialized·
countries. And the proportions are further skewed in manufactures trade. A quick
economic upturn in the Third World is not a critical prerequisite for the upward
march of the rest of the world's economic activity.
However, the converse is not true. The industrial country markets remain very
important indeed to the Third World. Some 60 per cent of Third World manufac-
tured exports and a similar proportion of their total exports are destined for the
industrialized countries. And it is here that there is cause for pessimism.
Over the last 12 months, there has been a growing trend toward protectionism
and market closure. I am sure we each have a favorite story to tell. Among recently
publicized protectionist measures are sugar import quotas, and more recently, tariffs
on motorcycle imports into the. U.S., barriers erected against video-tape recorders
by France and innumerable other non-tariff actions. Such interventions into specific
markets always appear eminently reasonable and are invariably billed as short-term.
But, collectively, such protectionist measures threaten to fragment the world econ-
omy. In an increasingly integrated international system, trade disruptions will have
pervasive and adverse economic growth consequences.
In other words, the rate at which world trade expands is a good indicator of the
rate at which the world's economies, and the well-being of its people, grow.
Therefore, to promote world trade-particularly Third World trade-it is important
that the major industrial country governments hold a tight rein on the prevailing
trend toward protectionism.
Doing so will ultimately help them as a group to maintain healthy growth rates,
perhaps averaging 4-5 per cent in inflation-adjusted terms, during 1983-84. Such
growth rates are not unusual for short periods following a recession; however, they
are higher than has been sustained over longer periods of time, even in the so-
called "steady growth" periods of the late 1950's and early 1960's.
But, beyond the 1983-84 time period, say looking out over a five- to ten-year
horizon, controlling protectionist trends will not alone maintain a high level of
steady growth. Another aspect of government policy threatens to slow industrial
country growth, and that is the increasing appropriation of economic resources by
governments. Almost without exception, total government spending, as a proportion
of the national output of goods and services in industrial nations, has risen dra-
matically in just the last decade (Table 3). Higher rates of taxation and deficit
spending hinder the private sector's willingness and ability to fuel our economic
engines. As a result, net investment rates have been decelerating in the industrial
countries since the late 1960's (Table 4). This phenomenon has not gone unno.ticed
in the political arena. President Reagan's "supply side" economics and Prime
Minister Thatcher's efforts to cut the British public sector are only the most visible.
In a number of Western European nations, including Holland and Belgium, policies
such as public sector wage limitations and cuts in indexation schemes are being put
into effect. Such policies would have been unthinkable as recently as in 1980.
The political resolve in industrial countries to combat both burdensome taxation
and high levels of government spending should not be allowed to melt away at the
first sign of economic recovery. As indicated earlier, the time to fight recession
and inflation is during an earlier expansion.
Naturally, political realism would suggest that neither the battle against protec-
tionism nor increased government spending will be easy.
The OECD has 32 million unemployed, some of them reduced to this state by
Third World competition and virtually all of them seeking assistance and support
60
from their respective governments, including both financial support and job pro-
tection against imports.
However, persistent efforts to resist these politically tempting measures must be
maintained. If such efforts are reasonably successful, it is quite possible that the
industrial countries will resume a path of sustained growth.
But we will not resume this path as individual countries, for most of us have
become so dependent on the world economy that we cannot achieve satisfactory
and sustainab1e 'economic growth on our own. No country will alone be able to
spend itself out of recession. We can only grow out of it together. Our aspirations
to return to the cooperative world order-of the kind that did so much for so
many since World War II-will depend on the overall economic growth and stability
of the industrialized world and the preservation of a global free trading system.
United States
Japan
Germany
Britain
France
Netherlands
Sweden
United States
Japan
Germany
Britain
France
Netherlands
Sweden
Source: OECD
* *
*
Table 3
Government Outlays as a Percentage of GDP
Peaks in Business Activity
1969 1973
30.8 31.2
21.5 22.1
37.6 40.5
41.5 41.1
39.6 38.5
43.9 48.7
42.8 44.9
Table 4
Net Investment as a Percentage of GDP
Peaks in Business Activity
1969 1973
9.2 9.7
24.l 13.8
16.2 14.9
11.4 11.9
16.8 16.6
18.4 16.2
15.0 11.8
1979
32.8
31.6
46.4
43.5
45.4
59.5
65.1
1979
7.5
19.7
13.0
7.6
11.8
12.4
9.1
61
DISCUSSION
This part of the discussion was led by Willem F. Duisenberg, chairman, with a
panel composed of Hans Angermueller and Alexandre Lamfalussy, authors of the
working papers, and Paul A. Volcker.
An International speaker outlined what he described as the "terrible mess" of
the international financial world. Some 25 to 30 countries now found themselves
obliged to reschedule or restructure their external debt. This amounted to two-thirds
to three-quarters of the total international debt outstanding, or as much as $300
billion. An open crisis had been averted by the concerted action of central banks,
the IMF, lending banks, and the borrowing governments, but we were running into
difficulty maintaining these "holding operations" for a number of reasons: (1) The
process of putting together rescue packages had become much more time consuming;
the Yugoslavian case had been dragging on for four months, compared with the
few days that had been required for Mexico. (2) The IMF had used up practically
all its facilities and could not increase its loans to major borrowers. (3) The plight
of the participating commercial banks was constraining.
Whatever the short-term resolution, long-term problems remained: (1) The "moral
suasion" issue was a delicate one; the wrong kind of relationship had been estab-
lished in 1977-80, when the commercial banks had crowded the IMF out of its
conditional lending. We had to be careful not to allow that to happen again. (2)
The "stock problem" concerning the consolidation of outstanding debt. (3) The
long-term financing needs of the LDCs.
An American participant remarked that a large number of parties could share
responsibility for the "mess," including OPEC, the banks, and the governments of
the borrowing countries. The events of the past year had shattered some illusions:
that governments were necessarily involved as parties in bilateral cross-border loans;
that the interbank loan market was essentially riskless; and that central banks, as
lenders of last resort, would always have hard currency reserves. On the positive
side, the major parties had managed to get together last year to address the problem
in a traditional but uniquely cooperative fashion. But, as the International speaker
had said, the result was fundamentally a holding operation. To make it durable
would require the recovery of the world economy and the adherence of borrowing
countries to their agreed adjustment programs, including the reduction of non-
essential imports. As the restructuring packages became more esoteric, the situation
would be more difficult to manage, but so far no debtor country had hinted at
any action inconsistent with traditional restructuring. The speaker did not exclude
the possibility of a default, but he thought it was not probable. So it was up to
all of us to deal with current liquidity problems while awaiting the effects of the
economic recovery. Growth was the key to the international financial situation, as
. it was to unemployment.
An International speaker referred to the steps which the debtor countries, in
cooperation with the financial authorities, had taken to avert a crisis. They had
immediately clamped down on their imports, so as to restore their balance of
payments and reduce the demand for money. But this phase could not be sustained.
Over the next year or two they would need enough finance to allow them to rebuild
an adequate level of imports. In the longer run, continued lending would serve only
borrower and lender if the external borrowing helped develop market-oriented
economies capable of competing in the developed world (as, for example, the East
Europeans were not able to do). They should not only be capable of competing,
but allowed to do so. So the medium-term task was to nurture a market orientation
62
among the leaders of the Third World, while further opening up our own markets
to their exports. There was a direct relationship between the maintenance of the
financial and trading system and the debt-servicing possibilities of the LDCs. The
heads of the OECD, IMF and GATT had met to discuss means of dismantling
trade barriers and restoring confidence in the financial system over the next two
to three years, and they hoped to have some practical proposals to make public
this autumn. The debt issue was not just a banking matter, but a problem of world
economic co6p~ration, he concluded.
Another American said that he felt relatively optimistic about the "mess," in-
asmuch as we had so far kept it from becoming a crisis. It was easy to put
restructuring plans on paper, but their practicality was another matter. Most of the
plans the speaker had seen suggested public money to one degree or another, and
he was not sure where it would come from. (In reply to a Swiss question on this
point, the speaker said he had not' meant to imply that the U.S. government would
not supply export financing, but that it was not likely to subsidize interest rates
on the renewal of old debt. One of the problems with subsidized finance was
deciding who was entitled to it.) Getting an increase for the U.S. IMF quota was
proving difficult, and additional outlays from industry for LDC financing were
unlikely in the near future. As for the adjustment programs of debtor countries,
some looked promising and others less so. Despite the calm surface, the situation
was erodfog, and our best hope was that the momentum of the recovery would
accelerate and restore economic growth around the world. In the meantime, the
maturing debt would be rolled over, as the lenders had no alternative. A Belgian
participant was heard to ask what the scenario for the debtor countries would be
if in fact there was no economic upturn.
A Spaniard intervened to say that, at none of the IMF/World Bank meetings he
had attended, had he ever heard the private banks criticized for "crowding out"
conditional lending. Nor was he aware that "suasion" had been used to limit private
lending.
An International speaker replied to two questions from Italian participants. To
one, he said that the major packages, such as for Mexico and Brazil, had assumed
no sizable improvement.Jn the terms of trade for those countries. If such improve-
ment occurred, that would be a major help. The other questioner asked why the
"stock problem" of outstanding LDC debt was placed in the "long-term systemic"
category when roughly half of that debt was due within the next 12 months. The
reply was that the short-term maturities had been "frozen" as part of the restruc-
turing/rescheduling process, and would not be repaid within the year.
A fundamental problem with the rescheduling process, in the opinion of an
American, was the uncertainty involved in renewing loans from year to year, and
the loss of valuable time spent in renegotiations by officials of debtor countries,
who would be better occupied dealing with substantive matters at home. Resched-
uling also involved costs - fees, risk spreads - which would in time grate on the
feelings of the debtors and risk producing extreme political reactions. If the burden
were eventually felt to be too heavy, radical forces might be brought to power in
the Third World. As others had said, the debt problem had to be seen as a
development issue ananot simply a financial one. The speaker endorsed the idea
of increased support for the IMF, the IBRD and regional banks, but individual
industrial countries might have to consider what role they should play in emergencies,
as lender of last resort or otherwise. The U.S., for example, sold 8.7 per cent of
its exports to Mexico, which made that country a sort of integral part of the U.S.
economy.
63
An International participant said that, while we could all agree in a general way
on short- and medium-term strategies for the less-developed countries, there was
for the longer run the tough challenge of how to get new money in the right places.
This was the special province of the World Bank, whose activities the speaker
discussed at some length. As a development institution, the IBRD had a 15- to 20-
year focus, compared with the three- to seven-year time frame of agencies like the
IMF and BIS. The Bank was emphasizing several mechanisms and procedures for
helping Third World countries, among them: (1) new techniques of co-financing,
which appealed to commercial banks who were willing to extend their term loan
maturities a year or two beyond the usual seven or eight years; (2) quicker dis-
bursements, especially for structural adjustment loans; and (3) more consultative
groups, chaired by the IBRD, for pledging and coordinating. The World Bank was
one of the underutilized factors in the international community's quest for solutions.
With appropriate increases in the member countries' quotas, the Bank could borrow
and lend more and derive greater leverage from its expertise. This would be
particularly valuable at a time when private and official development assistance was
not growing. Raising the Bank's lending strength above its present artificially low
levels would cost its shareholders nothing in the short run and little in the long
run, as the national quotas had negligible budgetary impact.
As a Briton put it, not only had the stable parity of the Bretton Woods fixed
exchange rates disappeared, but so had the assumption that the IMF was the
institution for solving temporary liquidity problems resulting from balance of pay-
ments disequilibria. IMF lending now came to about $18 billion, only a tenth of
what the Eurocurrency market combined. The balance had completely shifted, and
IMF was struggling to get its quotas raised. Two things were needed: (1) the ad
hoc process which had produced the Mexican package ought to be "systemized,"
so it could be relied on in future; and (2) official agencies such as the IMF, IBRD
and IDA ought to be endowed with larger resources if they were to provide the
basis on which money could be raised in other forums. These proposals were
endorsed by a Dutch participant.
A Swiss participant described the recent creation of the Institute of International
Finance (IIF), whose purpose was two-fold: (1) to improve the collection and
dissemination of statistics on the debtor countries and their economic development
for the benefit of borrowers and lenders, and (2) to provide a platform for a
continuous dialogue between the major groups of players in the international
financial arena. It would not be a lender itself, nor a focal point of syndications
or credit ratings. The IIF had been founded earlier in 1983 by 36 major commercial
banks from Europe, Japan, Canada and the U.S, and would eventually have close
to 1,000 members. It was located in Washington, D.C., to be near the IMF and
IBRD, and indeed its success would depend largely on its close cooperation with
those agencies and the BIS.
The health of the international banking and financial systems was obviously
important in both the short and long run, and many interventions touched on this
subject throughout the day's discussion. With respect to the role of the commercial
banks in the restructuring process, a Swiss participant said that they would of
course make a contribution, but that they could not increase their lending signifi-
cantly because of a "blatant lack of capital" and worrisome balance sheet deteri-
oration. Consequently, international agencies and regional investment banks would
be called upon to play a major role. Governments of the developed countries would
also have to step in, but this was not illogical, inasmuch as the original borrowing
had served to aid industrial exports from those countries.
64
Whether finance followed trade or vice versa, a German speaker pointed out that
probably 90 per centof=--the international lending of Western banks had been to
finance trade. Those banks were now being criticized for having lent too much or
imprudently to Third World or "threshold" countries, but if they had not done
so there would have been a crash some years ago. Avoiding that crash incidentally
enabled the industrialized countries to export, which was tantamount to fighting
unemployment in the large trading economies. The loans made by the private banking
sector to the -LDCs over the past decade should be viewed in that light, as a service
to domestic industries. Did the bankers now expect to be repaid? They "hoped
so." This suggested less than certitude, which is why they were setting up large
loss reserves - probably larger in Europe than in the U.S. But the bankers were
also hoping for cooperation - among banks, official institutions, and the debtor
countries themselves - to ease the problem. That was not equivalent to solving it,
whicq would require a sustained recovery, the opening of our markets to the LDCs,
and indeed doing whatever was needed to help them reach a more advanced economic
level.
Strong support for these remarks was heard from an Austrian participant, who
recalled that the official institutions had not been prepared to handle the recycling
of funds toward the LDCs at the time of the first oil shock. But the resulting
plight of the commercial banking system could not now be solved by setting up
reserves, no matter how prudent that might be. What would bad debt charges of
$400 billion do to bank balance sheets? Governments were applying restrictive
measures through their regulatory agencies, but this ran counter to the apparent
expectation that banks would continue to extend credit to poor countries despite
the absence of any general framework.
But, asked a Dutchman, how could banks be expected to go on extending these
questionable loans against which they had to establish loss reserves? He put the
problem in dramatic relief by observing that to write off the presumably bad LDC
loans would require all of the gross profits of the 25 largest banks in the world
for a period of 13 to 15 years. Much of the new lending would be export financing,
which now entailed a large component of political risk. That was rightly the province
of governments, not-the private banking sector.
An International speaker intervened to say that more export credit lines were not
what was needed by the LDCs just now, as most of them were committed to cutting
their imports. So it was not surprising that those facilities had been oversubscribed;
they would never be used. The Dutch speaker argued that it made no difference
whether the credits were labeled "export" or "balance of payment," but a German
thought it was unwise all the same to expose governments to the political pressure
to grant balance of payment credits - a responsibility which was best left to the
international institutions.
A British participant described the banking business as in a "very sick situation,"
which would not be cured by the economic recovery. The capital crisis of the banks
was extremely urgent, and it had been brought about by the accounting principles
of certain institutions in certain countries regarding bad loans. The patient was in
a "sorry state," and governments might have to step in.
An American speaker referred to legislation pending in the U.S. Congress which
had been characterized as "penalizing bank earnings." He asked if there were not
some way to sanction new reserves for banks who were prepared to grant new
credits to questionable countries, i.e., an opportunity to share costs with the
government, which would not after all be collecting taxes on the reserves set aside.
It was unfortunate, by the way, that the banking industry had taken "the wrong
65
position" on the withholding tax issue, thus alienating many Congressman at a
time when that was not needed.
A compatriot responded that the large U.S. banks, having initially opposed the
withholding tax, had withdrawn their opposition after enactment and geared up to
comply. The main resistance after that point had come from the smaller banks who
were not eager to take on the expense of the necessary computer programming. As
for the Senate version of the IMF bill, the U.S. banking industry had no fundamental
problem with that, but there was a bill circulating in the House which, if literally
applied, would wipe out the earnings of virtually all the major banks.
Another American said that he was not as pessimistic as the previous British
speaker about the condition of the banking industry. He looked to the prospective
economic recovery, combined with the calm skillfulness of banks and international
institutions, and the cooperation of borrowers, to insure that the debts would
eventually be repaid. It might not be on schedule, but neither would there be a
calamitous crisis.
While the discussion of this part of this agenda item dealt mainly with the LDC
debts and the condition of the banks, it touched also on fiscal and budgetary
policies and interest rates. A Canadian participant had noticed running throughout
the papers and the discussion the theme of high real interest rates. Unfortunately,
the public seemed to have the impression that it was simply up to central banks
and governments to lower them. This overlooked the fact that central banks were
governed mainly by the marketplace. Interest rates remained high because the market
was not convinced that we had wrestled inflation to the ground; in fact, there were
expectations of a return to inflation. We had to resist the temptation to pump
more money into the system; the only way to bring interest rates down was by
attacking high national budget deficits. Our dilemma was that those deficits con-
tained a high component of social welfare and job creation.
A Belgian pointed out that the effect of the U.S. federal budget deficit was felt
around the world through the high level of interest rates it caused. Outsiders should
not presume to suggest where that budget should be cut ("No representation without
taxation"), but it was to be hoped that America would find the courage to adopt
a sounder, more politically difficult fiscal policy.
A German participant argued that investors in the European and Japanese capital
markets were partially financing the U.S. federal budget deficit. So long as they
- as well as Americans - could get a better yield on U.S. government securities,
there was little incentive to make direct, job-creating investments in the private
sector. The economic upswing would be flat and short so long as the federal deficit
went far beyond the savings quota of American society. Responsible leaders could
not get away with just putting the blame on a few senators; it was up to them to
speak out to the public. To those who would assign the highest priority to military
spending, the speaker replied that nothing was more important to defense than the
health and growth of the economy. A worldwide depression would destabilize many
more countries than those in Central America. British and Dutch participants lent
their support to this intervention, and one of them wondered whether a political
trade-off between deficits and interest rates could not be accomplished.
An American participant conceded that interest rates were too high for a long
sustained recovery, but not too high at the moment, given the large U.S. budgetary
deficit and the purchasing power it was throwing out. As the recovery accelerated
there was a chance of a major collision in the financial markets because of the
needs of the government. Probably nine-tenths of the Congress condemned budgetary
deficits, but reform was everyone's second priority, the first being defense or social
66
spending. One problem with the· trade-off suggested by a previous speaker was the
time lag involved in feeling the effect of a reduced budget, which took a couple
of years.
In closing this session, the chairman recalled that, some years ago, a group of
Amsterdam bankers had negotiated with the ambassador of a newly developing
country a consortium loan for five years. It could not be repaid at maturity and
had to be rescheduled. It was finally repaid after 30 years. The year of the loan
was 1782. 1:he· ambassador was John Adams.
* *
*
67
III. DISCUSSION OF CURRENT EVENTS
The current events session focused on the formulation and conduct of U.S.
foreign policy. The discussion covered America's relations with its allies, arms
control negotiations and weapons programs, economic affairs, and policies in the
Middle East and Central America. An American speaker provided detailed reviews
of U.S. policies in those last two areas.
* * * *
The U.S. and its allies. Speakers from a number of countries expressed concern
about what they saw as "unpredictable swings of the pendulum" of U.S. foreign
policy. Unpredictability and inconsistency had characterized the Carter administra-
tion's policies, and the situation had not much improved under President Reagan.
A Canadian argued that a shift of power from the President to Congress was to
blame. There had been a traditional rivalry between the two branches of government,
but now Congress was more powerful and assertive. The speaker was worried by
a "decline in internationalism and a growing nationalistic mood" in Congress; there
were trends toward unilateralism and protectionism which could be expected to be
troublesome. Congress was competing with the President as an initiator of policy
and was becoming increasingly undisciplined and unrestrained by the executive
branch. _
A Turkish participant offered an example of how this dichotomy in America's
policy formulation troubled its allies. The administration had proposed a high level
of military aid to Turkey only to have an initiative raised in Congress a few weeks
later to cut off all military aid to that country.
The Canadian speaker sought to provide a perspective on the U.S. from its closest
neighbor. He said that the U.S. and Canada were at odds on a surprising number
of issues. Canada found it a challenge to "develop its own distinct society, project
its own identity, and fulfill its own domestic and international aspirations while
living next door to the most creative and dynamic society" in the world. The U.S.
tended to lean on Canada from time to time, and to criticize many of its policies.
But the U.S. was, in the words of one Canadian, "Canada's best friend, whether
we like it or not."
A fellow Canadian was more critical of the U.S., saying that too often the U.S
attacked Canada's interests and still expected Canadian support for its policies. The
U.S. had to learn to respect the essential concerns of its allies.
An American urged that his country's policies be viewed in light of the problems
the U.S. had faced in recent years. There had been a breakdown in the domestic
consensus about the nature, goals, and purposes of U.S. foreign policy that had
begun even before the Carter years. During the Nixon and Ford administrations,
the U.S. had been faced with the difficult task of having to conduct a foreign
policy of limited means in a climate of ambiguous dangers, at a time when national
cohesion was disintegrating due to Vietnam and Watergate. The U.S. had been slow
tO' recover from this period. The problem had been exacerbated, too, by the
sometimes reckess and· cynical manner in which the domestic debate had been
conducted.
Another American saw the problem not as a breakdown in the consensus of the
elite, but as a movement of the public away from support of an internationalist
position as the result of economic problems. People were simply more concerned
with jobs and the economy. But, added another speaker, the effects of Vietnam
68
were still very much alive, as the debate on Central America illustrated.
A widely expressed criticism was that the rhetoric coming out of Washington had
been excessive and confusing. This prompted an exchange of views among several
American participants. One argued that there was more strategy and continuity in
U.S. policy than had been suggested, and that the problem had been one of rhetoric.
A fellow countryman agreed, saying that the administration's policies were better
than the rhetoric by which they were defended. Other speakers felt that the admin-
istration's ~hetoric had been considerably toned down from its early days. Perhaps,
suggested yet another American, there was a danger in toning down rhetoric too
much. Policies, in order to be effective, had sometimes to be put forth in strong
terms.
A final American intervention on the subject sided with those Europeans who
still found U.S. rhetoric confusing, and argued that rhetoric and policy could not
really be separated; rhetoric 'was policy. The problem, in the speaker's view, was
a "divided administration". There were internal fights among the President's staff,
the National Security Council, the State Department and the Defense Department,
all of whom were trying to make policy.
Another American acknowledged that mistakes had been made in the past, that
there had been problems in "settling down". But it was important to remember
that the administration had been voted into office with a mandate to change the
old way of doing business.
It was a Canadian speaker's view that, while the aberrations of Vietnam and
Watergate had caused some "lurching around" of U.S. policy, these episodes were
well in the past. Indeed, the U.S. had some justification to view its allies as being
somewhat erratic themselves, complaining alternately about American strength and
American weakness.
Putting the past aside, a German found it encouraging that the U.S. was reas-
serting itself as the leader of the Western alliance. That leadership had been badly
missed. Europeans had criticized the U.S. for not providing leadership, now they
should not criticize too harshly its reacceptance of it. It was not easy to assume
the role of leader of a group of democratic nations. In doing so, the U.S. should
remember that- its__relationship with Europe had changed. Europe had become
stronger, and the alliance was now one of equal partners, with the small nations
playing an important role. Leadership, the speaker continued, meant consultation
before taking action, not information about actions already taken. The alliance
could ill afford any more "unhappy surprises" like the grain embargo or the
pipeline decision. But he expressed satisfaction that the U.S. was once again striving
to lead.
Economic policies. A Greek participant summed up the feeling of many when
he said that the unpredictability of U.S. economic policies, especially with regard
to interest rates, was more harmful to the cohesion of the alliance than the
unpredictability of U.S. foreign policy.
A Briton as~erted that economic and trade policies presented a great challenge
to alliance unity. Some NATO countries were "all but bribing" the Soviets to trade
with them, while others supported sanctions against the Soviet Union. A German
wondered why the U.S. seemed to view trade as a defensive rather than an offensive
element in foreign policy. Sanctions against Poland, for example, did not really
work against Soviet global aspirations. It was wrong to view trade as a "big stick".
Another German voiced concern that new demands by the U.S. to impose sanctions
or trade limitations on the East at the expense of domestic jobs in the West would
put great pressure on European governments, and likely make deployment of the
69
Pershing missiles more difficult for the German government to carry out.
A speaker from Canada predicted growing protectionism in the U.S. There could
be no reduction of the U.S. trade deficit without "far-reaching structural change."
The U.S. could only buy time for its uncompetitive industry. Congress would
increasingly respond to the popular American feeling that the U.S. had been unfairly
treated in the world.
We ought to be glad that the U.S. was striving for economic stability and to
bring down inflation, said a German. But the means by which those goals were
being accomplished were open to criticism. The policy mix was not correct, with
too much emphasis on monetary over fiscal policy. High interest rates would choke
off economic recovery, and the reason for those high rates was the huge U.S.
budget deficit.
An International speaker viewed that deficit with great alarm. He had the impres-
sion that U.S. officials were not inclined to take immediate action to lower the
deficit. The speaker was not reassured by the comments of some Americans in
government that the problem would be "taken care of later." Without immediate
action, the U.S. would probably have only a short recovery, and ··Europe would
have none.
Arms control and weapons programs. A Norwegian speaker, while acknowledging
that there was a remarkable consensus among all participants on the need to pursue
both tracks of the two-track decision with regard to INF, expressed doubts about
the sincerity and seriousness with which the U.S. was negotiating in Geneva. There
was a widespread feeling in Europe that the determination to deploy Pershing II
and Cruise missiles had been amply demonstrated, but that the negotiations had
been slow and unproductive. It appeared to the speaker that the U.S. had essentially
made the decision to deploy, regardless of the outcome of the negotiations.
The U.S., in the speaker's view, was spreading fear about Soviet power, and
using "scare tactics" which gave a misleading impression of the military balance.
It was hard for European leaders to "defend facts which we do not believe are
correct." The speaker referred to a recent poll in the U.S. in which 60 per cent
of those surveyed believed the Soviet Union was a threat to peace, but 75 per cent
felt new U.S. weapons programs would lead to a parallel build-up of Soviet
weaponry. The anti-nuclear sentiment was strong not just in Europe, but in the
U.S. as well, as the freeze movement showed.
A German agreed that many in Europe felt President Reagan had abandoned the
negotiation side of the two-track decision. That decision had been made on the
assumption that detente would continue. Now, if the U.S. administration wanted
to dispel the growing doubts about its sincerity, it had to "tone down its rhetoric,
not impose economic warfare on Europe, not engage in a geopolitical crusade
against the Soviet Union, and be serious and be seen to be serious in Geneva."
The speaker felt that the proposals that arose during the Nitze-Kvitsinsky "walk in
the woods" would have formed a sound basis for a negotiated settlement, and he
regretted that the U.S. had not accepted them.
An American responded that the U.S. had been prepared to pursue the Nitze-
Kvitsinsky channel, but that the ·proposals themselves were not considered acceptable
because they called for the deployment of Pershing missiles. The speaker sought to
clarify his country's policy with respect to the INF negotiations and to dispel the
notion that it was not taking them seriously. It was often overlooked that one of
the adminstration's earliest decisions had been to adhere to the two-track decision
and to return to the negotiating table to seek an agreement. The zero-option proposal
70
was a serious attempt to formulate an INF negotiating strategy, and was thought
to be sound both politically and militarily. The only proposal made by the Soviets
was to abandon the NATO deployment entirely. The U.S. had made a new proposal
that forces on both sides be equal at a number chosen by the Soviets. Now it was
becoming apparent the U.S. would come up with yet another proposal to break
the deadlock. The U.S. found itself in the position of being expected to meet every
instance of Soviet intransigence. ·
But the administration was committed to searching for a solution. It was not a
foregone conclusion that we would have to deploy in order to get an agreement,
but it was imperative that the Soviets realize there was no third alternative. Failure
of the alliance to carry through with the .deployment would have "politically
dangerous consequences." Further, no agreement could be reached if doubts per-
sisted in the alliance as to the sincerity of the U.S. negotiators.
Various speakers felt sure of American sincerity, but stressed the need to convey
that impression to the public. An American worried that we were getting to a point
where the only thing that would be accepted as proof of U.S. sincerity would be
to do what the Russians wanted.
A Turk agreed, warning that questioning U.S. sincerity only played into the
hands of Soviet propagandists, whose strategy was to isolate Europe from the U.S.
They had gone to great lengths to portray President Reagan as a warmonger. We
had to be careful not to give credence to the Soviet view that whatever they did
was right and whatever we did was wrong.
Responding to other points raised by the Norwegian speaker, an International
participant stressed that all of the NATO nations had studied the military balance
and reached a consensus view that imblance in favor of the Soviets was real and
not distorted by the U.S. And an American said it would be wrong to put too
much emphasis on the freeze resolution passed by Congress; it was an "abstract
document incorporating a wide spectrum of points of view,'' or, in the words of
a Congressman, a "letter to Santa Claus."
With regard to concerns that the U.S. had embarked on a major arms build-up,
an American stressed that his country's aim was not to restore strategic superiority,
but to replace and_ modernize weapons that were nearing obsolesence, as compared
with much newer SoViet armaments. The West had to maintain the credibility of
deterrence in the face of Soviet forces that were essentially brand new. This
modernization could be, and was being, carried out in phase with a general arms
reduction. The U.S. had 8,000 fewer nuclear weapons deployed around the world
than in 1967, with less megatonnage than in 1960. It had phased out roughly two
weapons for each new one introduced since 1967. It was the desire of the U.S. to
modernize its armaments while searching for stabilizing arms agreements. It was
hoped that the modernization could be achieved at vastly reduced levels of forces
on both sides.
U.S. policy in the Middle East. The major objective of U.S. policy in that region
was, according to an American speaker, to achieve a just and lasting peace between
Israel and its Arab neighbors.
With respect to the current situation in Lebanon, the U.S. had three goals: (1)
the withdrawal of all external forces, (2) the restoration of Lebanese sovereignty
over all its territories, and (3) effective security arrangements to safeguard Israel's
northern border. The broader goal of U.S. policy in the region was to show the
parties concerned that negotiations could be effective and were the only way to
achieve peace.
From the Israeli point of view, the Lebanese withdrawal accord was a positive
achievement because Lebanon became the second Arab country to negotiate and
71
reach agreement directly with Israel. The agreement called for an end to hostilities
and specified both parties' right and obligation to live at peace with each other
within secure, recognized national boundaries. It also provided for security arrange-
ments designed to prevent the return of outside forces to the security area.
From Lebanon's viewpoint, the agreement was the first step toward the withdrawal
of foreign forces, and would allow Lebanon to establish a strong central government.
But the agreement was not a peace treaty and thus allowed Lebanon to maintain
its relations with other Arab nations.
Though Syria had denounced the agreement, the U.S. believed there was a
reasonable chance that Syrian forces would withdraw once the Lebanese parliament
endorsed it. Syria itself had stated that its forces were in Lebanon by invitation.
Part of the diplomatic strategy was to encourage moderate Arab states to urge
Syria to withdraw. There was considerable risk of war with Syrian and Israeli forces
"cheek-by-jowl", and Syria would probably be on the losing end of any conflict.
Finally, the speaker suggested, Syria would not want to be the country responsible
for Israel's staying in Lebanon.
As for the broader peace process, the U.S. was concerned about the Palestinians
in the West Bank and Gaza. The U.S. approach was to handle the problem by
getting all parties concerned to the negotiating table. The PLO had done nothing
for these people, and by delaying the start of negotiations it had given Israel more
time to continue its settlements policy. The European proposal that negotiations
start with the U.S. endorsing Palestinian self-determination was a "non-starter,"
because that was a "code word" for an independent Palestinian state. Under such
circumstances, Israel would never negotiate. Nor was it productive to suggest that
the U.S. deal directly with the PLO. The U.S. insisted that, as a precondition to
joining any negotiation, the PLO recogni.ze the right of Israel to exist.
A Turkish speaker praised the U.S. achievements in the Middle East, but ques-
tioned how there could be a serious negotiation without the PLO, which, in spite
of its setbacks and disunity, was still a force to be reckoned with, and from which
no Arab state could afford to disassociate itself. The speaker did not share the
American confidence that the Syrians could be induced to withdraw from Lebanon.
If Syria withdrew, the Soviets would lose their cards in the region.
An American argued that while the U.S. was perhaps in the best position to
bring peace to Lebanon, it was not necessarily in the best position to bring peace
to the Middle East. It was being blackmailed, or at least victimized, by its client.
Israel had been obstructing negotiations, even rejecting something less than self-
determination as a basis to get them going. The U.S. had been able to do nothing
about the settlements policy. Failure to involve all the parties, including the PLO,
would ultimately reintroduce the Russians into the equation.
An Austrian agreed that the central problem was how to bring the PLO into the
negotiations. The Middle East was an area of vital concern to the interests and
security of Europe, and it was appropriate for European leaders to put forward
proposals for a negotiated political settlement. The PLO now seemed willing to
negotiate, but ironically, it was the other side that was unwilling.
Conflicting views within the alliance about the role of the PLO worried one
American participant. These conflicts had slowed down progress toward a settlement,
he warned, and "enormous political difficulties" were now developing. We had
given the Soviets and the Syrians an incentive to continue the Lebanese crisis to
see what would happen.
One speaker wondered why the U.S. did not exert pressure on Israel to give up
its settlements policy. An American replied that a policy of pressure would not
72
succeed. The U.S. had been successful not because it had been able to force ·Israel
to "knuckle under," but because it had been able to get both sides to negotiate.
The way to bring the PLO into the negotiations was to get therri to take the first
step of recognizing the right of the other party to exist.
U.S. policy in Central America. The Reagan administration, said an American
speaker, recognized that the conflict in the region had its sources in poverty,
economic underdevelopment, and failure of the social, economic and political in-
stitutions. These conditions had to be changed, but external intervention from Cuba
and the Soviet Union only made matters worse. This intervention had led to the
"betrayal" of the Sandinista revolution and the success of the paramilitary forces
opposed to the government of El Salvador. Jn that country, the guerillas were
destroying the national economy by wrecking its infrastructure.
U.S. policy with regard to El Salvador had four goals: (1) reform of the political
and social institutions to promote democratic government and respect for human
rights, (2) support for economic development, (3) provision of military assistance
in order to shield the democratic process and protect institutional reform, and (4)
support for negotiation to achieve a political solution.
The U.S. sought to promote free elections in El Salvador, open to all, with
guarantees against intimidation. It favored a continuation of the progress already
made in agrarian reform, as well as judicial reform to protect human rights. It
would aim to provide economic assistance necessary to rebuild the economy, to
provide military assistance to shield these processes, and to support negotiations,
especially regional ones. The U.S. did not support power-sharing negotiations be-
tween the government and the guerillas, but rather negotiations on conditions of
elections and on the democratic process.
In Nicaragua, the speaker continued, the U.S. had not sought conflict. It had
provided support initially to the Sandinistas, but policies of repression and support
for the insurgents in El Salvador had led to deteriorating relations and a cut-off
of aid. The U.S. had since sought a diplomatic accommodation, but had been
rebuffed by the Sandinistas in its efforts to promote bilateral and regional nego-
tiations. At present the U.S. supported the Contadora initiative.
Specifically, the U.S...would be in favor of the withdrawal of all foreign military
advisors and troops, renunciation of support for insurgencies in neighboring coun-
tries, and non-importation of offensive weapons into the area. All these objectives
would have to be achieved on the basis of a reciprocal and verifiable agreement
binding on all parties. .
There were no "quick answers," the American observed, but we nevertheless
were running out of time. The democracy that the U.S. saw emerging in El Salvador
could not survive if the economy were being wrecked. The fledgling institutions
needed protection.
A Spaniard offered a different perspective on the problems in Central America.
He had "full understanding and respect" for the U.S. position with respect to an
area that had "undeniable strategic importance" to it. But the situation had to be
viewed from the perspective of the historic difficulties in the inter-American rela-
tionship. U.S. policies in the region had ranged from neglect to full-scale interven-
tion.
One had to realize that we were seeing a group of different conflicts, .each with
indigenous causes-economic and social imbalances and oligarchical domination.
Only secondarily was it an East-West issue, only lately had external forces become
involved.
73
It was easy to support the basic goals of American policy, but the U.S. tendency
was to emphasize "negative aims," namely to halt the spread of Communism.
Other countries stressed positive goals such as human rights, economic development,
and social justice. The U.S. method tended to be military, while other countries
favored dialogue and negotiation. The problem of Central America was complex
and required a complex solution. It was imperative to prevent enlargement of the
conflict.
Spain felt the initiative had to come from the Latin American countries, and
therefore it supported the Contadora group. A multilateral framework was needed
to consider the overall problems in the area, and within that framework there had
to be bilateral talks between governments, and between opposition forces and
governments.
There were in Central America moderate groups seeking a peaceful solution. Not
all of the opposition in EI Salvador were armed Marxists. The moderates needed
support. The U.S. faced a credibility problem if it was seen to be <>iding with the
old, corrupt, tyrannical governments. A vast social change was taking place, and
the causes, not the effects, had to be fought.
A Canadian agreed, saying that while it was true the U.S. had important strategic
interests in Central America, the revolution "could not be turned off", nothing
would stop the process of change which was the result of years of oppression.
Military aid was a "losing game," and the U.S. would be better regarded by future
generations of Central Americans if it offered political and economic support only.
An American supported this view, saying that the younger generation of Latin
Americans was fed up with repressive, unjust regimes. The U.S. had a sorry record
of intervening in the Central American, Caribbean, and Latin American regions,
and it "never seemed to learn the lessons of its own history." The U.S. was badly
prejudicing its future with the younger generation in these areas.
A Spanish participant thought the U.S. had already lost its credibility in Latin
America as the result of its support of Britain in the Falklands conflict. Latin
American countries were suspicious of U.S. goals in Central America.
Other speakers expressed doubts about the wisdom and effectiveness of U.S.
policy in Central America. An American questioned whether the governments being
shielded with military assistance had any intention of carrying out political and
economic reform. The U.S. might have, at most, some short-term success with its
current policies. But it would have to redefine its interests in the region and figure
out how to deal with the inevitable revolutions. U.S. support for the regime in El
Salvador, in the speaker's view, "fed the causes by which the war began."
Another American supported military assistance to the government of El Salvador
because it was clear that the guerillas were "hardcore Marxists, not agrarian
reformers." But the question was how far to go in supporting the government. If
they could not survive even with U.S. weapons, instruction, and training, then there
was not much more to be done. But, in one participant's view, the U.S. had so
far used only "moderate, if not to say negligible, means in Central America."
Europeans, said an International speaker, should be more discreet when criticizing
the U.S. about its Central America policies. The choice in that region was not
between a good government and a bad government, but between a relatively corrupt,
undemocratic regime that was .pro-Western and a more corrupt, tyrannical (egime
that was pro-Soviet.
Queried why the U.S. supported new elections in El Salvador, an American
wondered what else his country was to support. Usually the U.S. was criticized for
supporting authoritarian regimes. In Central America it was supporting the alter-
74
native of electoral government. As to the possibility raised by several speakers of
including Cuba in negotiations, the American speaker said his government would
be open-minded about including Cuba in a multilateral approach if Cuba would
first renounce the exportation of its revolution.
The whole Central American issue, argued another American, was complicated
by an ill-informed debate between conservatives and liberals, who romanticized the
rebels and failed to realize there could be no reform or economic program without
the shieki Of military assistance.
* *
*
CLOSING REMARKS
In closing the Conference, the Chairman expressed the gratitude of all those
present to the Canadian hosts, under the leadership of Donald Macdonald, with
the assistance of Bernard C. Thillaye; to the various agencies of the Canadian
provincial and national government; to the authors of the working papers; to the
interpreters and the Bilderberg secretariat; and to the hotel staff, all of whom had
contributed generously and efficiently to the success of the meeting.
75
