 Good evening. I'm Leah Zinder. This week, close up goes abroad. Every now and then we
 believe it's important to take a look at Jewish communities outside of Israel. Many
 of them suffering as a result of Muslim immigration and the intense anti-Israel
 sentiment that's sweeping Europe. This week we travel to the capital of Sweden. A
 country we don't generally associate with anti-Semitism. Here's our report.
 Good evening and welcome to this week's edition of Close Up which this week
 visits Sweden. A country that until recently was considered one of the world's
 most successful liberal democracies. That's not the way it looks today to many
 of the 20,000 Jews who live here.
 The Swedish capital with boats and water everywhere between the 14 islands
 comprising the city is as prosperous and serene as ever. But under the surface
 Stockholm, like other places in Sweden and in Europe, is struggling with problems
 of rapidly expanding immigration and a new incarnation of a painfully familiar
 phenomenon, anti-Semitism. This is Malmo, 600 kilometers south of Stockholm.
 Malmo has a tiny and rapidly shrinking Jewish community. 700 Jews live here amid
 an influx of Muslim immigrants whose numbers have reached 50,000. Just two
 weeks ago, a makeshift bomb was hurled at the old synagogue in Malmo. It damaged
 but didn't destroy the building. Fortunately, no one was hurt. This was just
 the latest in a string of anti-Jewish hate crimes in Malmo including vandalizing
 the cemetery, fire bombings, graffiti and verbal abuse in the streets. The mayor of
 Malmo, Ilmar Appalu, says "I'm against anti-Semitism" and he adds "against
 Zionism". He recommends that Jews distance themselves from Israel if they
 want to prevent anti-Semitic attacks. Things have become so bad here that many
 of the younger Jews of Malmo decided to leave. Some for Stockholm, others for
 Israel. Yakov Guman Schat says he saw the writing on the wall six years ago. He now
 lives in Tel Aviv. I had a very good childhood. I was never had any problems
 being Jewish and I would never in my wildest fantasies think while growing up
 that I would once leave Sweden because of these reasons. And I think and I hope
 that at least here my children can grow up safe in that point of view. Although
 there are a lot of other dangers here but at least they won't have to be ashamed
 of them being Jewish. Is Malmo typical of the Jewish experience in Sweden and what
 is the source of these anti-Semitic attacks? Is it the influx of Muslim
 immigrants or is it the bitterly hostile attitude toward Israel adopted by the
 political and media establishment of the country? And what are the Jews of Sweden
 saying about the situation? These are some of the questions we try to answer on
 close up this week on location in Stockholm. This is Rabbi Yitzchat Naqman,
 the Orthodox Rabbi of Stockholm. He presides over a small but vibrant community
 that worships at the Adati-Srael synagogue, a synagogue that survived
 Kristallnacht in Hamburg Germany and was sent over to Sweden for safe keeping.
 Ever since its inauguration in 1940 this synagogue has held morning prayer
 services every day of the week. But this is also a diminishing community. There
 are 140 funerals a year in the Jewish community and only five weddings. And now
 Rabbi Naqman easily identifiable as a Jew by his kippah and beard as more
 immediate problems. He's been verbally attacked and threatened on the streets
 of Stockholm twice in recent weeks. It might be so that it has become more
 dangerous and clearly the security department in the Jewish community told
 me not to always use some kind of a hat, not go with a with the
 skull cap with a kippah and is that what you're doing? That's what I started to do
 reluctantly. I feel somewhat and I don't I do feel that the Jew should be able to
 go with a kippah on his hat. It's a very dangerous past chosen by the some
 politician and some intellectuals to actually blame the the victim for
 antisemitism. The Jews have a long history in Sweden beginning centuries ago. The
 conservative community of Stockholm worships in this magnificent synagogue
 built in 1871 and the Swedes who remained neutral throughout World War Two
 have a proud record of helping save 8,000 Jews from Denmark during the Holocaust.
 Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg who saved thousands of Jews in Budapest in
 the same dark era is memorialized in this controversial and it must be said
 odd sculpture erected by the government close to the Jewish center in Stockholm.
 I can't help feeling this towering hero deserves a more imposing monument. Now
 the Jewish school in Stockholm is busily preparing for the new school year. A
 teacher at the school, Jessica Rothschild, born in Stockholm like her parents before
 her says she feels at home here and isn't afraid. I don't know I don't see the
 problem outside. I feel it when I read in newspaper where I feel it when I read
 about Malmer the community Jewish community in Malmer but I don't feel it's
 so close and but I don't wear my gandavid. You don't wear it why? Because I'm
 little I am afraid of course that people will see that I'm Jewish and my kids
 don't sing they love to sing Jewish songs in the underground but sometimes I
 change it to Swedish songs or I let them just sing. The entire Swedish Jewish
 community 18,000 strong feels threatened. The Jewish community center and the
 synagogues have heavy security and are protected with locks and bulletproof
 glass. A security officer who refused to appear on camera said when events
 happen in the Middle East like the flotilla the Jewish centers are provided
 with round-the-clock police protection, threats to community leaders or routine
 and that's a problem for the leader of this community for the first time in
 Sweden a woman, Lena Posnek Karashi. The problem is which we are fighting very
 hard here is to make everyone from the police, legislators, parliamentarians,
 media to understand that being Jewish is not necessarily the same as being
 Israeli. What's going on in Israel is not the same as what the Jews in Sweden
 we are not responsible for what's going on in Israel and this is problematic in
 one way because of course we care and we would never accept any bashing. On the
 other hand we are not responsible so when there are demonstrations against
 Israel all these demonstrations end up outside not the Israeli embassy they
 continue to the Jewish school or the Jewish community regardless of
 where in Sweden. This is problematic because those who are against Israel are
 against the Jews and these are not the Swedes these are not necessarily the
 left-wingers. These are Muslim fundamentalists or Islamists. Is it dangerous for a
 Jew who is who looks like a Jew to walk the streets of Stockholm of Sweden
 today? Most Jews today don't feel comfortable walking in certain areas in
 the country in the various cities where there is a large Muslim population and
 if you're a visible Jew either because it's shown because you look like an
 orthodox the men or if you walk around with a Magindavid like I do or you're a
 public figure like I am. Of course you are bound to be cursed or abused in one
 way or another. Of course this is the fact today. You say of course it's shocking
 that you say of course because that's where we are today. That's where if you're
 a visible Jew today there are groups who would want to abuse you or verbally
 attack you or be aggressive and you don't really feel that you have the
 protection of your government. Is that correct? The thing is that without going
 into details the police and authority are well aware of the situation and so we
 are protected as individuals but this is not an acceptable situation and the
 government even if we've been trying very hard they don't understand and there
 are two levels. One level is to get the protection we need and for this they
 need to identify and understand that this is a situation. The other thing is to
 work politically against its situation to say that in a democratic society like
 Sweden we have counter-situation when there are groups in this country
 especially now the Jews who are not who can't feel free in the streets and
 can't feel comfortable we've been here for 250 years. What's happening here? The
 government of Sweden has become one of the most virulent critics of Israel's
 policies in recent years especially when it comes to Lebanon, Gaza and the West
 Bank. Now this criticism combined with a potent mix of latent prejudice radical
 left-wing ideology and Islamic incitement all this has produced an
 ominous wave of antisemitism that is washing over Sweden. Antisemitism that is
 of concern to a young member of the Swedish Parliament called Friedrich Marne.
 The conflicts in the Middle East seems to catalyze some and activate some
 anti-Semitic feelings among probably a quite small group in Sweden but at least
 I mean they are here and they are at least as many as they can cause trouble
 for people. And the most worrying thing I think is that the man I believe is the
 Chancellor for justice very high official in the justice ministry appears
 to be tolerant towards this antisemitism. What he is saying is that the very
 strict laws in Sweden against racism do not apply to antisemitism because of
 the conflict in the Middle East. Is that correct? There are people who argue like
 that. I think that they are wrong. And there are also people who argue that all
 troubles in the world would be gone if just you find a two-state solution on
 the conflict in the Middle East. Like people should not blow themselves up in
 Iraq or that terrorists in Somalia would end fighting if the Palestinians got a
 country and so on. And I don't believe in those. I don't think that Israel should
 be in the middle of the world all the time in the middle of all conflicts that
 everything has to do with Israel. That everything has to do with antisemitism and
 the Jews. I think that Israel should be a normal country which we treat like
 we treat other countries in the world. Sadly people don't really and they mix
 it up. The conflict in the Middle East with the situation for Jewish people
 living in Malman and Stockholm. It's sad that it should be that way. Let me ask
 you a personal question if I may. You are a young member of parliament an
 up-and-coming young politician who obviously has personal ambitions as well
 and you want to serve your country. It cannot be a very popular cause right now
 in Sweden to be defending the Jews. Why are you doing it? When I look at it I
 used to say that the star of David, Mag and David, we can choose now. We can
 choose if we want to star of David to be on Israel flag or if you want to
 star of David to be on the Jew in Treblinka. The history has shown us
 that there is nothing in between there. If Israel would not be an independent
 country today we don't even know how the situation would be like. More
 typical are the views of another MP from the Green Party named Mehmet Kaplan a
 Muslim. He was one year old when his parents immigrated to Sweden from Turkey.
 Kaplan was on board the May 31st Turkish Fotilla to Gaza though not on the
 Marvie Marmara. He says the ship to Gaza Sweden organization is planning to
 launch another flotilla before the end of this year. Talking to us in the Swedish
 Parliament he says he has visited Israel twice has friends there and denies that
 his fierce criticism of Israel mostly for its Gaza policies is based on anti-Israel
 prejudice or antisemitism. I don't pretend that we can understand fully what's
 happening in the area but we can understand that people civilians are
 suffering from the blockade. They are suffering and as a humanist as
 people living in a modern country like Israel and like in Sweden we have to
 protest we have to do things about this. But here's the problem as I see it and I'm
 not here to discuss I'm not here to to claim that everything that Israel's
 government does is correct. I don't think that's the issue. The point is as we both
 know perfectly well hundreds if not thousands of Muslim civilians are being
 killed in Afghanistan correct by the Allied forces. We don't hear a word of
 protest about that. There is this insistence on bashing Israel and this is
 used by Israel's enemies around the world to delegitimize Israel and what I see
 here in Sweden in the short time that I've been here but judging from what
 people have told me and you know it very well in places like Malmo this Israel
 bashing has turned into a real threat to the Jewish community of Sweden. I can say
 like this I am one of the persons who are fighting racism antisemitism and
 Islamophobia and this is actually why I have this situation and I have this
 entrenched in the Swedish public arena because I'm working against racism based
 on whatever. Would you Mr. Kaplan go to Malmo and and get up there publicly and say
 to the what is it 50,000 Muslims who live there who have been torching
 synagogues who have been attacking Jews would you stand up and say okay you may
 be critical of Israel but you dare not attack Jews here in Sweden. I have already
 been in Malmo just three days ago and I was meeting Muslim organization leaders
 and we were talking about many things about the Islamophobia in this
 community about the situation with discrimination but also about the
 situation with antisemitism and when we are talking about these issues I can
 guarantee you that I'm very very open and because I think that this society with
 the growing so-called Swedish Democrats it's a right-wing extremist party who
 are addressing the Islamophobic views who are talking about that Muslims and
 Islam is a threat for Europe and Sweden. And who by the way according to the
 polls will probably get into the party. Yeah they are just on the on the
 barrage now. They they are coming from a culture which was very very strong
 antisemitic culture this party so I think that we have problems both with
 antisemitism and Islamophobia in the society and I think that somebody who's
 working against racism in total must work with both antisemitism and Islamophobia.
 Is Mehmed Kaplan right? Is Swedish criticism of Israeli policies in Gaza
 legitimate protest? Is there rhetoric unrelated to antisemitism and public
 opinion? We went out into the streets of Stockholm to ask a few Swedes what they
 think. In my opinion what I know from Sweden I don't I had never have been to
 Israel but I think it's really wrong. What exactly is wrong? I've seen people in
 a little community they can't you build big walls and stuff around them
 and I think that's wrong but I understand also that I don't know
 anything because I'm here in Sweden and I have it's really good here and I don't
 have any terrorists and you know so it's easy to have an opinion but that's
 that's what we learn here. Do you think that what's happening in Israel affects
 the way people see the Jewish community here in Sweden? Not here in Sweden I
 don't think. I don't anyway I can't speak for everybody but I don't see
 anything wrong in the Jewish occupation here in Sweden. I don't know why
 they're fighting but it's just you know they want to take gas and stuff like
 that but I'm not sure I can't say anything about it because I don't know
 why. I just think it's it's annoying and does does what's happening over there
 affect the way you feel about the Jews here in Sweden? We feel nothing of well
 the Jews they're they're people just that they're called Jews so we have no
 opinion about them at all. Lots of things that the Israelis are doing that I
 don't appreciate that I don't condone but I think they're very much in their
 right to to do things to defend themselves and to defend the country
 they have. And you are aware of course that there is a lot of criticism against
 Israel here in Sweden and also a fair amount of anti-Semitism do you do you
 feel that at all? I can't say that I feel it but I know that it that it's
 there and I hear from other people that it is. What exactly is it that you're
 hearing? Oh it's not easy to I couldn't really say but I know of you know young
 Swedish Jews who don't want to carry the the Star of David for example
 visibly because they're afraid of what's gonna happen and I think Swedish youth
 should not have to be afraid of things like that no matter what their background
 or religion is. And do you feel that you as a supporter of Israel are in a
 minority here in Sweden? Yes it has changed all the way up to the
 the Six Day War or even about 1970 most Swedes were supporters of Israel but
 then gradually it's it's changed and I think that if you study this more
 closely you're going to find that part of the the stance that people take
 against Israel has more to do with anti-Semitism than with the policies of
 the state of Israel. As we heard there are people in Sweden who support Israel
 and have a deep sense of the injustice of the present situation. It's these
 people who give hope to those who still believe that things will get better
 here. One of them is Barb Respector, a former American who made Aliyah and then
 ten years ago with the help of the Government of Sweden set up a non-denominational
 Institute of Jewish Learning with a Greek name of Pidea here in Stockholm.
 She believes the current wave of anti-Semitism in Sweden will pass and that
 Jews have an important role to play in a country undergoing profound change. I
 think there's a resurgence of anti-Semitism because at this point in time
 Europe has not yet learned how to be multicultural and I think we're going
 to be part of the throes of that of that transformation which must take place.
 Europe is not going to be the monolithic societies that they once were in the
 last century. Jews are going to be at the center of that. It's a huge
 transformation for Europe to make. They are now going into a multicultural mode
 and Jews will be resented because of our leading role but without that leading
 role and without that transformation Europe will not survive.
 Pidea is a proponent of the liberal inclusive world view that was once
 identified with Sweden. A world view that now ironically appears to exclude the
 Jews. Do you think the Jewish community in Sweden has a future? It depends of
 course you can always live in a bubble as people do around here but personally I
 think it will be dwindling both for political reasons and religious reasons.
 People who will see that a Jewish future is important for the kids. They will leave
 Sweden either to Israel or to England or to other countries and I think that the
 political situation will only worsen with a growing aggressive Muslim population
 together with a maybe left-wing political government. But as you know
 Jews don't easily learn from the mistakes. I'm sure that Jews will stay in
 Sweden also. So let me ask you a question then. What are you doing here and how
 many of you or of the other Jewish people in Sweden are talking about
 leaving possibly moving to Israel? Or to Copenhagen. What we're doing here I'm a
 child of a survivor and the majority of the community members are children and
 grandchildren of Holocaust survivors. My grandparents were murdered. I would
 never as an individual. I would never ever give in to anything that is
 threatening the Jews and our existence. We are entitled to live and work wherever
 we want and I get so upset and this is a political battle and this is to get the
 recognition if and when I make Aliyah myself because that was the dream of my
 life it's because I love Israel. It's not because I'm fleeing this country
 because I want to feel that my children if they want to live in Sweden they
 should have all the possibilities to do so without feeling threatened and this
 is the work we have to do and that's why I think that we if we want we can be
 here. If we want to move it should be for reasons that has nothing to do with
 antisemitism. Until then we are going to fight it because we are never ever
 giving in to these dark forces, anti-democratic, anti-Semitic,
 synophobic, whatever phobia you may address. So that's why we are here.
 Sweden is a country that's proud. It's liberal democratic traditions but it's a
 country where today many of the Jews living here no longer feel safe. This is
 Leah Zinder for IVA close up in Stockholm. And here we are back home and certainly
 good to be home and so there it is Sweden 2010 not only thought not a very
 comfortable place for the Jews living there. The signs are worrying but as we
 heard there are still those who believe the situation there will improve. We'd
 love to hear what you think. Do write us at IVATVNews@gmail.com. We'd like to
 thank Israel up close, the European Jewish Fund and Shoah Meislich and special
 thanks to my partner in this week's program Dennis Zinn. Thank you for
 watching close up until next Wednesday at the same time. Shalom from Jerusalem.
